page 2 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1611 : page 2 
A NEW LEAF. 



He came to my desk with a quivering lip— 

The lesson was done— 
"Dear teacher, I want a new leaf," he said; 

"I have spoiled this one." 
In place of the leaf, so stained and blotted, 
I gave him a new one, all unspotted, 

And into his sad eyes smiled— 

"Do better now, my child." 

I went to the throne with a quivering soul— 

The old year was done— 
"Dear Father, hast thou a new leaf for me? 

I have spoiled this one." 
He took the old leaf, stained and blotted, 
And gave me a new one, all unspotted, 

And into my sad heart smiled— 



"Do better now, my child." —Selected. 
R1605 : page 2 
A HAPPY NEW YEAR, 1894. 



Dear Readers, we wish you all a very happy 
and prosperous new year. Although the times 
are unfavorable, money scarce, etc., we trust 
that He that feedeth the fowl of the air and 
clotheth the grass of the field will provide for 
our necessities in food and clothing;— giving 
us the needful strength and opportunity to 
"provide things honest in the sight of all 
men." Let us "seek first [chiefly] the Kingdom," 
and make our calling and election sure, 
remembering that "All things work together 
for good to them that love God, that are called 
according to his purpose." 

Although you know it, we will put you in 
remembrance of the fact that joy comes not 
with temporal abundance, but that godliness 
with contentment is great gain. The happy and 
the holy are more often the poor of this world, 
rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom. 
Therefore let us pray:— 

"Give me a calm, a thankful heart, 

From every murmur free." 
Let us not envy those more prosperous. Let 
us count and recount our own blessings, and 
then our hearts will overflow with thankfulness 
to the Giver of every good and every perfect gift. 

"Truth, how precious is the treasure! 
Teach us, Lord, its worth to know. 

Vain the hope and short the pleasure 
Which from other sources flow." 

page 2 

OUR ANSWER TO YOUR WELCOME LETTERS. 



We are rejoiced by the promptness of a large 
number of our readers this year, in the matter 
of renewals of WATCH TOWER subscriptions;— 
not only those responses which contain payment, 
but also those which ask a continuance 
on our List as the "Lord's Poor." To these 
last we would say, You are very welcome to 
the TOWER, dear friends. We rejoice that the 
Lord's bounty permits us as his stewards to 
continue to serve you and all with "meat in 
due season," from his storehouse. 



To all we would say: Your kind words of 
appreciation are very refreshing and encouraging. 
Not that we labor for human approval, 
—for we seek only the "well done" of the 
heavenly Master,— but if in the path of duty 
we have the encouragement of fellow servants 
of the Royal Priesthood our joy is complete; 
for thus the coldness and opposition of others 
is much more than offset. 

Aside from those letters which contain questions 
requiring answers, we hope that our eight 
thousand correspondents will accept this as a 
reply to their welcome letters— together with 
the change of date upon the address tag, which 
will indicate the renewal of their subscription. 
Your letters are attentively read and greatly 
appreciated by us; and the many requests for 
prayer are remembered by name at our family 
gathering around the throne of grace. "Brethren, 
pray for us." 

Many TOWERS will stop with this issue, if 
subscribers are not heard from; for we do not 
wish them to go where not wanted, and a postal 
card is surely within the reach of all. 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



Our mailing-privilege for our tracts has 
been temporarily suspended by the Post Office 
Department. 



R1605 : page 3 

VOL. XV. JANUARY 1, 1894. NO. 1. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



EVEN the dullest minds are becoming convinced 
that there is something peculiar 
about our day; that the civilization of competition 
—a selfish civilization— has been tried 
in the balances of experience and is found 
wanting; that the more general the intelligence 
on that line, the sharper the competition between 
the classes whose selfish interests oppose 
each other; and that, as iron sharpens iron, so 
the selfish energy of each class sharpens the 
opposing class, and makes ready for the great 
"day of slaughter"— the utter wreck of the 
present social structure. 



Worldly people not only see the great "battle" 
approaching, but they see that the skirmishing 
is already beginning all along the line 
—in every civilized country and on every imaginable 
issue. Their attitude is well described 
by our Lord's words;— "Men's hearts failing 
them for fear and for looking after those things 
which are coming on the earth."— Luke 21:26. 

The child of God sees the same things; but, 
being forewarned of them, he knows their import, 
their foreordained blessed results. Therefore 
he can lift up his head and rejoice, realizing 
that these dark clouds are the harbingers 
of coming Millennial blessings— that they 
mark the approach of the deliverance of God's 
saints, their exaltation to power as God's Kingdom, 
and the blessing of all the families of the 
earth through that Kingdom. 

It may be claimed with truth that the world 
as a whole never was so rich as to-day; that 
the masses never lived so comfortably as to-day 
—never were so well housed, clothed and 
fed as to-day. But we answer: (1) The taste 
of luxury which the masses have had has only 
whetted their appetites for more; and (2) the 
things considered luxuries thirty years ago are 
esteemed necessities of life under the higher 
intelligence to which "the day of the Lord's 
preparation" has awakened the world. 

When the world was generally asleep, the 
aristocratic class ruled it with comparative 
ease; for not only ignorance, but superstition 
also, assisted. If the people began to awaken 
religiously, and to question the power of pope 
and clergy, the aristocracy reproved them for 
their ignorance on religious subjects and awed 
them into submission to one or another party. 
If the people began to get awake on political 
questions, and to doubt the propriety of submitting 
themselves to the rule of some particular 
family— if they questioned the greater ability 
of some "royal" family to rule, or its right 
to perpetuate its control through unworthy 
members— aristocracy, always fearing some 
abridgment of its "vested rights," has upheld 
even insane royalty, lest, if the principle were 
overthrown, the people should get awake, and 
aristocracy should suffer directly or indirectly. 

Hence, royalty and aristocracy appealed to 
pope and clergy— expecting from them the 
favor, co-operation and support which they received: 
the ecclesiastics assured the people 
that their kings and emperors ruled them by 
divine appointment, and that to oppose their 
rule would be to fight against God. 



R1605 : page 4 

But now all this is changed: the people are 
awake on every issue— political, religious and 
financial— and are challenging everything and 
everybody; and financial, political and religious 
rulers are willing to sacrifice each other 
for self-interest, and are kept busy guarding 
their own peculiar interests, often opposing 
each other to gain popular support. 

Look at Papacy: note her attitude toward 
the French Republic— her praise of and friendship 
for republican principles. Who does not 
know that Papacy has been more insulted and 
opposed by France than by any other nation— 
by the present Republic, too? Who cannot 
see that the policy of Rome is to-day, as it always 
has been, hierarchical and monarchical, 
and opposed to the liberties of the people? 
Yet now Papacy extols the Republics of France 
and the United States to win the sympathies 
of the people and to hide the records of history. 
Her design is to draw to herself the 
opposing classes, deceiving both. 

The German government has felt the influence 
of the pope's smiles and kind words for 
its enemy, France. The growth of socialism, 
too, bids it beware of overthrow at home, and in 
dire necessity the German government appeals 
to the Roman Catholic party for aid in legislation 
to checkmate the Socialist party. The 
price of the support is: the repeal of laws 
framed some years ago expelling Jesuits, a class 
of Romish intriguers and clerical politicians 
which has been expelled or restrained by nearly 
every civilized nation. And now it seems 
that Germany must take back the Jesuits to restrain 
the Socialist influence. 

On the other hand, Italy, Mexico, Brazil 
and other strongly Roman Catholic nations 
are awaking to the fact that the Jesuits had 
drained their treasuries and were the real rulers 
and owners of everything, and now they are 
removing their yokes and confiscating their 
wealth to the use of the despoiled people. 

It is only a question of time, place and expediency 
—this matter of Church and State 
fellowship. Each is for itself, and tolerates 
the other only for use. It is a selfish union, 
and not a benevolent one for the improvement 
of the people. 

The union between money and politics is 
of a closer sort, because, if the rulers be not 
wealthy, they hope to be so soon. Vested rights 

R1606:page4 



must support government; for, without government 

vested rights would soon be divested. 

And governments must support vested rights 

for similar reasons. Indeed, there is great force 

in the argument that the poorest government 

is very much better than no government. 

All can see as quite probable, that which the 
Bible declares will soon be; viz., that although 
wealth and religion will unite with the governments 
for their mutual protection, all will by 
and by fall together before the poor and discontented 
masses. 

Already the power is in the hands of the 
masses in Europe; already they see that their 
condition is an almost hopeless one, so far as 
any rise above present conditions is concerned: 
the few have the power, the honor, the wealth, 
and the brains and education to hold on to 
these. They see no hope under present social 
regulations, and they want a change. Some 
hope for the change by moderate means; as, 
for instance, the Belgian general strike, which 
stagnated all business, to secure political privileges. 
The success of that strike has encouraged 
the masses of Austria-Hungary to hope 
for similar political privileges by a similar 
method; and such a strike is now threatened 
there. 

Others seem to realize that in any mental 
struggle the educated and wealthy classes have 
the advantage; and that, in the end, only a 
revolution of force will succeed. These are 
as yet a small minority, but very active. In 
Spain, France, England, Germany and Austria, 
as well as in Russia, crazy anarchists fruitlessly 
dash themselves to pieces against the ramparts 
of society. Why do not the masses overturn 
the present social order and establish a new 
and more equitable one? 

Because as yet they are only half awake, and 
do not realize their power; because they are 
yet held by the chains of reverence— true and 
superstitious; and because they lack competent 
leaders in whom they can have confidence. 
Reverse the order of the classes and their 
numbers— put the educated and wealthy ones 

R1606:page5 

in the place of the poor, and the poor of to-day 
in the place and power of the rich, and 
there would be a world-wide revolution within 
a week. 

It will probably be some twelve years or so 
future; but sooner or later the masses will get 



thoroughly awake, the chains of reverence, 
true and false, will break, the fit leaders will 
arise, and the great revolution will be a fact. 

In the United States the case differs considerably 
from what it is in Europe. Place 
the masses here upon the same footing with 
those in Europe, and there would be a revolution 
immediately; because the masses here are 
more intelligent— more awake. The restraining 
power here is a different one. Here, not 
only has prosperity been great, but opportunities 
to rise to competency or even wealth 
have been so general that selfishness has kept 
the masses in line,— in support of vested rights, 
etc., under the present social arrangement. 

But the present financial depression shows 
how quickly the sweets of the present arrangement 
might become the bitter of a social 
revolution, if once the hopes and opportunities 
of accumulating wealth were taken out of the 
question. 

The farmers of the West, who eagerly mortgaged 
their farms and promised a large interest 
for the favor, and who in some instances 
speculated with the money, are now many times 
angered almost to anarchism when the mortgages 
on their farms are foreclosed according 
to contract. 

Miners, artisans and laborers are embittered 
in soul as they see wages drop and their hopes 
of owning little homes of their own vanish. 
They realize that somehow they must forever 
be dependent upon the favored few possessed 
of superior brains and more money, who, with 
machinery, can earn daily many times what 
their employees, who operate their machines, 
can earn. Love and the grace of God are 
either lacking or at least none too abundant 
in their hearts, and selfishness in them inquires, 
Cannot I get at least a larger share of the results 
—the increase? Must the law of supply 
and demand bring the teeming human race 
increasingly into competition with each other, 
and above all into competition with machinery? 
If so, the lot of the masses must grow 
harder and harder, and the blessings of inventive 
genius and mechanical skill, while at present 
employing the masses in their construction, 
will become a curse as soon as the world's demands 
have been supplied— which time is not 
a great way off. 

No wonder that the poor masses fear the 
power of money, brains and machinery, and 
seek unitedly to strike against them. The organizations 
and strikes, which are now so 
general, are not so much attempts to grasp a 



larger share of the necessities and luxuries of 
life, as a fear of losing what they now enjoy 
and of being carried farther than ever from 
the shore of comfort and safety;— for they 
realize that the tide of prosperity which lifted 
them to their present level is already turning. 

This is evidenced by the recent coal strike 
in England. Some years ago the miners, by 
a general strike, secured an advance of wages 
of 40 per cent; and the recent strike was against 
a reduction of 25 per cent of this. 

The miners fought with desperation, realizing 
that defeated now would presently mean 
a still further reduction. The mining district 
was reduced to starvation, and many died of 
hunger rather than work for less pay now, and 
still less by and by. A London Press dispatch 
describes matters in few words, thus:— 

"All the relief now being generously poured 
into Yorkshire and Lancashire will not prevent 
the famine there getting worse each week. 
Correspondents on the spot describe the condition 
of thousands in the West Riding as fireless, 
foodless, shoeless, naked, and the whole 
district as one seething mass of misery. The 
death rate has gone up to something dreadful. 
What a crushing blow this long suspension has 
dealt industries of every description can be 
guessed by the fact that the seven principal 
railways, which are coal carriers, show a diminution 
of receipts in the past seventeen weeks 
of $9,000,000." 

It should be noticed, too, that the greatest 
unrest prevails where there is the greatest intelligence, 
and where there has been the greatest 
prosperity for the past thirty years. As 
the United States and Great Britain have been 
the most prosperous, and the peoples of these 

R1606:page6 

have the greatest general intelligence and 
freedom, so these have suffered most from 
financial depression, and in these strikes have 
been most frequent. 

Every one is moved to pity at the thought 
that in these, the two most civilized and most 
wealthy nations, some should starve for the very 
necessities of life. Yet so it is. In London 
there have been several deaths reported from 
starvation, and official reports from Chicago 
state that 1119 persons recently slept upon 
the stone floors of the public buildings, being 
without better provision. The same state of 
want prevails elsewhere, but to a less extent. 
Chicago got the most of this class by reason 



of the prosperity enjoyed by that city during 
the Columbian Exposition. So the United 
States as a whole suffers most just now, and has 
the greatest number of unemployed, because 
until recently it has been so prosperous that 
millions came from less favored lands and are 
now stranded here. 

We have mentioned one principal cause of 
the present and coming world-wide trouble to 
be, the competition of human and mechanical 
skill, resulting in the oversupply of the human 
element— hence the nonemployment of many 
and the reduced wages of the remainder; and 
we have seen that although temporary relief 
will soon come, and prosperity soon again prevail 
on a lower level, yet, the conditions remaining 
the same, the difficulty will become 
greater and greater and another spasm of depression 
will come which will bring wages to 
a yet lower level, and so on. This is, so to 
speak, the upper millstone. 

But we might mention another important 
factor in this depression; viz., money. Gold 
and silver have been the money of the civilized 
from the days of Abraham (Gen. 23:16) 
until recently. Now gold is the only standard, 
silver being used as a subsidiary coin for 
fractional change only. 

While other men were using their brains, 
and knowledge in general was on the increase, 
the wealthy men, "financiers," used theirs also, 
and of course in their own interest. They 
reasoned, truly, that the more abundant the 
wheat or any other commodity the cheaper it 
is— the less valuable— and so with money: 
the more there is of it the less valuable it 
is— the less of labor and other things each 
dollar will purchase. They saw that if silver 
should be demonetized and gold made the only 
standard of money value, every gold dollar 
would gradually become worth two, because 
money would then be only half as plentiful: 
for twice as many people would struggle 
for it. This scheme of the European money-lenders 
was forced upon the nations of Europe, 
because all are borrowers and were obliged to 
comply and make their bonds payable, with 
interest, in gold. The influence of this extended 
to the United States and compelled a 
similar policy here, to the injury of all except 
those who have money at interest. 

The shrinkage of the value of labor and the 
produce of labor of every sort one half, to the 
gold standard, is making it twice as difficult to 
pay off mortgages and other debts previously 
contracted. The farm and the labor on it 



shrink in value, but the mortgage does not. 
It increases in weight; for under the changed 
conditions the interest is more than twice as 
burdensome as when contracted. This is the 
lower millstone. 

"The law of supply and demand" is bringing 
these two millstones very close together, 
and the masses who must pass between them 

R1607:page6 

in competition are feeling the pressure severely, 
and will feel it yet more. 

WHAT IS THE REMEDY? 



Do not people of intelligence see these matters? 
and will they not prevent the crushing 
of their fellows less favored or less skilled? 

No; the majority who are favored either by 
fortune or skill are so busy doing for themselves 
—"making money"— diverting as much as 
possible of the grist to their own sacks, that 
they do not realize the true situation. They 
do hear the groans of the less fortunate and 
often give, generously, for their aid, but as 
the number of "unfortunate" grows rapidly 
larger, many get to feel that general relief is 
hopeless; and they get used to the present 
conditions and settle down to the enjoyment 
of their special blessings and comforts, and, 

R1607:page7 

for the time at least, forget the troubles of 
their fellow creatures,— their brethren after 
the flesh. 

But there are a few who are well circumstanced 
and who more or less clearly see the 
real situation. Some of these, no doubt, are 
manufacturers, mine owners, etc. These can 
see the difficulties, but what can they do? 
Nothing, except to help relieve the worst cases 
of distress among their neighbors or relatives. 
They cannot change the money standard accepted 
by the civilized world. They cannot 
change the present constitution of society and 
destroy the competitive system in part, and 
they realize that the world would be injured 
by the total abolition of competition without 
some other power to take its place to compel 
energy on the part of the naturally indolent. 

Should these few who see the difficulty and 
desire to curtail the operations of the law of 



competition attempt to put their ideas into 

force in their own mills, they would soon become 

bankrupt. For instance, suppose that 

the manufacturer had in his employ fifty men 

at an average wage of $2.00 per day of ten 

hours. Suppose that, under the present business 

depression, caused by "money stringency" 

and "overproduction," his orders decreased 

so that one fifth of his men were idle. 

Suppose, then, that instead of discharging any 

of them he should decrease the hours of labor 

two hours, and make eight hours a day's labor 

at the same price as before. What would be 

the consequence? He would lose money, lose 

credit, become a bankrupt, and bring upon 

himself the curses of the creditors injured by 

his failure, who would charge him with dishonesty. 

His influence would be lost, and 

even his neighbors and relatives formerly assisted 

by him would suffer, and reproach him. 

It is evident, therefore, that no one man or 
company of men can change the order of society; 
but it can and will be changed by and 
by for a perfect system based, not upon selfishness, 
but upon love and justice, by the Lord's 
power and in the Lord's way, as pointed out 
in the Scriptures. 

We have heretofore shown that the Scriptures 
point out a radical change of society. Not a 
peaceful revolution, by which the errors of the 
present system will be replaced by wiser and 
more just arrangements, but a violent removal 
of the present social structure and its subsequent 
replacement by another and satisfactory 
one of divine arrangement. 

We do not say that there will be no patching 
of the present structure before its collapse. 
On the contrary, we assert that it will be 
patched in every conceivable manner. We 
expect many of these patchings during the next 
fifteen years— female suffrage, various degrees 
and schemes of Socialism and Nationalism, etc.; 
but none of these will do, the patches upon 
the old garment will only make its rents the 
more numerous, and its unfitness for patching 
the more apparent. 

THE PROPER COURSE FOR BELIEVERS. 



Shall we, then, advocate the revolution or 
take part in it, since we see that thus God has 
declared the blessings will come? 

No, we should do neither. God has not revealed 
these things to the world, but to his 



saints; and the information is not for the 
world, but for his consecrated people. And 
this class the Lord directs to "live peaceably;" 
not to revolutionize, but to be "subject 
to the powers that be;" not to avenge themselves 
on those who legally oppress them, but 
to wait for the justice which they cannot secure 
peaceably. "Wait ye upon me, saith 
the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the 
prey: for my determination is to gather the 
nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to 
pour upon them mine indignation, even all 
my fierce anger: for all the earth [symbol of 
society] shall be devoured with the fire of my 
zeal. For then [after the complete destruction 
of the present social structure or symbolic 
"earth"] will I turn to the people a pure 
language, that they may all call upon the name 
of the Lord, to serve him with one consent." 
(Zeph. 3:8,9.) Let God's people trust him 
even while they see the waves of trouble coming 
closer and closer. God is both able and 
willing to make all things work for good to 
those who love him— the called ones according 
to his purpose.— Rom. 8:28. 

R1607 : page 8 

To those who are not of the saints, but who 
are seeking to deal justly and who are perplexed 
on the matter, we say: The Lord had 
you in mind, and has sent you a message, which 
reads: "Seek righteousness, seek meekness: 
it may be that [in consequence] ye shall be 
hid [protected] in the day of the Lord's anger." 
--Zeph. 2:3. 

The probabilities are that, in harmony with 
the Apostle's prediction and figure (1 Thes. 5:3), 
the present trouble or pang of travail 
will gradually pass away, and be followed by 
another era of moderate prosperity, in which 
the worldly will measurably forget the lessons 
now somewhat impressed upon them. But let 
all who are awake remember that each succeeding 
pang may be expected to be more severe, 
until the new order of things is born; 
and let each seek, so far as possible, to live and 
deal according to the rules of love and justice, 
the principles of the new dispensation shortly 
to be introduced. 



R1607 : page 8 

ECHOES FROM THE PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS. 



A GLIMPSE AT THE SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS LIFE OF INDIA. 



[Continued from our last.] 

INDIA'S SOCIAL AND NATIONAL CURSE. 

"It is an unmitigated evil and the veriest 
social and national curse. Much of our national 
and domestic degradation is due to this 
pernicious caste system. Young India has been 
fully convinced that if the Hindoo nation is 
once more to rise to its former glory and greatness 
this dogma of caste must be put down. 
The artificial restrictions and the unjust— nay, 
in many cases, inhuman and unhuman— distinctions 
of caste must be abolished. Therefore, 
the first item on the programme of social 
reform in India is the abolition of caste and 
the furtherance of free and brotherly intercourse 
between class and class as also between 
individual and individual, irrespective 
of the accident of his birth and parentage, but 
mainly on the recognition of his moral worth 
and goodness of heart. 

"Freedom of intermarriage. Intermarriage, 
that is marriage between the members of two 
different castes, is not allowed in India. The 
code of caste rules does not sanction any such 
unions under any circumstances. Necessarily, 
therefore, they have been marrying and marrying 
for hundreds of years within the pale of 
their own caste. Now, many castes and their 
subsections are so small that they are no larger 
than mere handfuls of families. These marriages 
within such narrow circles not only prevent 
the natural and healthy flow of fellow-feeling 
between the members of different classes, 
but, according to the law of evolution, as now 
fully demonstrated, bring on the degeneration 
of the race. The progeny of such parents go 
on degenerating physically and mentally; and, 
therefore, there should be a certain amount of 
freedom for intermarriage. It is evident that 
this question of intermarriage is easily solved 
by the abolition of caste. 

"Prevention of infant marriage. Among 
the higher castes of Hindoos it is quite customary 
to have their children married when they 
are as young as seven or eight, in cases not very 
infrequent as young as four and five. 

CHILD MARRIAGE AS PRACTICED. 



"Evidently these marriages are not real 
marriages— they are mere betrothals; but, so 
far as inviolability is concerned, they are no 
less binding upon the innocent parties than actual 
consummation of marriage. Parties thus 
wedded together at an age when they are utterly 
incapable of understanding the relations between 
man and woman, and without their consent, 
are united with each other lifelong, and 
cannot at any time be separated from each 
other even by law; for the Hindoo law does 
not admit of any divorce. This is hard and 
cruel. It often happens that infants that are 
thus married together do not grow in love. 
When they come of age they come to dislike 
each other, and then begins the misery of their 
existence. They perhaps hate each other, and 
yet they are expected to live together by law, 
by usage and by social sentiment. You can 
picture to yourselves the untold misery of such 
unhappy pairs. Happily, man is a creature of 
habits; and providence has so arranged that, 
generally speaking, we come to tolerate, if not 
to like, whatever our lot is cast in with. But 
even if it were only a question of likes and dislikes, 
there is a large number of young couples 
in India that happen to draw nothing but 
blanks in this lottery of infant marriage. In 
addition to this serious evil there are other 

R1608 : page 8 

evils more pernicious in their effects connected 
with infant marriage. They are physical and 

R1608:page9 

intellectual decay and degeneracy of the individual 
and the race, loss of individual independence 
at a very early period of life when 
youths of either sex should be free to acquire 
knowledge and work out their own place and 
position in the world, consequent penury and 
poverty of the race, and latterly the utterly 
hollow and unmeaning character imposed upon 
the sacred sacrament of marriage. These constitute 
only a few of the glaring evils of Hindoo 
infant marriage. On the score of all these the 
system of Hindoo infant marriage stands condemned, 
and it is the aim of every social reformer 
in India to suppress this degrading system. 
Along with the spread of education the 
public opinion of the country is being steadily 
educated; and, at least among the enlightened 
classes, infant marriages at the age of four 
and five are simply held up to ridicule. The 



age on an average is being raised to twelve and 
fourteen; but nothing short of sixteen as the 
minimum for girls and eighteen for boys would 
satisfy the requirements of the case. Our highest 
ideal is to secure the best measure possible; 
but where the peculiar traditions, customs and 
sentiments of the people cannot give us the 
best, we have for the time being to be satisfied 
with the next best and then keep on demanding 
a higher standard. 

MARRIAGE LAWS IN GENERAL. 

"The Hindoo marriage laws and customs 
were formulated and systematized in the most 
ancient times; and, viewed under the light of 
modern times and western thought, they would 
require in many a considerable radical reform 
and reasoning. For instance, why should 
women in India be compelled to marry? Why 
should they not be allowed to choose or refuse 
matrimony just as women in western countries 
are? Why should bigamy or polygamy be allowed 
by Hindoo law? Is it not the highest 
piece of injustice that, while woman is allowed 
to marry but once, man is allowed (by law) to 
marry two or more than two wives at one and 
the same time? Why should the law in India 
not allow divorce under any circumstances? 
Why should a woman not be allowed to have 
(within the lifetime of her husband) her own 
personal property over which he should have 
no right or control? These, and similar to 
these, are the problems that relate to a thorough 
reform of the marriage laws in India. 
But, situated as we are at present, society is 
not ripe even for a calm and dispassionate discussion 
on these— much less than for any acceptance 
of them, even in a qualified or modified 
form. However, in the no distant future 
people in India will have to face these problems. 
They cannot avoid them forever. But, 
as my time is extremely limited, you will pardon 
me if I avoid them on this occasion. 

"Widow marriage. You will be surprised to 
hear that Hindoo widows from among the 
higher castes are not allowed to marry again. 
I can understand this restriction in the case of 
women who have reached a certain limit of 
advanced age, though in this country it is considered 
to be in perfect accord with social 
usage even for a widow of three score and five 
to be on the lookout for a husband, especially 
if he can be a man of substance. But certainly 
you can never comprehend what diabolical 
offense a child widow of the tender age often 



or twelve can have committed that she should 

be cut away from all marital ties and be compelled 

to pass the remaining days of her life, 

however long they may be, in perfect loneliness 

and seclusion. Even the very idea is 

sheer barbarism and inhumanity. Far be it 

from me to convey to you, even by implication, 

that the Hindoo home is necessarily a 

place of misery and discord, or that true happiness 

is a thing never to be found there. 

Banish all such idea if it should have unwittingly 

taken possession of your minds. 

[Continued in our next.] 



R1608:page9 

THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 

ITS ACCOUNT OF CREATION. 



THE book of Genesis opens with the grandest 
theme that ever occupied the thoughts 
of created intelligences; the Work of God, in 
bringing into being the material universe, and 
peopling it with organic, conscious life. The 
style and manner of treatment are in harmony 
with the grandeur of the theme. In few and 
powerful strokes, the progressive stages of the 
work are pictured to the mind, on a scale of 
magnificence unparalleled in writings human 
or divine. 

It is much to be regretted that these characteristic 
traits of the account of the Creation, 
shadowing forth its impenetrable mysteries in 
broad and general outlines, should have been 
overlooked in its interpretation. This sublime 

R1608 : page 10 

Epic of Creation, with its boldly figurative 
imagery, and poetic grandeur of conception 
and expression, has been subjected to a style 
of interpretation, suited only to a plain and 
literal record of the ordinary occurrences of 
life. Hence, not only its true spirit, but its 
profound teachings, have been misconceived 
and misinterpreted; and its exhibition of the 
mysteries of creative power, which science 
traces in its own observation of Nature, have 
been confounded with popular misapprehensions, 
irreconcilable with the well-known facts 



of science. 

A reconciliation of the Biblical account with 
the facts of Geological science has been attempted 
on a false theory; namely, that the 
several stages in the earth's formation took 
place in an assumed interval of time between 
the first and second verses; an interval of vast 
and indefinite length, unnoticed by the sacred 
writer. During this interval, the successive 
processes in the formation of the earth was 
completed, and the successive orders of vegetable 
and animal life, the remains of which are 
found imbedded in its strata, were brought 
into existence and perished; that the account 
of the present state of things on the earth's 
surface begins with the description in the second 
verse, representing the chaotic condition 
of its surface after the last of its great internal 
convulsions; and what follows, in verses 3-31, 
occurred in six natural days of twenty-four 
hours. 

The objections to this theory are: 

1. There is no foundation for it in the sacred 
writer's statement. He gives no intimation 

of such an interval. It is thrust in, where 
there is no indication that it was present to his 
mind, and no reason for it in the connection. 

2. It assumes that the sacred writer has not 
given us an account of the Creator's work, but 
only of a part of it; that for unknown ages 

the earth was peopled with vegetable and animal 
life, of which no record is made. 

3. It is without support in the facts ascertained 
by science. Scientific investigation 

shows that no such convulsion, as is assumed 
in this theory, occurred at the period preceding 
the creation of man. 

Hence the latest advocates of this theory are 
driven to the assumption, that what is revealed 
in verses 3-3 1 has reference only to a small 
area of western Asia; being nothing more than 
the reconstruction of that little segment of the 
earth's surface, broken up and thrown into 
confusion by an internal convulsion, and the 
creation there of the new orders of vegetable 
and animal life that now occupy the globe. 

On this supposition, the earth had already 
enjoyed the full light of the sun for ages, before 
the work of the first day (verse 3) began. 
Even then all around this little tract, the earth 
was in a blaze of light; but over this tract dense 
mists shut out the rays of the sun. God said: 
"Let there be light!" The mists grew thinner, 
letting in sufficient light for the time, 
though not enough to disclose the forms of the 
heavenly orbs, which were not seen there till 



the fourth day, though visible everywhere else. 
Then follow, in rapid succession of single days, 
the formation of continents and seas, the 
clothing of the earth with vegetation, and the 
peopling of it with the various classes of irrational 
animals, and finally with Man. 

The infinite God has not revealed his work 
of creation on such a scale as this; and its proportions 
are better suited to the conception 
of the timid interpreter, stumbling at minute 
difficulties and seeking to evade them, than to 
the grand and fearless exposition of his work 
from God's own hand. 

4. It is an unworthy conception of the 
Creator and of his work. Why was the work 
of creation extended through six natural days, 
when a single divine volition would have 
brought the whole universe into being, with 
all its apparatus for the support of life, and its 
myriads of living beings? Its extension through 
six successive periods, of whatever duration, 
can be explained only by the operation of those 
secondary causes, which the structure of the 
earth itself proves to have been active in its 
formation, requiring ages for their 
accomplishment. 

It is now established, beyond question, that 
the earth we inhabit was brought into existence 
many ages before man was created. During 
these ages it was in process of formation, 

R1608:page 11 

and was gradually prepared, under the divine 
direction, for its future occupation by man. 
In those vast periods, succeeding each other 
in long procession, it was fitted up for his 
abode by accumulations of mineral wealth 
within its bosom. These processes required 
ages for their completion, as represented in 
the sacred narrative, and recorded by the divine 
hand in the successive strata enveloping 
the earth, and marking the progressive stages 
of its formation.* 



* "Every great feature in the structure of the planet 
corresponds with the order of the events narrated in the 
sacred history."— Prof. Silliman, Outline of Geological 
Lectures, appended to Bakewell's Geology, p. 67, note. 
"This history furnished a record important alike to philosophy 
and religion; and we find in the planet itself the 
proof that the record is true" (p. 30). 

R1609:page 11 



The writer has no claim to speak as a geologist, 
and does not profess to do so. He 
takes the teachings of geology as given us by 
eminent masters of the science, entitled to 
speak on its behalf. But, speaking as an interpreter 
of God's Word, and taking their representation 
of their own science, he sees no 
discordance between the two records, which 
the same divine Author has given us in his 
Word and in his works. The former, when 
rightly interpreted, is in perfect accord with 
the latter, when truly exhibited. And geologists 
themselves assert that the Word of God, 
so interpreted, is in harmony with the teachings 
of their science. This alone is sufficient 
to satisfy the candid and conscientious inquirer. 
But they assert, also, that the divine 
Word explains the divine work, while the divine 
work confirms the divine Word. Moreover, 
no human philosophy could have discovered, 
or conjectured, what is here revealed.* 
The divine record was made when science had 
not yet penetrated the mysteries of Nature; 
when the earth's record of its own history 
was still buried deep in its enveloping strata, 
and had been read by no human eye. As, 
therefore, no one witnessed the scenes described, 
or had read the "testimony of the 
rocks," the written account, if true, as science 
admits it to be, must have been of superhuman 
origin. 

The successive stages in the account of the 
Creation are as follows:— 

1. The act of bringing matter into being. 

Its condition as "waste and empty," and subjection 
to the divine influence imparting to it 
its active properties. Production of light, as 
the first effect of this imparted action. + 

2. Separation of the fluid mass into waters 
above and waters below. 

3. Separation of land and water on the 
earth. Vegetation, beginning with its lowest 
orders. 

4. Sun, moon and stars. 

5. Animal life, beginning with inhabitants 
of the waters, the lowest in the scale, and 
winged species on the land. 

6. Terrestrial animals, in ascending grades. 
Man, and his dominion over all.++ 

These periods of creative activity, and the 
cessation that followed, were presented to the 
mind of the sacred writer under the familiar 
symbolism of the six days of labor and the 
seventh of rest. This was a natural and intelligible 
application of it; the word day, the 



simplest and most familiar measure of time, 
being used in all languages for any period of 
duration, of greater or less extent; and it is 
specially appropriate in such a style of representation 
as we find in this chapter. 

The six days of labor, and the seventh of 
rest, having been adopted as the symbolism 
under which these sublime mysteries are revealed, 
whatever properly belongs to it, and 



*"No human mind was witness of the events; and no 
such mind in the early age of the world, unless gifted 
with superhuman intelligence, could have contrived such 
a scheme;— would have placed the creation of the sun, 
the source of light to the earth, so long after the creation 
of light, even on the fourth day, and, what is equally 
singular, between the creation of plants and that of animals, 
when so important to both; and none could have 
reached to the depths of philosophy exhibited in the 
whole plan."— Dana, Manual of Geology, art. Cosmogony, 
p.743. 

+Styled cosmical in distinction from solar light. 

++"In this succession," says Prof. Dana (Manual of 
Geology, as above, p. 745), "we observe not merely an 
order of events, like that deduced from science; there is 
a system in the arrangement, and a far-reaching prophecy, 
to which philosophy could not have attained, however 
instructed." 

R1609 : page 12 

is essential to its full expression, is pertinent 

to the writer's object. Each period being represented 

by a "day," its beginning and end 

are described in terms proper to represent a 

day: "there was evening and there was morning." 

This was necessary, in order to preserve 

the symbolic representation. 

It should be observed that the sacred writer, 
throughout this account, represents things 
under forms of expression most easily apprehended 
by the common mind. The narrative 
was given to instruct, and not to perplex and 
confound, the common reader, as it would have 
done if expressed in scientific forms, adapted 
to a higher stage of culture than the Bible requires, 
or could properly presuppose, in its 
readers. 

Such a view of the sacred narrative exalts 
our conception of the divine Architect, and of 
his work. He who inhabits eternity has no 
need to be in a hurry. With him, a thousand 
years are as one day. It was not till ages of 
preparation had passed away, that his purposes 



found their entire fulfilment, and his work its 
completed unity, in the creation of man. 

According to the distinguished teachers of 
science— Professors Silliman, Guyot and Dana 
—the account of the creation recognizes two 
great eras, an inorganic and an organic, consisting 
of three days each; each era opening 
with the appearance of light, that of the first 
being cosmical, that of the second solar for 
the special uses of the earth.* 

It need not be supposed that the sacred 
writer read in these wonderful revelations all 
the mysteries which they contain, or that they 
were seen by those to whom the revelations 
were first addressed. It was not necessary that 
he or they should be made wise in physical 
learning beyond the wants of their time; and 
the symbolism itself conveyed all the instruction 
they needed. -T. J. CONANT. 



*"I. Inorganic era: 
1st Day.— LIGHT cosmical. 

2nd Day.— The earth divided from the fluid around, or 
individualized. 

3rd Day.— 1. Outlining of the land and water. 
2. Creation of vegetation. 

II. Organic era: 
4th Day.-LIGHT from the sun. 
5th Day.— Creation of the lower order of animals. 
6th Day.— 1 . Creation of Mammals. 2. Creation of Man." 
—Dana, Manual of Geology, p.745. 



page 12 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1609 : page 12 
THE FIRST ADAM. 



LESSON I., JAN. 7, GEN. 1:26-31; 2:1-3. 



Golden Text— "And God saw every thing that he had 
made, and, behold, it was very good."— Gen. 1:31. 

VERSES 26-30. "And God said, We will 
make man in our image, after our likeness," 
etc. The plural form of the pronoun used 
here calls to mind the statement of John 
with reference to "the only begotten Son of 
God," "the beginning of the creation of 
God," "the first born of every creature," 
that "he was in the beginning [of creation] 
with God;" that "all things were made by 
him, and without him was not any thing 
made that was made"— 1 John 4:9; Rev. 3:14; 
Col. 1:15,16; John 1:2,3. 

Man was created in the image and likeness 
of God, having mental and moral faculties 
corresponding, so that he could appreciate 
and enjoy communion with his 
maker, for whose pleasure he was created. 
"Male and female created he them," not 
only for the propagation of the race, but also 
that the twain might find their happiness 
complete in their mutual adaptability to 
each other and to God. Their dominion was 
to be the whole earth, with all its products 
and resources and all its lower forms of life 
—a wide and rich domain affording ample 
scope for all their noble powers. 

VERSES 31; 2:1,2. "And God saw all 
that he had made, and behold, it was very 
good." The physical earth was very good. 
It was a good storehouse of valuables for 
his intelligent creature, man; a good field 

R1609 : page 13 

for the exercise of his powers; a good place 
for his discipline and development; and 
finally a good and delightful home for his 
everlasting dominion and enjoyment. And 
so with the whole material universe, all of 
which was answering the ends of its creation; 
and so with all the laws which God had 
set in operation, all of which were wise and 
good and for the ordering, perpetuity and 
development of the purposes of their great 
designer. And so also with man, God's intelligent 
creature, created in his own image 
and likeness. Truly he was very good— 
morally, intellectually and physically— a likeness 
which God was not ashamed to own 
and to call his son.— Luke 3:38. 

VERSE 3. "And God blessed the seventh 
day and hallowed it; because on it 



he rested from all his work which God in 
making created." Here God established the 
order of sevens— an order of time to be 
observed throughout his plan subsequently. 
Six periods of equal length were to constitute 
the working days, and the seventh was 
the appointed period of rest. To this principle 
he subjected his own course in the 
work of creation. No special reference is 
here made to the seventh day of the week; 
but rather to the seventh period in any 
future division of time which his plan might 
indicate. In conformity with this principle 
the seventh day was appointed to the Jews 
under the law as a day of rest, a sabbath. 
So also their seventh week, seventh year 
and their culmination in the Jubilee or Sabbath 
year were on the same principle. (See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 6.) And 
likewise the seventh millennium or seventh 
thousand-year day is to be a Sabbath, a 
blessed and hallowed day of rest; for so 
God appointed in his ordering of time. 

We have heretofore shown, and will in 
some future volume of M. DAWN again 
present the evidences, that the seventh day 
of God's rest, which began just after man's 
creation, has continued ever since, and is to 
continue one thousand years into the future 
—to the full end of Christ's Millennial reign 
—in all a seven-thousand-year day. During 
this long day Jehovah God rests— avoids interference 
with the operation of the laws 
under which originally he placed all his 
earthly creation. (See Heb. 4:3,10; John 5:17.) 
He rests from or ceases his direct 
work, in order to let Christ's work of redemption 
and restitution take its place and 

R1610 : page 13 

do its work as a part of his divine plan. 

If thus the seventh day be a period of 
seven thousand years, it is but reasonable to 
say that the six days of creation preceding 
were also periods of seven thousand years 
each. Thus the entire seven days will be a 
period of forty-nine thousand years; and the 
grandly symbolic number fifty, following, 
speaks of everlasting bliss and perfection 
in full harmony with the divine plan. 

It will be well to notice in connection 
with this lesson the general disposition of 
teachers and Lesson Papers toward the 
theory of evolution;— denying that God 
made man in his own image; claiming that 



he was practically only a step above the 
orang-outang. Mark such teachings. They 
are misleading and contrary to the ransom. 
For if Adam were not created in God's image, 
then the account of his trial and fall 
(See next lesson) is nonsense; and if man 
did not fall a ransom would be absurd, and 
a restitution (Acts 3: 19-21) would be a 
most undesirable thing. 

If the Evolution theory be true, the Bible 
is false; if the Bible is true, the Evolution 
theory is false: there can be no middle 
ground. We affirm that the Bible is true. 

R1610 : page 13 

ADAM'S SIN AND GOD'S GRACE. 



LESSON II., JAN. 14, GEN. 3:1-15. 

Golden Text— "For as in Adam all die, even so in 
Christ shall all be made alive."— 1 Cor. 15:22. 

In the brief text of this lesson we have 
recorded the cause and beginning of all the 
woes that have afflicted humanity for the 
past six thousand years. It was not a gross 
and terrible crime that brought the penalty 
which involved us all, but a simple act of 
disobedience on the part of our first parents 
against the righteous and rightful authority 
of an all-wise and loving Creator, the penalty 
of which act was death. 

This was the extreme penalty of the divine 
law, and its prompt infliction for the 
very first offense— an offense too, which, in 
comparison with other sins that have since 
stained the race, was a light one— is a clear 
declaration of the Creator that only a perfectly 
clean creation shall be accounted 
worthy to abide forever. A celebrated photographer 
will not permit a single picture 
to leave his gallery which is not up to the 
standard of perfection, even if the party for 
whom it was taken is pleased with it. Every 
photograph must reflect credit upon the 
artist. Just so it is with the divine artist: 

R1610 : page 14 

every creature to whom eternal life is 
granted must do credit to its great author; 
otherwise he shall not survive. God's work 
must be perfect, and nothing short of perfection 



can find favor in his eyes.— Psa. 18:30; 
Hab. 1:13; Psa. 5:4,5. 

The test of character must necessarily be 
applied to every intelligent creature possessed 
of a free moral agency— in the image 
of God. In the case of our first parents it 
was a very simple test. The tempter was 
not necessary to the testing: the tree in the 
midst of the garden, and the divine prohibition 
of the tasting or handling of it were 
the test. The tempter urged the course of 
disloyalty; and this God permitted, since 
both the tempter and the tempted were free 
moral agents, and both were subjects of the 
test. In assuming that position, Satan also, 
as a free moral agent, was manifesting his 
disposition to evil— proving himself disloyal 
to his Creator and a traitor to his government. 
The serpent was an irrational, and therefore 
an irresponsible, instrument of the tempter, 
and in choosing such an instrument Satan 
unwittingly chose an apt symbol of his own 
subtle, cunning and crafty disposition. The 
penalty pronounced upon the serpent could 
make no real difference to the unreasoning 
creature, but in the words apparently addressed 
to it, in man's hearing, was couched 
the solemn verdict of the responsible, wilful 
sinner, which, for the evil purpose, had used 
the serpent as his agent. 

VERSES 1-3. The prohibition was clearly 
stated and clearly understood. They were 
not to eat of the forbidden fruit; neither 
should they touch it, lest they die. So 
should we regard every evil thing, not exposing 
ourselves to temptation, but keeping 
as far from it as possible. 

VERSE 4. The assertion— "Ye shall not 
surely die"— was a bold contradiction by 
the "father of lies" of the word of the 
Almighty— "Ye shall surely die." And it 
is marvelous what a host of defenders it has 
had in the world, even among professed 
Christians, and in the present day. Nevertheless, 
the penalty went into effect, and has 
been executed also upon all posterity ever 
since— "In the day thou eatest thereof, 
dying, thou shalt die"— i.e., in the gradual 
process of decay thou shalt ultimately die. 
The day to which the Lord referred must 
have been one of those days of which Peter 
speaks, saying that with the Lord a thousand 
years is as one day. (2 Pet. 3:8.) Within 
that first thousand-year day Adam died 
at the age of nine hundred and thirty years. 

VERSES 5-7. The reward which the deceiver 



promised was quickly and painfully 

realized. The offenders could no longer delight 

in communion and fellowship with 

God, and with fear and shame they dreaded 

to meet him; and in the absence of that 

holy communion with God and with each 

other in the innocent enjoyments of his 

grace, the animal nature began to substitute 

the pleasures of sense. The spiritual nature 

began to decline and the sensual to develop 

until they came to realize that the fig-leaf 

garments were a necessity to virtue and self-respect; 

and in these they appeared when 

called to an account by their Maker. 

VERSES 8-11. The natural impulse of 
guilt was to hide from God. But God sought 
them out and called them to account— not, 
however, to let summary vengeance fall 
upon them, but while re-affirming the threatened 
penalty, to give them a ray of hope. 
The fig-leaf garments had spoken of penitence 
and an effort to establish and maintain 
virtue, and the Lord had a message of 
comfort for their despairing hearts, notwithstanding 
the heavy penalty must be 
borne until the great burden-bearer, "the 
seed of the woman," should come and assume 
their load and set them free. 

VERSES 12,13. In reply to the inquiry 
of verse 1 1 Adam told the plain simple 
truth, without any effort either to justify 
himself or to blame any one else. Eve's reply 
was likewise truthful. Neither one tried 
to cover up the sin by lying about it. Nor 
did they ask for mercy, since they believed 
that what God had threatened he must of 
necessity execute; and no hope of a redeemer 
could have entered their minds. 

VERSE 14 is a figurative expression of the 
penalty of Satan, whose flagrant, wilful sin 
gave evidence of deliberate and determined 
disloyalty to God, and that without a shadow 
of excuse or of subsequent repentance. No 
longer might he walk upright— respected 
and honored among the angelic sons of 
God, but he should be cast down in the 
dust of humiliation and disgrace; and 
although he would be permitted to bruise 
the heel of humanity, ultimately a mighty 
son of mankind, the seed of the woman, 
should deal the fatal blow upon his head. 

Mark, it is the seed of the woman that 
shall do this; for he is to be the Son of God, 
born of a woman, and not a son of Adam, 

R1610 : page 15 



in which case he would have been an heir 
of his taint and penalty, and could not have 
redeemed us by a spotless sacrifice in our 
room and stead. God was the life-giver, 
the father, of the immaculate Son of Mary; 
and therefore that "holy thing" that was 
born of her was called the Son of God, as 
well as the seed of the woman; and because 
thus, through her, a partaker of the 
human nature, he was also called a Son of 
man— of mankind. 

This lesson should be studied in the light 
of its Golden Text, and in the light of the 
inspired words of Rom. 5:12,18-20. 



R1610:page 15 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT." 



The number of Infidels heard from, converted 
to faith in the Bible through the instrumentality 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN and the WATCH 
TOWER is truly remarkable. Below we give 
communications from three prison convicts, 
two of whom were Infidels but a short time 
ago. The doctrine of everlasting torment 
which they had all heard for years neither 
drew nor drove them to the Crucified One; 
but the "good tidings of great joy for all people" 
has conquered them. 

Several prisoners hope to enter the "harvest" 
field as "reapers" as soon as liberated. We 
are sure that all TOWER readers will rejoice 
with them. Remember them at the throne of 
grace.-EDITOR. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I acknowledge 
at this late day the receipt of your 
last very kind favor, knowing that you will, 
in the circumstances of my incarceration, 
find apology for my delay. My report to 
you now is full of encouragement. Our 
chaplain recently perfected arrangements 
whereby all who desired (with the exception 
of two who were inadvertently deprived 
the opportunity this time) partook 
of the Lord's table. The number actually 
partaking was fifty-two. A very large percentage 
of these are men who have never 
before made any profession of Christianity. 
All— I know of only two exceptions— have 



begun reading the Bible in prison. Many 

have given up idle habits and evil ways, 

and are pressing on to know the Lord, determined 

R1611 :page 15 

to become "sanctuary" Christians; 
and a very respectable number— say fifteen 
or twenty— are sanctuary Christians. The 
noon prayer-meeting has never faltered, 
but has continued to grow in grace and 
number until, in point of number, we have 
reached a limit beyond which we cannot go. 

Taking every thing into consideration, 
Brother, do you not think the Lord is bestowing 
upon us blessings of a marked character? 
Among those who have come to the 
Lord are two Jews, one of whom, I believe, 
intends writing to you. 

The two sets of DAWN and VOL. I. (which 
I found and which led me to correspond 
with you) are all continually in service. 
They have proved a great blessing to many. 
The copy of TOWER— a most invaluable 
help— is also on the go, and highly appreciated; 
and some of us in the edition containing 
the paper on "The Church of the 
Living God," were impressed to find how 
opposite was the teaching to our own way 
of worshiping. "Surely this is the house 
of God." I doubt not you will hear in 
person from several in this place who have 
derived great benefit from the DAWN series 
and TOWER; for they hold you and Sister 
R. in very high esteem, in Christ. 

I enclose to you herewith two poems, 
written by one of our number. If they 
meet your favor, we will hope to see them 
in the TOWER when space affords. They 
are original, and the author does not object 
either to the use of his name, or the mention 
of the place from which they are written, 
his desire being that they may be used 
in the most effective manner, for the glory 
of our beloved Lord and Savior. 

Speaking for myself, I am, by the grace 
of God and our Lord Jesus Christ, enabled 
to say that I have walked daily in close 
communion with him, ordering my ways 
by his written Word, under the guidance 
and teachings of the holy spirit. I am resting 
now in his keeping power. The conflict, 
in which the spirit of the old man had 
to be broken, was long and severe; but, 
thank God, I was strengthened daily by his 
grace, to the end that in my weakness his 



strength was perfected. I love the brethren, 
yet do I realize that this same love is 
to be made perfect. I cannot tell you, dear 
friends, how much I feel indebted to you 
for a perusal of the helps which you are 

R1611 :page 16 

sending out into the world; but of this you 
may be assured, that both yourself and Sister 
R. and all of your co-laborers are carried 
before the throne of grace in my prayers 
night and morning; and I am confident that 
my prayers are heard. God willing, I am 
due to be discharged from this place next 
summer, after which I may meet you; but 
I lay no plans. Henceforth I belong to Jesus, 
and he is not only able, but willing, to direct 
my efforts, abilities and time; and to him I 
am now fully and wholly committed. 

Praying that you may be continued in the 
service and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ 
until he is ready to bestow the crown, and 
the approval, "Well done, good and faithful 
servant," upon you, I subscribe myself 
Christ's, and yours in Christ unfailingly, 
W. D. HUGHES. 



page 16 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:- 
I feel I owe a debt of gratitude to you both, 
and I take this opportunity to convey to 
you my expressions of love and esteem, for 
your fearless and noble attitude in DAWNS 
and TOWERS, which I have had the good 
fortune to read, through kindness of our 
brother [writer of the above letter]. I had, 
previous to reading them, accepted Jesus 
as my Redeemer, but was beset by doubts 
and fears on account of the differences in 
my views from those of others I knew, and 
felt I was wrong, until (Praise the Lord) 
your works came to hand, and gave me fresh 
courage; and now I am determined that 
nothing shall separate me from Christ. This 
testimony will, I hope, be all the more acceptable 
because it comes from one to 
whom the very name of Jesus has been one 
of antipathy, from the fact that I am a Jew. 
Though a young man of only twenty-four 
years, I have been all but an open infidel— 
a "fatalist." 

I have read and re-read each page of 



DAWN with increasing interest, and I thank 
God for leading me into his secret— that 
the things spoken by the prophets are now 
fulfilled, and that we are drawing near to 
that day when all things shall be revealed. 
I have read your article in the TOWER on 
Baptism, and I thank the Lord for letting 
me have light on that subject. I have been 
in doubt how I could be baptized without 
assenting to some of the creeds and dogmas 
of the day, which I never could believe, and 
have felt that I must always be beyond the 
pale of the church. But, praise the Lord, 
your views are approved by my judgment- 
reached from the same source, the Word. 
Then I was fearful, lest I was being led 
away by pride; but now I shall, at the first 
opportunity, be immersed into Christ. 
What a beautiful symbol it is of a complete 
surrender of self and a resurrection in Christ. 
It is not a mere empty form, but an actual 
surrender and living. 

Will you kindly send me some information 
as to the work? also a few tracts, for 
here are souls hungry for the bread of life. 
I wish to know all about the work, that I 
may fully determine my attitude now; and 
if the Lord can use me, I am ready. There 
is a mighty work going on within these 
walls, and each day sees another soul step 
out into the glorious liberty of Christ Jesus. 

Dear Brother, my time here is drawing 
to a close, and soon I shall begin the battle 
against the world. I wish you to keep me 
before the throne of grace, as I do you and 
your work. May the Lord bless and keep 
you, is the earnest prayer of 

Yours in Christ, MAURICE ASHHEIM. 



R2254 : page 16 

HE CALLETH FOR THEE. 

H. HARDIE.-A PRISONER. 



There is nothing within me that ever I might 

Give as reason why Jesus should wash my soul white. 

I had mocked at his mercy so often before, 

He might have forsaken my soul evermore. 

But still in his wonderful mercy so free, 

He had room in his heart for a sinner like me. 



I would not attend, though so often he cried, 
"Son! look at my hands and the wound in my side; 
Oh, think of the love that could bring thy Lord down 
To buffeting, hate and a brow-piercing crown. 
I bore all that anguish to set thy soul free." 
But Christ's love and mercy were nothing to me. 

He bore with me long, and he followed me far 
O'er the way where allurements and lusts ever are: 
He brought me to bay, and he led me to think, 
With my feet slipping fast o'er the terrible brink 
To destruction and death, put the devil to rout. 
Then I came, and he never has since cast me out. 

He is ever the same; and his Bible declares, 
There's rejoicing above o'er a penitent's prayers; 
That sins, red as scarlet, can be white as the snow, 
If o'er them the blood of the Savior but flow. 
He is pleading and calling, poor sinner, for thee: 
He'll not refuse you, since he saved one like me. 



page 18 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



1894. GOOD SHEPHERD CALENDARS. 1894. 



We have quite a number of calls for these 
calendars for this year. Those who got them 
last year seem to have been pleased and profited 
by them. They contain excellent selections of 
Scripture texts, one for each day of 
the year. The text for each day is pulled off, 
showing that for the day following. 

The usual retail price of these calendars is 
35 cents each. We have arranged for a large 
quantity, and can supply them at less than 
half price— two calendars for twenty-five cents; 
postage paid by us. 

PROMPT RENEWALS, TAGS, ETC. 



We much appreciate the promptness of many 
of our readers in renewals— those who receive 
the WATCH TOWER free, as the Lord's poor, 
as well as those who send payment. 

However, this promptness on the part of so 
many will hinder our promptness in the changing 
of the dates on some of the address tags. 
We hoped to indicate on the tag of this issue 
all receipts up to Jan. 1, but some must wait 
over until our next issue. 

It seems impossible, too, for us to answer 
any but the most important letters— except by 
the WATCH TOWER articles (which frequently 
are designed to meet inquiries), and by a 
Postal-card referring you for answers to 
back numbers of the TOWER or to M. DAWN. 
Be assured that we are pleased to receive and 
read all of your welcome letters. It requires 
much less time to read than to answer them. 

EXPERIENCE AND PRAYER MEETINGS. 



We called attention last year to the inauguration 
of Experience and Prayer Meetings, 
in various parts of this city and Pittsburg, 
held every Wednesday evening, under the 
leadership of different brethren, who move 
from one meeting to another every quarter. 
We want to tell you that these meetings have 
been growing in interest and profit from the 
first. They average from six to eighteen in 
attendance, and now could not be dispensed 



with. The spiritual sentiment of the Congregation 
of the Lord, which meets every Sunday 
at Bible House chapel, was never before as 
good as at present; and under the Lord's blessing 
we attribute this to these meetings. 

Thus far they have been chiefly experience 
meetings (doctrinal questions are avoided at 
these meetings); but we propose that for the 
coming year they shall take on more of a 
prayer feature. All have learned to express 
themselves to one another, and all should learn 
to "draw nigh to the throne of the heavenly 
grace, that each may obtain mercy and find 
grace to help in every time of need," before 
the brethren, as well as privately. 

Several little groups here and there have 
written us that they have tried the plan and 
have been blessed thereby. We therefore urge 
all groups, everywhere, to try this service 
faithfully, during the year beginning. And 
those who have no companionship and fellowship 
in the truth will all the more need just 
such an evening each week for personal inspection, 
and praise and worship, and thanksgiving 
to the Giver of every good gift. Try it! 

ORDER TRACTS FREELY NOW. 



Our prayers have been answered, and all 
hindrance to the sending forth of the Old 
Theology Tracts at the cheap rate of postage is 
removed. Order all you can use judiciously. 

PRESERVE YOUR WATCH TOWERS. 



Those who dispose of their TOWERS after 
reading them once or twice do themselves an 
injury. Preserved, they would often refresh 
your memory. A "Patent Binder" holding 
forty-eight copies, lasting for two years, we can 
supply for fifty cents; or you can keep them in 
order without one, or in a home-made binder. 
Order extra copies for loaning or giving to your 
friends. If you cannot afford to pay for the 
extra copy, say so, and we will send it upon the 
usual terms to "the Lord's poor"— free. 



R1611 :page 19 

VOL. XV. JANUARY 15, 1894. NO. 2. 



"ARE THERE FEW THAT BE SAVED?" 



EMERGING from that blackness of error 
called Calvinism, with its heaven of blessing 
for the "little flock" and its eternal torment 
of all others, as taught by good but sadly deceived 
men— John Calvin, Jonathan Edwards, 
Charles H. Spurgeon and others— into the glorious 
light of the goodness of God, shining in 
the face of Jesus Christ our Lord and revealed 
in the divine Plan of the Ages, the writer was 
subjected to the same attacks of Satan (the great 
Enemy of God and man) to which all others 
seem to be exposed. Coming as an angel of 
light, he seemed to welcome us into the light 
out of the gross darkness which he himself had 
brought upon the world. And while our heart 
trembled with joy, and yet with fear also, lest 
after all we should find some evidence that God 
would do some terrible and unjust thing, to at 
least some of his creatures, the suggestion came, 
God will not permit any to be lost. 

At this time the word lost still had associated 
with it that unscriptural, wicked and awful 
meaning of eternal torment; for, although 
we had gotten rid of that misbelief, and 
saw that lost means dead, destroyed, the influence 
of that old error still gave a false coloring 
to the words formerly supposed to teach it. 
Hence the greater force in the suggestion that 
God would not permit any to be lost;— for 
surely no enlightened mind can candidly imagine 
the eternal misery of a solitary individual 
in all of God's universe. 

Reason and judgment swayed for a time, first 
to one side and then to the other, according 
to circumstances and moods, until we learned 
that our reasoning powers are not to be relied 
upon to settle such questions; that they are 
imperfect as well as liable to be prejudiced; 
and that for this cause God had given us his 
inspired Word to guide our reasoning faculties 
into proper channels. Then, appealing to the 
Scriptures, we found abundant proof that unless 
God therein trifles with his children's 
confidence (and as men would say "bluffs" 
them, with suggestions and threats which he 
knows he will never execute) there surely will 
be some lost as well as some saved. 

Among these Scriptures are not only those 
similes which speak of the salt which lost its 
value, and was thenceforth good for naught, 
but to be trodden under foot, and of the destruction 



of those servants which would "not 
have this man to rule over" them (Matt. 5:13; 
Luke 19:14,27), etc., but the following 
plain statements:— 

Some "wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction. 
--2 Pet. 3:16. 

"Pride goeth before destruction."— 
Prov. 16:18. 

"The Lord preserveth [saves] the souls of his 
saints."-Psa. 97:10. 

"The Lord preserveth all them that love 
him, but all the wicked [not the ignorant] will 
he destroy."-Psa. 145:20. 

"False teachers... bring in damnable 
heresies,. ..and bring upon themselves 
swift destruction."— 2 Pet. 2:1. 

Some are "vessels of wrath fitted to destruction." 
-Rom. 9:22. 

R1611 : page 20 

"Them that walk after the flesh. ..shall 
utterly perish in their own corruption."— 
2 Pet. 2:10-12. 

"The destruction of the transgressors and of 
the [wilful] sinners shall be together, and they 
that forsake the Lord shall be consumed."— 
Isa. 1:28. 

The Lord will "destroy them that corrupt 
the earth. "-Rev. 11:18. 

"The way of the Lord is strength to the upright: 
but destruction shall be to the workers 
of iniquity."-Prov. 10:29,30; 21:15. 

Some fall into "many foolish and hurtful 
lusts [desires], which drown men in destruction." 
-1 Tim. 6:9. 

"For many walk,. ..the enemies of the 
cross of Christ, whose end is destruction."— 
Phil. 3:18,19. 

"Who shall be punished with everlasting 
destruction."— 2 Thes. 1:9. 

"If any man defile the temple of God, him 
will God destroy."- 1 Cor. 3:17. 

"The judgment of God [is] that they who 
do such things are worthy of death." "Because 
that, when they knew God, they... 
became vain in their imaginations, and their 
foolish heart was darkened."— Rom. 1:32,21. 

"Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being 
left us of entering into his rest, any of you 
should seem to come short of it."— Heb. 4: 1. 

"For it is impossible for those who were 
once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly 
gift, and were made partakers of the holy 
Spirit, if they should fall away, to renew them 
again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to 



themselves the Son of God afresh and put him 
to an open shame."— Heb. 6:4-6. 

"See that ye refuse not him that speaketh; 
for if they escaped not who refused him that 
spake on earth [Moses, the typical teacher], 
much more shall not we escape, if we turn 
away from him that speaketh from heaven." 
"Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the 
grace of God. "--Heb. 12:25,15. 

"The soul that will not hear that prophet 
shall be destroyed from among his people."— 
Acts 3:23. 

"By one offering he [Christ] hath perfected 
forever them that are sanctified. ...Let 
us [therefore] draw near with a true heart, in 
full assurance of faith. ...Let us hold fast 
the profession of our faith without wavering, 
...exhorting one another, and so much the 
more as ye see the [Millennial] Day drawing 
on. For if we sin wilfully, after that we have 
received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth 
no more [part for us in the] sacrifice 
for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment 
and fiery indignation, which shall consume 
the adversaries. "-Heb. 10:14,22-27. 

If "he who [in the typical nation] despised 
the law of Moses [the typical lawgiver] died 
without mercy, of how much sorer [more serious] 
punishment shall he be thought worthy 
who hath trodden under foot [disgraced] the 
Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the 
[New] Covenant an unholy [ordinary] thing, 
and hath done despite unto the spirit of grace?" 
Surely the wages of such conduct would be 
everlasting, while that in the type was not, but 
was covered by the great sacrifice for sins once 
for all. "It is a fearful thing to fall into the 
hands of the living God."-Heb. 10:28,29,31. 

"He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting 
life; and he that believeth not the Son 
shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth 
on him."— John 3:36; 1 John 5:12. 

"His servants ye are to whom ye render 
service; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience 
unto righteousness."— Rom. 6:16. 

"The end of those things is death."— 
Rom. 6:21. 

"To be carnally minded is [to reap the 
penalty] death; but to be spiritually minded 
is [to reap the reward] life and peace."— 
Rom. 8:6. 

"Sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth 
death."— Jas. 1:15. 

"There is a [kind of] sin unto death;... 
and there is a [kind of] sin not unto death." 
-1 John 5:16. 



"Fear not them which kill the body, but 
are not able to kill [destroy] the soul [being]: 
but rather fear him which is able to destroy 
both soul and body in Gehenna [the second 
death]. "--Matt. 10:28. 

"The wages of sin is death."— Rom. 6:23. 

"As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no 
pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that 
the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn 
ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will 
ye die?"--Ezek. 18:32; 33:11. 

"All the wicked will God destroy."-Psa. 145:20; 
147:6. 

What could be more explicit than this testimony 
of God's Word! And how reasonable 
it all is. Torment might properly be objected 
to as unjust as well as unmerciful; but taking 
away the life of those who will not conform 
their lives to the just and holy and kind regulations 
of the New Covenant which God has 

R1611 : page 21 

opened to our race, through Christ's great 
atoning sacrifice, is reasonable, just and 
merciful. 

It is reasonable: why should God continue 
his blessings, of which life is the chief, to those 
who, after knowing and being enabled to conform 
to his just requirements, will not do so? 

It is just: because God is under no obligation 
to man. Man is already his debtor ten 
thousand times; and if he will not render loving 
respect to his Creator's wise and good 
commands, Justice would demand that those 
blessings be stopped. 

It is merciful on God's part to destroy the 
incorrigibly wicked— those who, after full 
knowledge and opportunity have been enjoyed, 
refuse to be conformed to the lines of the law 
of God's Kingdom— the law of love. (1) Because 
all who will live ungodly— out of harmony 
with God's law of love— will always be like 
the restless sea, more or less discontented and 
unhappy. (2) Because such characters, be 
they ever so few, would mar the enjoyment of 
those who do love peace and righteousness. 
And to these God has promised that the time 
shall come when sin and its results, weeping 
and pain and dying, shall cease (Rev. 21:4), 
when he will destroy out of the earth those 
who corrupt it. (Rev. 11:18.) (3) Because God 
has promised that there shall yet be a clean 
world (Isa. 11:9; Rev. 21:5), in which the 
unholy and abominable and all who love and 
make lies shall have no place. (Rev. 21:8.) 



"Thou shalt diligently consider his place and 
it shall not be."-Psa. 37:10. 

Only such as have preferred their own wisdom 
to that of the Bible can read the foregoing 
words of God, and yet believe that all 
men will be everlastingly saved. 

Only such as are puffed up with a sense of 
their own benevolence can hold that God 
never would be satisfied or happy if one of the 
race perished. God has gotten along very 
well without the sinners thus far, and could 
do so forever. It was not for selfish reasons 
that he redeemed all, and is about to restore 
all who will accept his favor in Christ. 

But some attempt to evade the foregoing 
statements of Scripture with the claim that 
they refer to wickedness, and not to wicked 
people; that they mean that all wicked people 
will be destroyed by their conversion—by having 
their wickedness destroyed. We ask those 
who so think to read over these words of God 
again, carefully, and see that they could not, 
reasonably, be so construed. Notice that even 
though the Word mentioned nothing about 
the destruction of wicked doers, but merely 
mentioned the destruction of wickedness and 
wicked things, this would nevertheless include 
wicked doers; because, of all wicked things, 
intelligent, wilful evil-doers are the worst. But 
the Word does specify wicked persons; and 
all who are familiar with rules of grammar 
covering the question know that when the 
person is specified the destruction of his wickedness 
merely could not be meant. 

"The lake of fire, which is the second 
death" (Rev. 20:14), is "prepared for the devil 
and his angels [messengers or servants]." 
(Matt. 25:41.) And all who, with Satan, 
serve sin are his servants or messengers. (Rom. 6:16.) 
For such, yes, for all such, and for 
such only, God has prepared the penalty of 
"everlasting destruction from the presence of 
the Lord and from the glory of his power." 
And from Satan their chief down to the least 
one of his children who, notwithstanding 
knowledge and opportunity to the contrary, 
cling to evil, and choose it rather than righteousness, 
this tribe will be blotted out to the 
praise of God's justice, to the joy and welfare 
of the holy and to their own real advantage. 

It will not do to judge others by ourselves, 
in all respects. The fact that God's saints do 
not feel opposition to God's will, and cannot 
understand how others can entertain such sentiments, 
sometimes leads to the false conclusion 
that if all others enjoyed a similar knowledge 



of God they too would delight in his 
service. That such a conclusion is false is 
evident, from the fact that Satan, who knew 
God thoroughly, "abode not in the truth," 
but became "the father of lies" and "a 
murderer." And, after six thousand years witness 
of sin and its results, he is still the Adversary 
of righteousness. After nearly two 
thousand years knowledge of the love and 

R1611 : page 22 

mercy of God manifested in Christ's sacrifice 
for sin, he is still as unmoved by that love as 
he is unmoved by pity for human woe. And 
more than this: God, who knows the future 
as well as the past, shows us, unquestionably, 
that after being restrained (bound) for a 
thousand years by the power of Christ's Kingdom, 
and during that time witnessing the 
blessings of righteousness, he will, when granted 
liberty at the close of the Millennium, still 
manifest a preference for the way of sin and 
opposition to God's arrangements. Surely this 
proves that intelligent beings, and perfect beings, 
too, can know God and yet choose a way 
of disobedience,— whether or not our minds 
can grasp the philosophy of their course. 

But the philosophy of the matter is this: A 
perfect being, angel or man, is a blank page 
upon which character must be engraved. 
Knowledge and a free will are the engravers. 
Pride, Selfishness and Ambition may be engraved, 
or Love, Humility and Meekness. 
The latter is the blessed or God-like character; 
the former is the sinful or devilish character. 
According to which is engraved will be the 
character. If the will decide for sin and cultivate 
the wicked character, the result will be 
a wicked being. If the will decide for righteousness 
and God-likeness, the result will be 
a holy being. 

The same principles in a general way apply 
also to fallen men. No matter how fallen and 
weak they may be, they have free-wills. They 
can will aright, even when they cannot do 
aright. And under the New Covenant God 
accepts, through Christ, the imperfect deeds, 
where the wills are perfect. 

For some who are now evil doers and lovers 
of sin, our hope is, that they are such because 
of blinding of the devil (2 Cor. 4:4), which 
leads them to make a choice they would not 
make if they had a full, clear knowledge. 
God's guarantee to all, through Christ, is, that 
all shall come to an accurate knowledge of the 



truth, and thus to a full opportunity to choose 
between righteousness and sin. We have no 
hope for any who, after coming to a clear 
knowledge, choose sin, wilfully: neither in 
this age nor in the next is there hope for such, 
according to God's Word. 



R1611 : page 22 

THE FUTURE-SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS. 

AS SEEN BY A CONGREGATIONAL MINISTER. 



REV. Dr. C. I. Scofield, pastor of a large 
Congregational church in Texas, recently 
preached a sermon on unfulfilled prophecies as 
interpreted by the signs of the times. He said: 

I am to speak to you to-night upon unfulfilled 
prophecy as interpreting the signs of the 
times. As pertinent to that theme, I ask you 
to look with me at the passage found in Luke 12:54-56: 
"And he said also to the people, 
when ye see a cloud rise out of the west, straitway 
ye say, There cometh a shower; and so it 
is. And when ye see the south wind blow, ye 
say, There will be heat; and it cometh to pass. 
Ye hypocrites! Ye can discern the face of the 
sky, and of the earth; but how is it that ye do 
not discern this time?" 

As a matter of fact, the ancient people of 
God did not discern the time of their visitation, 
the presence of their long expected Messiah, 
simply and only because they did not 
study the signs of their own times in the light 
of the prophets. From Genesis to Malachi 
the spirit of prophecy had been painting, broadly 
at first, but stroke upon stroke in ever fuller 
detail, the portrait of a coming one. His biography, 
to change the figure, was written 
beforehand. 

In due time he came, and prophecy began 
to be changed into history. For three years 
he filled the earth and air with the very marks 
of identity which the prophetic portrait required. 
To this day the absolutely unanswerable 
proof of the messiahship of Jesus is the 
unvarying literalness of his fulfillment of the 
prophecies. The prophets and the evangelists 
answer to each other as the printed page answers 
to the type, as the photograph answers 
to the negative. And these predictions, be it 
remembered, were so minute and specific as to 



exclude the possibility of imposture. It is 
open to any man to say, "I am the Christ;" 
but it is not possible for any man to arrange 
his ancestry for two thousand years before his 
birth, and then to be born at a precise time, in 
a particular village, of a virgin mother. 

Looking back upon all this, we marvel that 
the men of Christ's own time did not hit upon 

R1611 : page 23 

the simple expedient of testing his pretensions 
by the prophetic Scriptures. More than once 
he challenged the test, but they remained to 
the end discerners of the sky and of the earth, 
but absolutely blind to the tremendous portents 
of their time. 

But is it not possible, at least, that we are 
equally blind to equally evident signs? We 
have the prophetic word "made more sure," 
says Peter, who calls it a "light shining in a 
dark place," and warns us that we do well to 
take heed to it. But are we walking in that 
light? Rather, is it not true that the prophetic 
Scriptures are precisely the portions of the 
sacred book least studied? Of this we may be 
sure: there is nothing occurring which has not 
been foreseen and foretold; and of this, too, 
that the things foretold will surely come to pass. 
Is it not possible, therefore, that our Lord is 
saying of us: "How is it that ye do not discern 
this time?" 

Let us proceed after this manner: First, let 
us look at the prophecies which describe the 
closing events of this dispensation and usher 
in the next. Second, let us look about us to 
see if our sky holds any portent of those things. 

The first great word of prophecy, solemn, 
repeated, emphatic, is that this age ends in 
catastrophe. 

"In the last days perilous times shall come. 
There shall be signs in the sun and in the 
moon and in the stars, and upon the earth distress 
of nations with perplexity; the sea and 
the waves roaring; men's hearts failing them 
for fear and for looking after those things 
which are coming on the earth, for the powers 
of heaven shall be shaken. And then shall they 
see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with 
power and great glory." (Luke 21:25-27.) 
"But as the days of Noah were, so shall also 
the presence of the Son of Man be. For, as in 
the days that were before the flood, they were 
eating and drinking, marrying, and giving in 
marriage, until the day that Noah entered into 
the ark, and knew not until the flood came 



and took them all away; so shall also the 
presence of the Son of Man be." (Matt. 24:37-39.) 
"For yourselves know perfectly that the 
day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the 
night. For when they shall say, Peace and 
safety, then sudden destruction cometh upon 
them, as travail upon a woman with child; and 
they shall not escape." And then, referring to 

R1612 : page 23 

the abundant prophetic testimony in our hands, 
the apostle adds, "But ye, brethren, are not 
in darkness, that that day should overtake you 
as a thief."— 1 Thess. 5:3,4. 

It is useless to multiply references when all 
are to the same purport. The notion that we 
are to pass, by the peaceful evolutionary processes 
of a broadening culture, by the achievements 
of discovery and inventions and by 
the universal acceptance of the gospel, into the 
golden age of millennial blessedness is, in the 
light of prophecy, the baseless fabric of a 
dream. True, the prophet's vision takes in 
that day; but it lies beyond the awful chasm of 
blood and tears and despair which yawns between. 
Toward that chasm this age is hastening 
with accelerated speed: this age ends in 
catastrophe. 

So much for the broad and obvious prophetic 
testimony which he who runs may read. Now 
the book of the Revelation (and to some extent 
Second Thessalonians) takes up these prophecies 
of the end time, and enters into the detail 
of them. By this we know not merely that the 
end is calamitous and catastrophic, but also of 
what elements the calamitous catastrophe is 
made up. Observe, I do not say that the Revelation 
tells us what precedes the catastrophe, 
but of what the catastrophe itself consists. 

And first it is war, and war such as this world 
has never seen, war colossal, universal and desperate. 
"Peace shall be taken from the earth." 
Not only organized combat of nation against 
nation, but the murderous passions of men 
shall be unchained, and "they shall kill each 
other." The natural results of such a condition 
are depicted as following famine, consequent 
upon unsown fields, and then pestilence. 

And, second, this awful condition is to be 
followed by bloody anarchy— the overthrow of 
all settled government. 

Now, it is evident that if we are indeed near 
the end of this age, some unmistakable signs 
of these coming horrors must be discoverable. 
Wars on the apocalyptic scale require long 



years of preparation. In primitive conditions, 
tribe springs to arms against tribe; but we are 
not living in primitive conditions. If, therefore, 
we find the nations of the earth steadily 
reducing their armaments, selling off their war 
material, sending regiments back to the forge 
and the plow, and dismantling fortresses, we 
may be sure, not indeed that the prophecies 
will fail, but that they will not reach their fulfillment 
in our time. 

Similarly, anarchy in any universal sense is 
not the product of an hour. The conservative 
instincts are too strong, love of home and property 
and security too deep-seated. Men may, 
as they have, overturn a government; but it is 
only to establish another which they prefer. 
But anarchy, pure and simple, is not a spontaneous 
possibility. If, therefore, we find men 

R1612:page24 

everywhere growing in love of order and veneration 
for law; if we find lynchings and riots 
becoming infrequent, and discontent with the 
settled order disappearing, we may be sure that 
the end of the age is far removed from us. We 
may go on with our buying and selling, confident 
that our accumulations will represent 
some fleeting value for yet a few transitory 
years. 

Nor need we be specially apprehensive if, 
upon a survey of the times, we find but a nation 
or two here and there in readiness for 
war; or a few anarchic socialists noisily venting 
their theories. But what are the facts- 
facts so conspicuous, so obtrusive, so inconsistent, 
that all the world feels itself under the 
shadow of impending calamity? 

Take the war shadow first. Have armaments 
been decreasing? On the contrary, Europe, 
the east, everything within the sphere anciently 
ruled by Rome (which is the especial sphere 
of prophetic testimony), is filled as never before 
with armed men. All the nations, with 
feverish haste, are increasing their armaments. 
Practically bankrupt, they are hoarding gold 
and piling up material of war, though perfectly 
aware that the strain is simply insupportable 
for any long continued period; and they are 
doing it because they all feel that a tremendous 
crisis is at hand. 

Within two years Bismarck and Gladstone, 
the most experienced and sagacious of living 
statesmen, have said that the situation does 
not admit of a peaceful solution, that the 
world is hastening toward the war of wars, the 



outcome of which no man may predict. This is 
also the expressed opinion of that singular man 
whose only position is that of Paris correspondent 
of the London Times, but whose wisdom, 
judgment and prudence are such that he is 
consulted by every cabinet and trusted by every 
sovereign— De Blowitz. And all are agreed 
that the war, when it comes, must involve the 
earth. 

Eleven millions of men are armed and drilled 
and ready to drench the prophetic earth in 
seas of blood. The Emperor William has said 
to his friend, Poultney Bigelow: "We live 
over a volcano. No man can predict the moment 
of the eruption. So intense is the strain 
that a riot the other day between French and 
Italian workmen at Aigues-Mortes— a mere riot 
—came near to precipitating the awful conflict." 

So much for the war sign of the end. What 
of the anarchic portent? We all know that 
now for the first time in the history of the 
world is there a socialist propaganda. Socialism 
is a fad with dreaming doctrinaires, a desperate 
purpose with millions of the proletariat 
of Russia, France, Germany, England, Italy. 

From the philosophic socialism of Bellamy 
and the idealists to the anarchic socialism 
of Spies, Schwab and Neebe may seem a far 
cry. How long in 1790-93 did it take France 
to traverse the distance from Rousseau and 
Diderot to Robespierre? Yes, my hearers, the 
anarchy sign blazes in our heavens alongside 
the baleful war sign. But there is more. Two 
groups among the sons of men are especially in 
the eye of prophecy— the Christian church and 
ancient Israel. What, let us ask, is the prophetic 
picture of the end of the Church age? 
The answer is in large characters, and none 
need miss it. The Church age ends in increasing 
apostasy, lukewarmness, and worldliness on 
the part of the many; of intense activity, zeal 
and devotedness on the part of the few. 

What now are the signs? Look into our 
Churches. The world has come into the Church 
and the Church has gone into the world, until 
the frontier is effaced. Moral and honorable 
men of the world point the finger of scorn at 
the life of the average professor of religion. 
But in all our Churches are the faithful few 
who do the praying, the giving, the home and 
foreign mission work; and these have never 
been excelled in any age in zeal, piety and 
consecration. Verily, this sign, too, of the 
catastrophe is here. 

What of Israel? As all Bible students know, 
the great burden of the unfulfilled prophecy 



concerning the Jew is his restoration to his 
own land. This does not mean that every Jew 
must return, but only that the nation must be 
reconstituted upon its own soil. Is there any 
sign of this? Every reader of the newspapers 
has his answer ready. In a word, there are 
more Jews in Palestine now than returned 
under Ezra and Zerrubabel to reconstitute the 
nation after the Babylonian captivity. More 
have returned in the last ten years than within 
any like period since the destruction of Jerusalem 
—more in the last three years than in the 
previous thirty. The great bulk of the Jewish 
people are in Russia, where now they are undergoing 
persecutions so infamous as to move 
to indignation and grief every generous soul. 
Moved with pity, Baron Hirsch is seeking to 
deport his suffering brethren to South America; 
but the Russian Jews themselves, moved by 
undying faith in the prophets, have organized 
the great Choveir Lion association to promote 
the colonization of Palestine. This will succeed; 
the other, in large measure, will fail. 

And so, my friends, looking through the 
vision of the prophets on to the end-time for 

R1612:page25 

conditions, and then sweeping our own sky 
for signs, we find the four great portents- 
preparation for universal war, universal anarchy, 
a worldly Church and regathering Israel lifting 
themselves up into a significance which the 
world dimly apprehends, but which we, who are 
not of the night that that day should overtake 
us as a thief, know means that the end is just 
upon us. How glorious that this lamp of 
prophecy not only casts its rays into the awful 
abyss upon the brink of which the age hangs 
poised, but also lights up the fair Millennial 
shore just beyond, where the nations of the 
redeemed shall walk in light and peace under 
Messiah's rule, with restored Israel the manifestation 
of his earthly glory. And even beyond 
that golden age we are permitted to see 
the new heavens and the new earth— eternity. 



R1615:page25 

A SAVIOR AND A GREAT ONE! 



A ghastly sight shows in the shivering air 



On Calvary's brow: 
The Savior of mankind, in love, hangs there; 

While followers bow 
The head low on the breast and sadly sigh, 
"How can he be Messiah— if he die?" 

A jeering mob surrounds the cursed knoll 

And mocks the Lord; 
Yet to his lips comes from his stricken soul 

The precious word— 
"Father, forgive; they know not what they do—" 
E'er o'er his face creeps dissolution's hue. 

"Tis finished," rings in triumph through the sky; 

He bows his head. 
And; while the querying soldiers mark the cry, 

The Lord is dead. 
All anguish past, his triumph doth begin, 
The world is saved, a death blow dealt to sin. 

Jerusalem, amazed, hears soldiers tell 

(With terror cold) 
How Christ has vanquished Satan, death and hell, 

As he foretold. 
And feeble fishers forcefully proclaim, 
"There is salvation in no other name." 

A Sabbath's journey from the city gate, 

With sorrow shod, 
Two sad disciples bear their sorry weight 

To their abode. 
The Christ appears, while holden are their eyes, 
And doth expound wherefor Messiah dies. 

Emmaus reached, the Lord would further go. 

They gently chide— 
"Thou hast beguiled our weary tears, and so 

With us abide." 
He brake their bread,— then vanished from their sight. 
Their hearts did burn with holy joy that night. 

Still thus he comes; and though the faulty sight 

Of clouded eyes 
Perceives him not, he makes the burden light, 

And stills our cries: 
For, like weaned babes, we mourn, the while he would 
Our hearts sustain with stronger, richer food. 

The tale is old, but ever sweetly new, 

Why Jesus died. 
The nail prints, doubting one, he shows to you, 

And in his side 
A spear thrust gapes— a passage rent apart, 
For easy access to your Savior's heart. 

It was for you, my brother, that he shed 



His life so free. 
For you, for me, he bowed his godlike head 

On Calvary's tree; 
That, trusting in the merit of his name, 
We might be saved from sorrow, sin and shame. 

The past sufficeth, surely, to have spent 

In sinful deeds. 
Come, join our band; and be our footsteps bent 

Where Jesus leads. 
So in his righteousness serenely dressed 
We'll meet him face to face among the blest. 
--H. HARDIE. 



R1612:page25 

ECHOES FROM THE PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS. 

A GLIMPSE AT THE SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS LIFE OF INDIA. 



[Continued from our last.] 

HAPPY HINDOO MARRIAGES. 

"Happiness is not to be confounded with 
palatial dwellings, gorgeously fitted with soft 
seats and yielding sofas, with magnificent costumes, 
with gay balls or giddy dancing parties, 
nor with noisy revelries or drinking bouts and 
card tables; and as often, if not oftener, in 
that distant lotus land, as in your own beloved 
land of liberty, you will come across a young 
and blooming wife in the first flush of impetuous 
youth who, when suddenly smitten with 
the death of the lord of her life, at once takes 

R1612 : page 26 

to the pure and spotless garb of a poor widow, 

R1613 : page 26 

and with devout resignation awaits for the call 
from above to pass into the land which knows 
no parting or separation. But these are cases 
of those who are capable of thought and feeling. 
What sentiment of devoted love can you 
expect from a girl of twelve or fourteen whose 
ideas are so simple and artless and whose mind 
still lingers at skipping and dollmaking? What 
sense and reason is there in expecting her to 
remain in that condition of forced, artificial, 



lifelong widowhood? Oh, the lot of such child- widows! 
How shall I depict their mental 
misery and sufferings? Language fails and 
imagination is baffled at the task. Cruel fate 
—if there be any such power—has already reduced 
them to the condition of widows, and 
the heartless, pitiless customs of the country 
barbarously shave them of their beautiful hair, 
divest them of every ornament or adornment, 
confine them to loneliness and seclusion- 
nay, teach people to hate and avoid them as 
objects indicating something supremely ominous 
and inauspicious. Like bats and owls, on 
all occasions of mirth and merriment they must 
confine themselves to their dark cells and close 
chambers. The unfortunate Hindoo widow is 
often the drudge in the family; every worry 
and all work that no one in the family will 
ever do is heaped on her head; and yet the 
terrible mother-in-law will almost four times 
in the hour visit her with cutting taunts and 
sweeping curses. No wonder that these poor 
forlorn and persecuted widows often drown 
themselves in an adjoining pool or a well, or 
make a quietus to their life by draining the 
poison-cup. After this I need hardly say that 
the much-needed reform in this matter is the 
introduction of widow marriages. 

SOME HINDOO REFORMERS. 

"The Hindoo social reformer seeks to introduce 
the practice of allowing such widows 
to marry again. As long ago as fifty years one 
of our great pundits, the late pundit V.S. of 
Bombay, raised this question and fought it out 
in central and northern India with the orthodox 
Brahmans. The same work, and in a 
similar spirit, was carried out in Bengal and 
Northern India, by the late Ishwar Ch. V. 
Sagar of Calcutta, who died only two years 
ago. These two brave souls were the Luther 
and Knox of India. Their cause has been 
espoused by many others, and until to-day 
perhaps about two hundred widow marriages 
have been celebrated in India. The orthodox 
Hindoos as yet have not begun to entertain 
this branch of reform with any degree of favor, 
and so anyone who marries a widow is put under 
a social ban. He is excommunicated; that 
is, no one would dine with him, or entertain 
any idea of intermarriage with his children or 
descendants. In spite of these difficulties the 
cause of widow marriage is daily gaining 
strength both in opinion and adherence. 

"The position of woman. A great many 



reforms in the Hindoo social and domestic 
life cannot be effected until and unless the 
question as to what position does a woman occupy 
with reference to man is solved and settled. 
Is she to be recognized as man's superior, 
his equal, or his inferior? The entire 
problem of Hindoo reform hinges on the position 
that people in India will eventually ascribe 
to their women. The question of her position 
is yet a vexed question in such advanced 
countries as England and Scotland. Here in 
your own country of the States you have, I 
presume to think, given her a superior place 
in what you call the social circle and a place 
of full equality in the paths and provinces of 
ordinary life. Thus my American sisters are 
free to compete with man in the race for life. 
Both enjoy the same, or nearly the same, rights 
and privileges. In India it is entirely different. 
The Hindoo lawgivers were all men, and, 
whatever others may say about them, I must 
say that in this one particular respect, viz., 
that of giving woman her own place in society, 
they were very partial and short-sighted men. 
They have given her quite a secondary place. 
In Indian dramas, poems and romances you 
may in many places find woman spoken of as 
the 'goddess' of the house and the 'deity of 
the palace,' but that is no more than a poet's 
conceit, and indicates a state of things that long, 
long ago used to be rather than at present is. 

WOMEN'S BATTLE FROM BIRTH. 

"For every such passage you will find the 
other passages in which the readers are treated 
with terse dissertations and scattering lampoons 
on the so-called innate dark character 
of women. The entire thought of the country 
one finds saturated with this idea. The Hindoo 
hails the birth of a son with noisy demonstrations 
of joy and feasting; that of a female 
child as the advent of something that he would 
most gladly avoid if he could. The bias begins 
here at her very birth. Whatever may be 
the rationale of this state of things, no part of 
the programme of Hindoo social reform can 
ever be successfully carried out until woman is 
recognized as man's equal, his companion and 
co-worker in every part of life; not his handmaid, 
a tool or an instrument in his hand, a 
puppet or a plaything, fit only for the hours of 
amusement and recreation. To me the work 

R1613:page27 



of social reform in India means a full recognition 

of woman's position. The education 

and enlightenment of women, granting to them 

liberty and freedom to move about freely, to 

think and act for themselves, liberating them 

from the prisons of long-locked zenana, extending 

to them the same rights and privileges, 

are some of the grandest problems of Hindoo 

social reform. All these depend on the solution 

of the above mentioned problem of the 

position of woman in India. 

EDUCATION OF THE MASSES. 

"The masses or the common people in India 
are very ignorant and quite uneducated. 
The farmer, the laborer, the workman and the 
artisan do not know how to read or write. They 
are not able to sign their own names. They 
do not understand their own rights. They are 
custom bound and priest-ridden. From times 
past the priestly class has been the keeper and 
the custodian of the temple of knowledge, and 
they have sedulously kept the lower class in 
ignorance and intellectual slavery. Social reform 
does not mean the education and elevation 
of the upper few only: it means inspiring 
the whole country, men and women, high and 
low, from every creed and class, with right 
motives to live and act. The work classes 
need to be taught in many cases the very rudiments 
of knowledge. Night schools for them 
and day schools for their children are badly 
wanted. 

FAILURE OF FOREIGN MISSIONS. 

"Government is doing much; but how much 
can you expect from government, especially 
when that government is a foreign one, and 
therefore has every time to think of maintaining 
itself and keeping its prestige among foreign 
people? It is here that the active benevolence 
of such free people as yourselves is 
needed. In educating our masses and in extending 
enlightenment to our women you can 
do much. Every year you are lavishing— I 
shall not say wasting— mints of money on your 
so-called foreign missions and missionaries sent 
out, as you think, to carry the Bible and its 
salvation to the 'heathen Hindoo,' and thus 
to save him! Aye, to save him! Your poor 
peasants, your earnest women and your generous 
millionaires raise millions of dollars every 
year to be spent on foreign missions. Little, 
how little do you ever dream that your money 



is expended in spreading abroad nothing but 
Christian dogmatism and Christian bigotry, 
Christian pride and Christian exclusiveness. I 
entreat you to expend at least one-tenth of all 
this vast fortune on sending out to our country 
unsectarian, broad learned missionaries that 
will spend their efforts and energies in educating 
our women, our men and our masses. 
Educate. Educate them first, and they will 
understand Christ much better than they would 
do by being 'converted' to the narrow creeds 
of canting Christendom. 

"The difficulties of social reformers in India 
are manifold. Their work is most arduous. 
The work of engrafting on the rising Hindoo 
mind the ideals of a material civilization, such 
as yours, without taking in its agnostic or 
atheistic tendencies, is a task peculiarly difficult 
to accomplish. Reforms based on utilitarian 
and purely secular principles can never 
take a permanent hold on the mind of a race 
that has been essentially spiritual in all its 
career and history. Those who have tried to 
do so have failed. The Brahmo-Somaj, or the 
church of Indian Theism, has always advocated 
the cause of reform, and has always been the 
pioneer in every reform movement. In laying 
the foundations of a new and reformed 
society the Brahmo-Somaj has established every 
reform as a fundamental principle which must 
be accepted before any one can consistently 
belong to its organization. 

"Acting on the model of ancient Hindoo 
society, we have so proceeded that our social 
institutions may secure our religious principles, 
while those principles regulate and establish 
every reform on a safe and permanent footing. 

PLAN OF BRAHMO-SOMAJ. 

"Social reform merely as such has no vitality 
in our land. It may influence here and 
there an individual; it cannot rear a society 
or sway a community. Recognizing this secret, 
the religion of the Brahmo-Somaj has from 
its very birth been the foremost to proclaim a 
crusade against every social evil in our country. 
The ruthless, heartless practice of suttee, 
or the burning of Hindoo widows on the funeral 
pile of their husbands, was abolished through 
the instrumentality of the great Raja Ram Rohan 
Roy. His successors have all been earnest 
social reformers as much as religious reformers. 
In the heart of Brahmo-Somaj you find no 
caste, no image worship. We have abolished 
early marriage, and helped the cause of widow 



marriage. We have promoted intermarriage; 

we fought for and obtained a law from the 

British government to legalize marriage between 

the representatives of any castes and any 

creeds. The Brahmos have been great educationists. 

They have started schools and colleges, 

societies and seminaries, not only for 

R1614:page27 

young men, but for girls and young women. 

In the Brahmo community you will find hundreds 

R1614:page28 

of young ladies who combine in their 
education the acquirements of the east and the 
west; oriental reserve and modesty with occidental 
culture and refinement. Many of our 
ladies have taken degrees in arts and sciences 
in Indian universities. The religion of the 
Brahmo-Somaj is essentially a religion of life 
—the living and life-giving religion of love to 
God and love to man. Its corner-stones are 
the fatherhood of God, the brotherhood of man 
and the sisterhood of woman. We uphold reform 
in religion and religion in reform. While 
we advocate that every religion needs to be 
reformed, we also most firmly hold that every 
reform, in order that it may be a living and 
lasting power, needs to be based on religion. 
"These are the lines of our work: we have 
been working out the most intricate problems 
of Hindoo social reform on these lines. We 
know our work is hard, but at the same time 
we know that the Almighty God, the father of 
nations, will not forsake us; only we must be 
faithful to his guiding spirit. And now, my 
brethren and sisters in America, God has made 
you a free people. Liberty, equality and fraternity 
are the guiding words that you have 
pinned on your banner of progress and advancement. 
In the name of that liberty of 
thought and action, for the sake of which your 
noble forefathers forsook their ancestral homes 
in far-off Europe, in the name of that equality 
of peace and position which you so much prize 
and which you so nobly exemplify in all your 
social and national institutions, I entreat you, 
my beloved American brothers and sisters, to 
grant us your blessings and good wishes, to 
give us your earnest advice and active cooperation 
in the realization of the social, 
political and religious aspirations of young 
India. God has given you a mission. Even 
now he is enacting, through your instrumentality, 



most marvelous events. Read his holy 
will through these events, and extend to young 
India the right hand of holy fellowship and 
universal brotherhood." 

Would that America, with all its advantages 
of the gospel, were able to give the needed 
help; but no, in common with all "Christendom," 
she has fallen short of her privileges, 
and is unable to save India from the ditch toward 
which she herself is blindly drifting. 
But, thank God! help is coming, and that right 
speedily, in the glorious establishment of the 
Kingdom of God over all the earth; and our 
blessed Christ, the Prince of peace, shall himself 
"speak peace unto the heathen; and his 
dominion shall be from sea to sea, and from the 
river to the ends of the earth."— Zech. 9:10. 

A HEATHEN POEM. 

[The following lines, from a recent journal of Madras, 
India, show what some of the best Hindoo minds are 
thinking at the present time.] 

"Weary are we of empty creeds, 

Of deafening calls to fruitless deeds; 

Weary of priests who cannot pray, 

Of guides who show no man the way; 

Weary of rites wise men condemn, 

Of worship linked with lust and shame; 

Weary of custom, blind, enthroned, 

Of conscience trampled, God disowned; 

Weary of men in sections cleft, 

And Hindoo life of love bereft, 

Woman debased, no more a queen, 

Nor knowing what she once hath been; 

Weary of babbling about birth, 

And of the mockery men call mirth; 

Weary of life not understood, 

A battle, not a brotherhood; 

Weary of Kali yuga years, 

Freighted with chaos, darkness, fears; 

Life is an ill, the sea of births is wide, 

And we are weary; who shall be our guide?" 



page 28 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 



LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1614:page28 

THE MURDER OF ABEL. 



I. QUAR., LESSON III., JAN. 21, GEN. 4:3-13. 

Golden Text— "By faith Abel offered unto God a more 
excellent sacrifice than Cain."— Heb. 1 1:4. 

VERSES 3-5. Coupled with the first promise 
of deliverance from sin and death through 
the seed of the woman, was the typical foreshadowing 
of the great sacrifice of "the 
Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of 
the world," when God substituted the garments 
of skin, which required the sacrifice 
of life, for the fig-leaf garments of Adam 
and Eve. Whether more plainly told them 
or not, we know that the idea of typical 
sacrifices for sin was received, and offerings 
were made at certain intervals of time- 
probably yearly, as subsequently commanded 
under the Jewish dispensation, and also 
as indicated by the sacrifices of Cain and 

R1614 : page 29 

Abel— Cain's offering being of the fruit of 
the ground, a part of his harvest, and Abel's 
a firstling or yearling of his flock. 

The offering of Abel was, according to 
the divine institution, a sacrifice of life, and 
therefore a true type of the promised redemptive 
sacrifice, while Cain's offering was 
not. Hence the offering of Abel was acceptable 
to God, while that of Cain was 
rejected. 

VERSES 6,7. "And Jehovah said unto 
Cain, Why art thou angry? and why is thy 
countenance fallen? If thou doest well, shalt 
thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not 
well, sin croucheth at the door, and unto 
thee is its desire; but thou canst rule over it." 

VERSE 8 shows that Cain disregarded the 
counsel received and allowed his anger to 
burn unchecked. He failed to resist the 
enemy Sin, here figuratively represented as 
a devouring beast, and it gained control of 
him, and drove him, first to unkind words, 
and finally to murder. 



VERSE 9. One sin leads to another unless 
promptly acknowledged. Here the sin 
of murder was followed by those of lying 
and insolence— "I know not. Am I my 
brother's keeper?" 

VERSES 10-12. The blood of Abel cried 
for vengeance upon the murderer. That is, 
Justice insists that he who takes the life of another 
thereby forfeits his own right to live. 

VERSE 13. When Cain began to realize 
the deep remorse of a guilty conscience, in 
his agony of mind he cried out, "My punishment 
is greater than I can bear;" and in 
connection with the unbearable load he 
mentions regretfully the hiding from him 
of Jehovah's face, showing thus an appreciation 
of God's favor to which he would 
fain return. This evidence of penitence was 
quickly responded to by the Lord, who 
graciously set a mark upon Cain, that no one 
finding him should slay him, declaring that 
any such transgressor should receive sevenfold 
punishment. Thus the Lord guards 
the penitent. A bruised reed he will not 
break, and smoking flax he will not quench. 
(Isa. 42:3.) If there be even a slight disposition 
to penitence, he fosters and cherishes 
it. This merciful course with Cain 
foreshadowed God's similar course with the 
whole guilty world: when his chastisements 
shall have brought them to repentance, then 
his arm will be extended for their recovery. 

The Golden Text shows that it was not 
by custom nor by accident that Abel chose 
his sacrifice, but by faith. Evidently he 
had been seeking the mind of the Lord, and 
had found it; and thus was enabled to offer 
acceptably. So with God's children now: 
it is to those who exercise faith, and who 
seek and knock, that the mind of the Lord 
is revealed, and they can see that nothing 
short of the great sacrifice, our Redeemer's 
life, could be acceptable before God. 

The Apostle in speaking of Christ institutes 
a comparison (Heb. 12:24) which seems to 
imply that Abel was in some degree a type 
of Christ;— in that he offered an acceptable 
sacrifice, and was slain therefor. But while 
Abel's death called for vengeance, Christ's 
life was sacrificed for us and calls instead 
for mercy, not only upon those who slew 
him (Luke 23:34), but also upon the whole 
world. Not only was he slain by men, but 
he was slain for men; and by his stripes all 
may be healed who will penitently come 
unto the Father by him. 



R1614:page29 

GOD'S COVENANT WITH NOAH. 



I. QUAR., LESSON IV., JAN. 28, GEN. 9:8-17. 

Golden Text— "I do set my bow in the cloud, and it 
shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the 
earth."-Gen. 9:13. 

With the deluge the Apostle Peter says 
the first world, the first heavens and earth, 
passed away— i.e., that dispensation, that 
order of things came to an end. (2 Pet. 2:5.) 
That was the dispensation in which the 
angels were permitted to mingle with men, 
assuming the human form for that purpose, 
the object being to influence and help mankind 
to retrieve their great loss by the fall. 
This, God knew they could not do; but in 
his wisdom he permitted the endeavor, foreseeing 
the ultimate utility of such an 
experiment. 

R1615 : page 29 

The immediate result was the corruption 
of some of the angels (Jude 6,7), who, leaving 
their first estate, took to themselves wives 
of the daughters of men; and by these mixed 
marriages a mongrel race of "giants" was 
produced, who, having the unimpaired vitality 
of their fathers and the human nature 
of their mothers were indeed "mighty men 
of renown"— "giants" in both physical 
and intellectual strength, especially as compared 
with the fallen and rapidly degenerating 
human race.— Jude 6,7; Gen. 6:2,4. 

The account of the deluge is not merely 
a Bible narrative, but is corroborated by 
the traditions of all races of the human family 

R1615 : page 30 

except the black race. It is found in 
India, China, Japan, Persia, among the native 
Indians of America and the natives of 
the Pacific Islands. What are known as 
the Deluge Tablets were found not long 
since among the ruins of the great stone 
library of Nineveh. The accounts given 
by these harmonize in many respects with 
the Scriptural account. 



The extreme wickedness of these men 
and of the world in general, as described by 
the inspired writer, seems indicative of almost 
total depravity— "And God saw that 
the wickedness of man was great in the 
earth, and that EVERY imagination of the 
thoughts of his heart was ONLY EVIL, CONTINUALLY. 
(Gen. 6:5.) So God determined 
to wipe them all from the face of the earth, 
saving Noah, who "was perfect in his generations," 
and his family; that is, he was not 
of the mixed race, but was of pure Adamic 
stock; and his heart was right before God. 
--Gen. 6:9. 

With Noah, after the flood, God again 
established his covenant, as he had done 
with Adam at the beginning, giving to him 
dominion over the earth, as he had done with 
Adam. (Gen. 9:1-12.) And here again, as 
at the beginning, he indicates the true nature 
of the marriage relation— a union of 
one man and one woman as husband and 
wife, which order began to be violated very 
early in the world's downward history. -- 
Gen. 4:19. 

The rainbow in the clouds was given as 
a sign of God's covenant with man, that the 
earth should never again be destroyed by a 
flood of waters. So ended the first dispensation, 
or the first world, the heavens and 
earth that then were, as Peter describes it 
(2 Pet. 3:6); and so began the second dispensation, 
"this present evil world" (2 Pet. 3:7; 
Gal. 1 :4), the heavens and earth which 
now are, which are soon to pass away 
with a great noise, which are to be burned 
up with the fire of God's jealousy, and whose 
elements are to melt with fervent heat; for, 
like that first great dispensation, it also has 
become corrupt. (2 Pet. 3:10-12; Zeph. 1:18.) 
And when this present evil world will 
have thus passed away, then the new heavens 
and the new earth, wherein dwelleth 
righteousness, shall appear.— 2 Pet. 3:13. 

In this destruction of worlds it will be 
seen, as the Prophet also declares (Eccl. 1:4; 
Psa. 104:5; 119:90); that "the earth abideth 
forever." The same physical earth remains, 
and is the scene of all these great 
revolutionary changes, which so completely 
destroy the preceding order of things as 
to justify the mention of them under the 
significant symbols of a new heavens and 
a new earth. See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. 
I., Chap. iv. 

While the present world— this present 



order of things— is also doomed to pass 
away, and will be replaced by another new 
dispensation, the new heavens and earth, 
God's promise, of which the bow in the 
clouds was a pledge, will be kept: he will 
never again destroy the world with a flood 
of waters; but it is written that all the earth 
shall be consumed with fire: not a literal 
fire, but the fire of God's jealousy (Zeph. 3:8) 
—a symbolic fire, a great calamity, which 
will completely destroy the present order 
of things, civil, social and religious. 

R1615 : page 30 

BEGINNING OF THE HEBREW NATION. 



I. QUAR., LESSON V., FEB. 4, GEN. 12:1-9. 

Golden Text— "I will bless thee, and make thy name 
great; and thou shalt be a blessing."— Gen. 12:2. 

VERSE 1. The Lord had commanded 
Abraham to leave his native land, etc., while 
he was yet in Haran (verse 4); and later, 
when his father was dead, and when he arrived 
in the land of Canaan, God showed 
him the land and gave him the title to it for 
himself and his seed after him for an everlasting 
possession. (Verse 7; 17:8.) Thus 
we have a very important point in chronology 
established, viz., the date of the Abrahamic 
covenant. See MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
VOL. II., pages 44-47. 

VERSES 2,3. In partial fulfilment of this 
promise, the nation of Israel has indeed become 
a great nation— a nation unique in its 
separation from other nations, and in its 
peculiar history under the divine guidance. 
And the promises and threatenings of verse 3 
will in due time be dealt out to those who 
bless and to those who oppress her. 

The blessing of all the families of the 
earth through Abraham and his seed— which 
seed is Christ, head and body, as the Apostle 
Paul explains (Gal. 3:16,29)— is a promise 
which few Christians have duly considered. 
All the families of the earth must 
certainly include the families that have died, 
as well as the families that are living. And 
it points forward, therefore, to the grand 
millennial reign of Christ, when, according 
to his Word, all that are in their graves will 



R1615:page31 

hear the voice of the Son of Man, and shall 
come forth.— John 5:25,28. 

Nor is God's dealing with this nation yet 
ended; for the gifts and callings of God 
are not things to be repented of or changed. 
In God's due time, after the full completion 
and glorification of the elect Gospel Church, 
the mercy of the Lord shall again turn toward 
the seed of Jacob. And so all of 
fleshly Israel shall be saved from present 
blindness, as it is written, "There shall come 
out of Zion the deliverer [the Gospel Church, 
the spiritual seed of Abraham— Gal. 3:29], 
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob;" 
for this is God's covenant with them. 
-Rom. 11:25-33. 

The remaining verses of the lesson show 
that Abraham obediently followed the Lord's 
direction, walking by faith in his promise. 
Thus his acts attested his faith, and his 
faith, thus attested, was acceptable to God. 
-Jas. 2:22. 



page 3 1 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I came into possession 
of the truth so recently, that I feel that 
I should work with might and main, day and 
night, for the remnant of my days. Oh, how 
blessed to come to the thousand three hundred 
thirty and five days! 

I have given some lectures, and have invitations 
to lecture at other points; but I am 
sure it does not spread the truth as effectively 
as the blessed DAWNS have and will spread it. 
I am sure it was through the DAWNS that meat 
in due season was served to me, and I now rejoice 
with joy unspeakable. 

My dear Brother, I pray that all the saints 
may make themselves ready for the glorious 
union with their Lord and Head, and specially 
for you and your helpmeet, Sister Russell, 
that you may be faithful in your work of labor 
and love. 

I always receive the WATCH TOWER as a 
friend that has been absent and returned with 
joyful news. 

Your brother in Christ, A. F. BINKLEY. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--The TOWER has 
come regularly to hand, each number filled to 
overflow with the "Gospel of Peace." "The 
poor in spirit"— the "humble" and "meek"— 
are indeed refreshed, yea, filled, after reading 
the many spiritual subjects treated in the pages 
of the various issues of that welcome guest. 
Often have I turned from the burdens, sorrows, 
cares and temptations of the world, and sought 
comfort, consolation and peace, and found 
them, in their pages, as the Editor, through 
the holy Spirit, unfolded the spiritual meaning 
of the different texts from the standpoint of 
the "Plan of the Ages." You and Sister 
Russell have my earnest prayers for the divine 
blessing in your efforts to obey the injunction 
—"feed my lambs," "feed my sheep"; and as 
each presses quietly and persistently along the 
narrow way to glory, honor, immortality, eternal 
life, may the indulgent Father tender the 
"helping hand"; knowing that the way is rugged, 
steep, difficult and beset with many 
dangers. 

"Oh! how beautiful are the feet of them 
that preach the Gospel of Peace." Kindly 
and lovingly yours in the Master's service, 
W. P. DEBOLT. 



TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-I received the 
Diaglott and the two Swedish DAWNS, and am 
exceedingly well pleased with all. I had feared 
that the Swedish translation would not be 
equal to the original; but I am indeed agreeably 
disappointed. The force and clearness 
of tone, the lucidity and charm of language, 
are so happily transferred as to make it a literary 
treat, beside its innate, inestimable worth 
as a help to Bible study and a luminary in the 
dense darkness that has so long vailed the 
many precious truths of God's Word. May 
God richly bless its author. 

Very gratefully yours, C. EDLUND. 



DEAR BROTHER:-I am having quite a struggle 
of it here, in the territory in which I have 
been canvassing for a few days past, running 
only six, seven or eight books a day. This is 
the hardest experience I have yet encountered 
for so many days at once. However, if I can 



manage to meet my actual expenses through 
the winter, and can endure the cold weather, 
I shall be satisfied. 

When I entered this particular phase of the 
harvest work, it was not with the motive of 
becoming wealthy. Had that been the desire, 
I would have taken up some more lucrative 
employment. At the same time, of course, I 
want to scatter as much of the "good seed" 
as is possible, in the hope that thereby some 
precious wheat may be found, to the glory of 

page 32 

the Lord of the harvest. It has been my purpose 
(and I trust I have thus done) to give 
myself altogether to him who has bought me 
with his precious blood; and, if I understand 
aright what this giving means, it is to be his 
through good report and through evil report, 
in failure or in success, in sorrow or in joy, in 
the dark, or in the light, in life or in death, 
his only, wholly and forever. Pray that this 
may ever be my happy condition— kept through 
the "riches of grace" in Jesus Christ. If I 
try to do this in my own strength, I shall always 
fail. But if he accept me, and keep me, 
I shall then be kept indeed. 
Yours in faith and fellowship, 

J. A. MITCHELL. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--In the past few 
days I have succeeded in getting several persons 
thoroughly interested in the DAWN, and 
am in the hope that at least some of these will 
come into the light and prove wheat. One is 
a Methodist minister who has been not altogether 
satisfied with his belief. I have his 
promise to read the DAWN carefully, which I 
trust he will do. 

I feel the dear Lord is using me to his honor 
and glory. Working for him is such a pleasure: 
such blessing I derive from it that meeting 
with opposition and taking the cross are not 
at all hard for me. I am again reading the 
DAWNS, and find more good things, and see 
more and more into the truth. 

I have just read in the December TOWER 
your views in regard to the annual convention; 
and I fully agree with you. It seems to 
me your time should be given to the many 
rather than to the few. While I am very grateful 
for the opportunity of meeting you at the 
last one, I feel as if it had been at the expense 



of others to whom you could have given 
your time. We who are in the faith do not 
need conventions as much as we need to impart 
to others the blessed truths. We are, I 
think, willing to forego convention pleasures 
if doing so will hasten the publishing of other 
volumes of the DAWN series. 

Wishing you a Happy New Year, Yours in 
Christian love and fellowship, 

J. A. BOHNET. 



DEAR BROTHERS:--Enclosed find $1.00 to 
continue the WATCH TOWER. The grand news 
received from it last year has, praise God, 
filled my heart with love that I cannot find 
words to express. May God still continue to 
bless you in the work. 

Yours in Christ, A. SIMPSON. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-This is Brother 
A's home, and I came here to do some 
"reaping." I sold forty-seven books in 
about two days— twenty-eight the first day. 

Last Sunday by arrangement we met a 
few friends, to whom I explained our chart. 
I have not enjoyed a talk so well for many 
a day. Every one present was ripe for truth, 
and had not a word of opposition. 

One had begun to read DAWN with a 
strong and firm determination to fight it 
from the beginning. So she read on and 
on and on, and, as a result, she began to see 
God as a God of love, and is now rejoicing 
in freedom and the truth. It did us much 
good to be of use to these few friends, and 
we hope for increased usefulness. Accept 
love in our Head. F. B. UTLEY. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have 
been confined to the house for some time, 
after having canvassed only one day; I am 
not discouraged, however, for my faith 
grows stronger day by day; and, if I cannot 
work in one way, I will try another, 
until convinced that the Master wants me 
to leave the field; and then he will surely 
show me what he would have me do. May 
the Master lead and give me strength to 
follow is my prayer. 

Yesterday I was reading an account in 



the American Baptist of St. Louis, of the 
trial for heresy of J. M. Carter, pastor of a 
Baptist church. Some of the charges are 
as follows: (1) He denies the immortality 
of the soul. (2) He denies the consciousness 
of the soul between death and the resurrection. 
(3) He holds the restoration and 
possible salvation of the dead and the final 
annihilation of the incorrigible. It seems 
that the major part of the church went with 
him, and still retains him as pastor. 
Yours in Christ Jesus, A. L. TUPPER. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-What a great 
blessing it is to us to be able to understand 
the things coming to pass at present, so as not 
to be fretting and complaining about these 
hard times, but, "having necessary food and 
clothing, therewith to be content." "Godliness 
with contentment is great gain." Jesus 
is indeed a satisfying portion. 

Pray for us, that the Lord will graciously 
protect us through this evil time, or as far into 
it as he shall in his wise pleasure permit us 
to live— until our change come. 

Yours in the one faith, W. L. KELLEY. 



page 34 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1616:page34 

SENATOR PEFFER'S FOREVIEW. 



Speaking in the United States Senate, on 
January 21st, Senator Peffer gave evidence of 
having the eyes of his understanding somewhat 
open, respecting what is coming. He is 
reported to have used the following language: 

"A day of retribution is coming— a day of 
reckoning is nigh at hand. The people will 
smite their enemy. In their wrath this great 
crime will be avenged. Standing as I do in 
the night of the Nineteenth century, and looking 
toward the dawn of the Twentieth, I see 
coming a wave of fire and blood. I pray 
God that it may spend its force on the sea. 
Behind me is Rome, and before, God alone 
in his infinite wisdom knows." 



page 34 

THE WORK IN ENGLAND. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--In my work at 

S (a town of 30,000 inhabitants) I found 

some who are likely to be greatly blessed by 

the truth. I put out about ninety DAWNS in 

the seven days I had at that place, and sold 

about 253 of the Old Theology tracts. While 

my idea in going there was principally to get 

a better knowledge of the smaller cities of 

England, the Lord perhaps brought it about 

in order to send the truth to some of his sheep 

there, who seemed to be very hungry. And I 

must say that the Lord's hand can be seen in 

so many of the movements in connection with 

the work here that it is very encouraging, 

although the results in some ways have not been 

quite what I expected. For instance, in a neighboring 

city, a little company of "holiness" 

people had, for a year or more, been working 

very earnestly in their way till a few months 

since, when the Lord led them to see that 

they were not in the right way. For two or 

three months they had been waiting to know 

the Lord's will; and about a month or six weeks 

since they began to feel that the Lord was going 

to send them the truth through "some 

man" as one of his messengers. Then, shortly 

before leaving, entirely unbeknown to these 

waiting ones, it was arranged to hold two 

meetings at the home of Brother and Sister 

Bivens who knew of the attitude of these friends, 

and afterwards invited them to the meetings. 

After the first meeting two or three of these 
said that, as soon as they heard the voice of 
the speaker, they felt sure that he had what 
they had been waiting for. There are six of 
this little company in particular that I met, 
and they availed themselves of every opportunity 
to hear the message. After the second 
meeting I put the DAWNS in their hands, and 
trust that they are now entering into the joys 
of present truth. 

I reached the great metropolis on Dec. 26th. 
At my request the brethren had appointed the 
evenings of the 28th and 29th for special 
prayer and communion in the interests of the 
harvest work in London and Great Britain 
generally. Together we thanked the Lord for 
the many favors of the past, and asked for 
more love and wisdom and strength, both for 



ourselves and all who have entered into the 
secret of his presence and the knowledge of 
the Kingdom to which we are called. The 
dear brethren here seem rejoiced to see me, and 
I need hardly say that you and Sister Russell 
and all the saints in America are much spoken 
of in their prayers. 

Could you tell all the colporteurs through 
the TOWER of the possibilities and privilege of 
disposing of the Old Theology tracts at two 
cents or one penny each, in many places where 
the DAWNS can not be sold? 

With greetings of love and good wishes, 
Yours in our Redeemer, S. D. ROGERS. 



R1616:page35 

VOL. XV. FEBRUARY 1, 1894. NO. 3. 

"HALLELUJAH! WHAT A SAVIOR!" 



CHRIST THE INSTRUCTOR, JUSTIFIER, 
SANCTIFIER AND DELIVERER OF HIS CHURCH. 
"Who of God is made unto us wisdom, and 
righteousness [justification], and sanctification, 
and redemption [deliverance]."— 1 Cor. 1:30. 

[A CANADIAN journal, The Expositor of 
Holiness, reached our table as we finished 
this article. We extract a few statements from 
one of its leading articles which show how blind 
are both the writer and the Editor respecting 
true holiness and a gospel faith in Christ. 
Ignoring the fact of the fall of the race in 
Adam, and of our consequent imperfection, 
because we are his offspring, born in sin and 
shapen in iniquity (Rom. 5:12; Psa. 51:5), 
the redemption accomplished by Jesus our 
Lord, and our justification, by faith in his 
blood, are not seen. This is the seducing 
spirit and tendency of our times, part of the 
"doctrine of devils"— no fall, no death, 
no ransom; Christ merely a pattern; salvation 
by works, following Christ's example, crucifying 
your own sins in your own flesh, as he 
crucified sin in his flesh (?)-- "in whom was 
no sin," who was "holy, harmless, and separate 
from sinners." We quote:— 

"Because Jesus lived right, men imagine 
that they can substitute his life for theirs when 
they come to be judged. ...They have 
carved out the beautiful fiction that God will 



look only upon Jesus' life instead of upon 
theirs. He will see that Jesus' life was very 
good,— that Jesus' life pleased him, and therefore 
he will look only upon Jesus.... 
Therefore they expect to come up for judgment 
...with shortcomings, with failures, with 
infirmities of the flesh, with sins of omission, 
with sins of commission, and expect God's divine 
favor, by this substitutionary process,— 
God looking upon Jesus. ...The only 
atonement God will have anything to do with 
is based on righteousness,— that we should live 
right, act right, think right. Jesus did se- 
lf a man's deeds be righteous he will escape 
condemnation."] 

CHRIST OUR WISDOM. 



Since God's dealings with his creatures recognize 
their wills, therefore the first step in 
his dealing with them, is to give them knowledge, 
or "wisdom," as it is translated in the 
above Scripture. It is for this reason that 
preaching was the first command of the Gospel 
age. To the worldly minded the preaching of 
forgiveness on account of faith in the crucified 
Jesus did not seem the wise course. To them 
it would have seemed better for God to have 
commanded something to be done by them. 
But, as Paul says— "It pleased God to save 
those who believe by [knowledge imparted 
through what the worldly consider] the foolishness 
of this preaching."— 1 Cor. 1:21. 

The first gift of God to our redeemed race, 
therefore, was knowledge. 

(1) Knowledge of the greatness and absolute 
justice of the God with whom we have to 

do. This knowledge was prepared for by the 
Mosaic Law, which was a "schoolmaster," or 
pedagogue, to lead men to Christ. And Christ, 
by his obedience to that Law, magnified the 

R1616:page36 

Law and showed its honorableness, its worthiness; 
and thus honored God, the author of 
that Law, and showed his character. 

(2) Knowledge of his own weakness, of his 
fallen, sinful and helpless condition, was also 
needful to man, that he might appreciate his 
need of a Savior such as God's plan had provided 
for him. 

(3) Knowledge of how the entire race of 
Adam fell from divine favor and from mental, 



moral and physical perfection, through him, 
was also necessary. Without this knowledge 
we could not have seen how God could be 
just in accepting the one life, of Christ, as the 
ransom price for the life of the whole world. 

(4) Without knowledge as to what is the 
penalty for sin— that "the wages of sin is 
death"— we never should have been able to 
understand how the death of our Redeemer 
paid the penalty against Adam and all in him. 

(5) Knowledge, in these various respects, 
was, therefore, absolutely necessary to us, as 
without it we could have had no proper faith, 
and could not have availed ourselves of God's 
provision of justification, sanctification and 
deliverance through Christ. 

Most heartily, therefore, we thank God for 
knowledge or wisdom concerning his plan. 
And we see that this wisdom came to us through 
Christ; because, had it not been for the plan 
of salvation of which he and his cross are the 
center, it would have been useless to give the 
knowledge, useless to preach, because there 
would have been no salvation to offer. 

CHRIST OUR JUSTIFICATION. 



That Christ is made unto us righteousness 
or justification implies,— 

(1) That we are unjust, or unrighteous, in 
the sight of God, and unworthy of his favor. 

(2) That, in view of our unworthiness, God 
had in some manner arranged that Christ's 
righteousness should stand good for "us," 
and thus give "us" a standing before God 
which we could not otherwise have because of 
our imperfections— our unrighteousness. 

(3) This scripture does not imply that 
Christ's righteousness covers every sinner, so 
that God now views every sinner as though he 
were righteous, and treats all as his children. 
No, it refers merely to a special class of sinners 
—sinners who, having come to a knowledge of 
sin and righteousness, and having learned the 
undesirableness of sin, have repented of sin, 
and sought to flee from it and to come into 
harmony with God. This is the particular 
class referred to in this scripture— "who of God 
is made unto us justification" or righteousness. 

(4) How God has arranged or caused 

Christ to be our "righteousness," or justification, 
is not here explained; but what we know 
of divine law and character assures us that the 
principle of Justice, the very foundation of 



divine government, must somehow have been 

fully satisfied in all of its claims. And other 

scriptures fully substantiate this conclusion. 

They assert that God so arranged as to have the 

price of man's sin paid for him; and that the 

price paid was an exact equivalent, a ransom 

or corresponding price, offsetting in every particular 

the original sin and just penalty, death, 

as it came upon the original sinner and through 

him by heredity upon all men. (Rom. 5:12,18-20.) 

He tells us that this plan of salvation 

was adopted because by it "God might be 

[or continue] just, and [yet be] the justifier of 

him [any sinner] that believeth in Jesus"— that 

comes unto God under the terms of the New 

Covenant, of which Christ Jesus is the mediator, 

having sealed it or made it a covenant by 

his own precious blood. —Heb. 13:20,21; 10:29. 

(5) While the benefits of this gracious arrangement 
are only for "us," for "believers," 

for those who come unto God by Christ— under 
the provisions of the New Covenant— 
these benefits are, nevertheless, made applicable 
to all; for God's special provision for the 
whole world of sinners is that all shall "come 
to a knowledge of the truth," that they may, if 
then they will accept the conditions of God's 
covenant, be everlastingly saved. A knowledge 
and a rejection of error— of false doctrines 
which misrepresent the divine character, even 
though they be mixed with a little misconstrued 
truth— will not constitute grounds for 
condemnation; but a knowledge of the truth 
and a rejection of it will bring condemnation 
to the second death. The Greek text states 

R1616:page37 

this much more emphatically than our common 
English translation. It says, "come to an accurate 
knowledge of the truth."— 1 Tim. 2:4. 

(6) The provision made was sufficient for 
all men. Our Lord gave himself [in death] a 
ransom— a corresponding price— for all; he 
was a "propitiation [or sufficient satisfaction] 
for the sins of the whole world." (1 John 2:2.) 
As a consequence, he is both able and willing 
"to save unto the uttermost [i.e., to save from 
sin, and from divine disfavor, and from death, 
and all these everlastingly] all that come unto 
God by him." (Heb. 7:25.) And inasmuch 

as God's provision is so broad, that all shall 

come to an exact knowledge of the truth respecting 

these provisions of divine mercy under 

the terms of the New Covenant;— inasmuch 

as the provision is that all the sin and 



prejudice blinded eyes shall be opened, and 
that the devil, who for long centuries has deceived 
men with his misrepresentations of the 
truth, is to be bound for a thousand years, so 
that he can deceive the nations no more; and 
that then a highway of holiness shall be cast 
up in which the most stupid cannot err or be 
deceived; and in view of all this provision 
God declares that all men will be saved from 
the guilt and penalty incurred through Adam's 
sentence. Because, when all of these blessed 
arrangements have been carried into effect, 
there will be no reason for a solitary member 
of the human family remaining a stranger and 
alien from God's family except by his own choice 
or preference for unrighteousness, and that 
with an accurate knowledge that all unrighteousness 
is sin. Such as, of their own preference, 
knowingly choose sin, when the way and 
means of becoming servants of God are clearly 
understood by them, are wilful sinners on their 
own account, and will receive the second-death 
sentence as the wages of their own opposition 
to God's righteous arrangements. 

The world's salvation will be complete the 
moment all have come to an accurate knowledge 
of the truth concerning God's great plan 
of salvation; because then they will know that 
by accepting Christ and the New Covenant 
which God offers to all through Christ, they 
may have life everlasting— salvation to the uttermost. 
Whether they will hear (heed) or 
whether they will forbear (refuse to heed) will 
not alter the fact that all will thus have been 
saved from Adamic sin and death— will have 
had a full salvation tendered to them. Thus, 
the living God will be the Savior of all men— 
especially or everlastingly, however, the Savior 
of only those who accept his grace and become 
"his people" under the New Covenant. 
-1 Tim. 4:10. 

(7) It is only to "us" that Christ is made 
justification or righteousness. Though all men 
are to be saved in the sense of being brought 
to the knowledge and opportunity of salvation, 
none have Christ as their justification, the covering 
of their imperfections, imputing his righteousness 
to them, except "us"— the household 
of faith. "To you who believe he is precious." 
(1 Pet. 2:7.) He of God is made unto us justification, 
righteousness, covering and cleansing 
from the unintentional weaknesses and 
shortcomings of the present, as well as from 
the original sin and its sentence. Who is he 
who condemns us? "Will that Anointed One 
who died; and still more who has been raised, 



who also is at the right hand of God, and who 
intercedes on our behalf?" Nay, he has been 
made our justification: it is the merit of his 
great sacrifice that speaks our justification. -- 
Rom. 8:34. 

Justification signifies to make right or whole 
or just. And from the word "whole" comes 
the word "(w)holiness," signifying soundness 
or perfection or righteousness. None of the 
fallen race are either actually or reckonedly 
whole, sound, perfect or just by nature. "There 
is none righteous [just, sound, holy], no, not 
one; all have sinned." But all who come unto 
God by Christ, whom he has accepted as the 
justification or righteousness of all who accept 
the New Covenant, are from that moment accepted 
and treated as sound, perfect, holy. 
Although we are actually unholy or imperfect, 
we are made "partakers of God's holiness;" 
first, reckonedly, in Christ, and, second, more 
and more actually by the eradication of our 
sinful tendencies and the development of the 
fruits and graces of the spirit, through chastisements, 
experience, etc. (Heb. 12:10.) God not 

R1616:page38 

only begins on the basis of holiness, imputing 
to us Christ's merit to cover our demerits, but 
he continues on the same line, and ever urges 
us to "be holy [to strive after actual soundness 
and perfection], even as he is holy." (1 Pet. 1:15,16.) 
And he promises the faithful strivers 
that they shall ultimately attain absolute holiness, 
soundness, perfection— in the resurrection, 
when they shall be made actually like 
Christ, as now their wills are copies of his. 
For "without holiness [thus attained] no man 
shall see the Lord." (Heb. 12:14.) Hence, 
"Every man that hath this hope in him purifieth 
himself, even as he [Christ] is pure"— 
seeking to be as much like him as possible now, 
and by and by fully in his image.— 1 John 3:3,2. 
Justified persons and no others are Christians, 
in the proper use of that term. 

CHRIST OUR SANCTIFICATION. 



The term "Sanctification," used in this text, 
means, set apart, consecrated, devoted to, or 
marked out for, a holy use or purpose. 

Christ by God is made unto us sanctification. 
That is to say, God through Christ sets 
apart or marks out for a special share in his 



great plan "us"— the Church. 

Many make the serious error of supposing 
that God is sanctifying the world,— sanctifying 
sinners. As a consequence of this error, 
many are seeking to copy Christ's example, 
and thus, be sanctified before God, while they 
repudiate the doctrine of the ransom, or justification 
by faith. They confound sanctification 
and justification in their minds, and suppose 
that if they consecrate or sanctify or set 
apart their lives to God's service and to deeds 
of kindness they are thereby justified. 

This is a serious error. Justification is entirely 
separate and distinct from sanctification; 
and no one can be sanctified in God's sight, 
and in the Scriptural sense, unless he has first 
been justified or cleansed from all sin. 

Consecrating a person or a thing to God's 
service does not cleanse that person or thing. 
On the contrary, God always refuses to accept 
anything imperfect or unclean. This is distinctly 
and repeatedly shown in the typical 
arrangements of the Law given to typical 
Israel. The priests were obliged to wash 
themselves and put on new, clean linen garments 
before consecration to their office and 
work as God's typically set apart, or sanctified, 
priesthood. Their cleansing and new 
clothing represented justification, the appropriation 
of Christ's righteousness instead of the 
filthy rags of their own unrighteousness, as 
members of the fallen race. 

The seal or mark of their consecration was a 
totally different one, and followed the cleansing 
ceremony, as consecration should in every 
case follow justification. The sign or mark of 
consecration or sanctification was the anointing 
with the holy oil, which symbolized the 
holy spirit. 

The anointing oil or symbol of consecration 
was poured only upon the head of the High 
Priest, but the under-priests were represented 
in the members of his body, even as Christ is 
the Head over the Church which is his body, 
and all together constitute the royal priesthood. 
So the holy spirit given without measure 
to our Lord and Head applies to us (his 
body) through him. The Father gave the 
Spirit to the Son only: all of the anointing 
oil was poured upon the Head. At Pentecost 
it ran down from the Head to the body, and 
has continued with the body ever since, and 
whoever comes into the "body" comes thereby 
under the consecrating influence— the spirit 
of holiness, the spirit of God, the spirit of 
Christ, the spirit of the Truth.— Acts 2:4. 



But in consecrating the typical priests the 
blood was not ignored. It was put upon all, 
upon the tip of the right ear, upon the thumb 
of the right hand and upon the great toe of 
the right foot, thus showing that the hearing 
of faith, the work of faith and the walk of 
faith must all be touched and made holy by an 
appreciation of the precious blood of atonement 
—the blood of Christ— the blood of the 
New Covenant. And then the garments of all 
the priests— their clean linen garments— were 
sprinkled with a mixture of the blood and the 
oil, implying that both justification through 
the blood and sanctification through the possession 
of the spirit of holiness are necessary 
in our consecration. 

R1616:page39 

To what end or service are God's people, 
the royal priesthood, consecrated or set apart? 

Some would be inclined to answer: To live 
without sin, to practice the graces of the spirit, 
to wear plain clothing and in general to 
live a rather gloomy life now, hoping for 
greater liberty and pleasure hereafter. 

We reply, This is the common but mistaken 
view. True, God's people do seek to 
avoid sin; but that is not the object of their 
consecration. Before consecration, they learned 
the exceeding sinfulness and undesirableness 
of sin, and saw Christ Jesus as their sin-bearer 
and cleanser. Consequently they had 
fled from sin before consecration. When consecrated 
they will still loathe and abhor sin, and 
that more and more as they grow in grace and 
knowledge; but we repeat that to seek to live 
free from sin is not a proper definition of consecration 
or sanctification. 

It is true also that all of the consecrated will 
seek to put on the graces of Christ's spirit 
and example; but neither is this the object of 
our call to consecration under the Gospel 
high-calling. 

It is true, also, that our consecration may 
lead to plainness of dress, and bring upon us 
sufferings for righteousness' sake, in this present 
evil world (age); but, we repeat, these are 
not the objects of our consecration. They are 
merely incidental results. 

The object of God in calling out the Gospel 
Church, providing for the consecration or 
sanctification of its members, is a grand and 
worthy one; and when once clearly seen by the 
eye of faith it makes all the incidentals which 
it will cost, such as self-denials in dress, loss 



of friends and companionships, and even persecution 

for the truth's sake, etc., to be 

esteemed but light afflictions, not worthy to be 

compared to the glorious object of our consecration, 

which is that we may become "partakers 

of the divine nature" and "joint heirs 

with Christ," and together with him bless the 

world during its day of judgment— the Millennium 

—as we will show. 

God in his wisdom and foreknowledge knew 
that sin would enter this world and bring its 
blight,— sorrow, pain and death. He foresaw 
that after their experience with sin some of his 
creatures would be, not only willing, but anxious, 
to forsake sin and return to his fellowship 
and love and blessing of life everlasting. 
It was in view of this foreknowledge that God 
formed his plan for human salvation. 

In that plan Christ Jesus our Lord had first 
place, first honor. As he was the beginning 
of the creation of God, so he was the chief of 
all God's creatures thus far brought into being. 
But God purposed a new creation— the 
creation of a new order of beings different and 
higher than men, angels and arch angels- 
higher than all others, and of his own divine 
essence or nature. The worthiness of anyone 
accepted to that great honor should not only 
be recognized by God himself, but by all of 
his intelligent creatures. Hence God, who 
knew well the character of his first-begotten 
Son (our Lord Jesus), decided to prove or test 
his well-beloved Son in a manner that would 
prove to all of his intelligent creatures, what 
they all now recognize in the new song, 
"Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive 
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, 
and honor, and glory and blessing."— 
Rev. 5:12. 

But the exaltation of our Lord, who already 
was the chief of all creation, was even less remarkable 
than another feature of the divine 
plan, foreordained before the foundation of the 
world (1 Pet. 1:2; Eph. 1:4); namely, that 
he would make to some of his human creatures 
(of the race sentenced as unworthy of any future 
life but redeemed from that sentence by 
Christ's sacrifice) an offer of joint-heirship and 
companionship with his beloved Son, in the 
order of the new creation (of the divine nature), 
of which he has made the worthy Lamb 
the head and chief, next to himself. 

This offer is not made to all of the redeemed 
race, but to many— "Many are called." The 
called are only those who in this age are justified 
by faith in Christ's atoning sacrifice. Unbelievers, 



and scoffers are called to repentance 
and faith, but none are called to this high 
calling of participation in the divine nature 
(2 Pet. 1:4) until they have forsaken sin and 
laid hold upon Christ as their Redeemer. 

R1616:page40 

If the worthiness of the Lamb was necessary 
to be shown, the worthiness of these whom he 
redeemed to be his joint-heirs (called also the 
bride, the Lamb's wife) would also need to be 
shown, proved, manifested, before angels as 
well as before men, that God's ways may be 
seen to be just and equitable. 

It is for this reason that God calls upon those 
whom he does call to consecrate themselves to 
him; not in dress or word merely, but in every 
thing. It is not a consecration to preach 
merely, although all the consecrated will delight 
to use every opportunity in telling to 
others the good tidings of God's love. It is 
not a consecration to temperance reform, social 
reform, political reform, or any other work 
or reform, although we may and should feel a 
deep interest in anything that would benefit 
the fallen race. But our attention should be 
as that of a maid to her mistress, or of soldiers 
to their officers, or, better yet, as that of a 
dutiful child toward a beloved parent— swift 
to hear, quick to obey, not planning or seeking 
our own wills but the will of our Father in 
heaven. Just such an attitude is implied in 
the words sanctified or consecrated to God. 
It takes hold of the will, and therefore rules 
the entire being, except where uncontrollable 
weaknesses or insurmountable obstacles hinder. 
And since our call and acceptance are based 
upon the New Covenant, which accepts a 
perfect will on the part of those trusting in 
the precious blood, and does not demand perfection 
of deeds, it follows that all, no matter 
how degraded by the fall, may be acceptable 
to God, in the Beloved, and make their calling 
and election sure. 

Nor is this arrangement of the New Covenant 
(by which those in Christ whose wills and 
efforts are right toward God are not held responsible 
for the full letter of God's law, but 
for the observance of its spirit or meaning, to 
the extent that they have knowledge, opportunity 
and ability) a violation of Justice, as some 
have assumed. God's law was designed for 
perfect creatures, and not for fallen ones; but 
under the New Covenant in Christ, God has 
adapted his law to the condition of the fallen 



ones without interfering with that law itself 
or even with its spirit. The perfect law, dealing 
with the perfect man, demanded a full 
consecration of his will to the wisdom and will 
of his Creator, and an obedience to that Creator's 
Word to the extent of his ability. But 
since man was created "upright" (and not 
fallen), in the moral image and likeness of God 
(and not born in sin and shapen in iniquity), 
it follows that his perfect will, operating 
through a perfect body and under favorable 
conditions, could have rendered perfect obedience; 
and hence nothing less could be acceptable 
to God. 

How just, how reasonable and how favorable 
is God's arrangement for us. Yet he assures 
us that, while he has made all the arrangements 
favorable for us, he must insist on our wills 
being just right,— we must be pure in heart, 
and in this respect exact copies of his Beloved 
Son, our Lord. (Rom. 8:29--Diaglott.) Of 
those who learn of and accept God's grace 
in Christ, in the forgiveness of sins under the 
New Covenant, all of whom are called to this 
high calling of joint-heirship with Christ in 
the divine nature and its honors, only a few 
will make their calling and election sure (or 
complete); because the testings of their wills 
and faith are so exacting— so crucial. 

Nor should either of these God-declared 
facts surprise us: it is not strange, but reasonable, 
that God should test severely, yea, with 
"fiery trials" (1 Pet. 4:12), the faith and love 
of those invited to so high a station. If they 
be not loyal and trustful to the last degree, 
they surely are "not fit for the Kingdom," its 
responsibilities and its divine honors. Nor 
should it surprise us to be informed by God's 
Word that only a "few," a "little flock," will 
gain the prize to which many are called and for 
which many consecrate. Few are willing to 
"endure" a great fight of afflictions; partly 
whilst made a gazing stock, both by reproaches 
and afflictions, and partly as companions of 
those who are so abused for Christ's sake and 
his truth's sake.-Heb. 10:32,33. 

In a word, the trial of the justified and consecrated 
consists in the presenting to them of 
opportunities to serve God and his cause in this 
present time, when, because of sin abounding, 

R1616:page41 

whosoever will live godly and hold up the light 
will suffer persecution. Those whose consecration 
is complete and of the proper kind will 



rejoice in their privilege of serving God and 
his cause, and will count it all joy to be accounted 
worthy to suffer in such a cause, and 
thus to attest to God the sincerity of their love 
and of their consecration to him. Such consecrated 
ones, pure in heart (in will or intention), 
realizing the object of present trials, 
glory in tribulations brought upon them by 
faithfulness to Christ and his Word, realizing 
that their experiences are similar to those of 
the Master, and that thus they have evidence 
that they are walking in his footsteps who said, 
"Marvel not if the world hate you; ye know 
that it hated me before it hated you. If ye 
were of the world, the world would love its 
own, but because ye are not of the world, but 
I have chosen you out of the world, therefore 
the world hateth you." "Be faithful unto 
death, and I will give thee a crown of life." — 
1 John 3:13; John 15:18,19; Rev. 2:10. 

Furthermore, they glory in tribulations because 
they realize that the Lord will be near 
them while they endure faithfully, and that 
he will not permit them to be tempted above 
what they are able to bear, but will with every 
temptation provide some way of escape; because 
they realize the necessity of forming 
character, and that tribulation worketh patience, 
and patience experience, and experience 
hope— a hope that maketh not ashamed; 
and because they realize that all these favorable 
results of tribulation follow, because of a 
genuine consecration in which the love of God 
has been shed abroad in the heart, displacing 
the spirit of the world, the spirit of selfishness. 
--Rom. 5:3-5. 

"He that committeth sin [wilfully] is of the 
devil." "He that is begotten of God cannot 
sin [wilfully]." (1 John 3:3-10; 5:18.) And 
we have seen that all of those acceptable to 
God in Christ were obliged to come unto him 
under the New Covenant, whose first condition 
is faith in Christ, and whose second 
condition is an entire consecration of their 
wills to God's will and service. Hence, any 
wilful sin would mean that they had repudiated 
the New Covenant and were no longer recognized 
as begotten of the truth, but under the 
influence of sin, and hence begotten of the 
devil— his children. 

If any justified and consecrated child of God 
commit sin it will be, at most, only partially 
wilful— largely of weakness or deception. He 
may feel his shame and weep bitterly, as did 
Peter; but all such penitence would but prove 
that his sin was not of the wilful kind that 



would mark him as "of the devil." No: so 

long as the seed of the Truth, and of his consecration, 

remains in him, he cannot sin (wilfully). 

But if any trespass under deception or 

weakness, and not wilfully, he has an advocate 

with the Father,— "Jesus Christ the [absolutely] 

righteous" one, whose merit is applicable for 

all such unwilful errors, of such as abide under 

the shadow of the New Covenant. If he 

confess his sin, God is just to forgive him— because 

Christ died. (1 John 1:7,9; 2:1.) But 

if we should say that we have no sin, no imperfection, 

we deceive ourselves, make God a liar, 

and disown the Advocate whom God provided; 

for we are weak through the fall, and liable to 

deception and error at the hands of the world, 

the flesh and the devil.-- 1 John 1:8,10. 

Having seen what Sanctification is, its object 
or result and its present cost, we note that 
Christ by God is made unto us Sanctification 
—in that we could have no such call and could 
experience no such work of grace, under the 
divine plan except for Christ and the work he 
did for us;— justifying us before the Law of 
God, sealing for us the New Covenant and 
making us fit for this call to "glory, honor 
and immortality." 

CHRIST OUR REDEMPTION OR DELIVERANCE. 



Many readers confound the words redemption 
and redeem found in the New Testament, 
whereas they refer to different features 
of the work of Christ. The word redeem in 
its every use in the New Testament signifies 
to acquire by the payment of a price, while the 
word redemption in its every New Testament use 
signifies the deliverance or setting free of that 
which was acquired by the payment of a price. 
"We were redeemed [purchased] with the precious 

R1616:page42 

blood [the sacrificed life, the death] of 

Christ." We wait for "the redemption [the 

deliverance] of our body" [the Church] from 

present imperfections and death. We wait 

for "the redemption [deliverance] of the purchased 

possession.-l Pet. 1:18,19; Rom. 8:23; 

Eph. 1:14. 

In Christ is our redemption or deliverance; 
for so God has ordained. He who redeemed 
or bought us with the sacrifice of his own life 
gives us, as our Prophet or Teacher, wisdom 



by his gospel, to see our fallen state and himself 
as our helper; as our Priest, he first justifies 
us and then sanctifies or consecrates us, as his 
under priesthood; and, finally, as King, he will 
fully deliver the faithful from the dominion of 
sin and death, to the glory, honor and immortality 
of the divine nature;— for "God will 
raise up [from the dead] us also, by Jesus." If 
faithful to our call and covenant, even unto 
death, we shall, at the second coming of our 
Redeemer, "Receive a crown of life that 
fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for us who 
are kept by the power of God [His Word and 
Providence] through faith unto salvation, 
ready to be revealed in the last time."— 1 Pet. 1:5; 
Rom. 1:16; 2 Cor. 4:14. 

"Hallelujah! What a Savior!" 
Truly he is able and willing to save to the 
uttermost all that come unto God by him.— 
Heb. 7:25. 

WHOM GOD DID PREDESTINATE. 



In the light of the foregoing, now read a 
hitherto obscure passage of Scripture: "We 
know that all things work together for good to 
them that love God, to them who are the called 
according to his purpose. For whom he did foreknow, 
he also did predestinate must be conformed 
to the image of his Son, that he might 
be the first born among many brethren. Moreover, 
[the class] whom he did predestinate 
[must be copies of his Son], he also called [or 
invited to that honor through the gospel]; 
and whom he called he also [previously] justified 
[because he could not consistently call 
to honor and glory, those who were under his 
own sentence of death as sinners] ; and whom 
he justified those he also [previously] honored 
[by sending to them the gospel message]."— 
Rom. 8:29,30. 

Thus the Apostle continues his argument 
concerning the favor of God toward the 
Church, asserting that God has a purpose to 
fulfil, and that the call of the Church is in accordance 
with that purpose. (Peter declares 
the same thing. 1 Pet. 1 :2.) And he asserts 
that all of God's dealings and arrangements 
correspond with that purpose, and co-operate 
for its accomplishment. God's predestination 
was, (1) that he would have a class of beings 
of the divine nature; (2) that each one of that 
class must have a fixed character, like that of 
his ever faithful, Beloved Son. To get such a 



class the Apostle reasons and declares, God 
must call or invite some (just as we see he is 
doing), because "no man taketh this honor to 
himself." (Heb. 5:4.) But whom would God 
call or invite? None were worthy; all had 
gone out of the way; none were righteous, no 
not one. Hence it was necessary that God 
provide for the justification of those he would 
call. But he could justify only such as believed 
in Jesus; and how could they believe on him 
of whom they had not heard, and without a 
preacher sent of God? (Rom. 10:14.) Hence 
it was necessary that these be honored with 
the gospel message in this age, in advance of 
its general revealing, to every creature, during 
the Millennial age.--Rom. 1:16; 2 Cor. 4:6; 
1 Cor. 15:1. 

True, many more were called than will be acceptable 
—many more than will acquire the 
likeness of the Beloved Son; and many were 
justified who did not, after believing, consecrate 
themselves, and whose justification consequently 
lapsed; and many were honored with 
a hearing of the gospel who, after hearing a 
little of it, rejected the message of mercy and 
favor. But all the preaching, justifying and 
calling of this Gospel age has been to the intent 
that the foreknown class of the predestinated 
character might be selected and made 
joint-heirs with Christ.— See also 2 Tim. 1:8-10. 

What shall we [who have been so highly 
favored by God, and for whose successful running 
of the race every necessary arrangement and 
provision has been made] say to these things? 

R1616:page43 

"If God be for us, who can be against us?" 
And in view of this let each say,— "What shall 
I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward 
me? I will take the cup of salvation, and 
call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my 
vows [fulfil my covenant of consecration] unto 
the Lord, now, in the presence of all his 
people. [This will mean, as in our Lord's case, 
faithfulness (dying daily— 1 Cor. 15:31), even 
unto death, but] Precious in the sight of the 
Lord is the death of his holy ones."— 
Psa. 116:12-15. 



R1616:page43 

THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 



II. 

ITS OBJECT, AND ITS RELATION TO THE DIVINE CANON. 



THE object of the book is to reveal to us the 
material universe; man's origin and relation 
to God the Creator, and the equality of 
all men before him; the divinely constituted 
relation of the sexes; the origin of moral and 
physical evil; the primaeval history of the human 
race, and the origin of nations; the selection 
of one as the depository of the sacred 
records, and of the divine purpose and method 
for man's redemption; the history of its ancestral 
founders, and their relation to its subsequent 
history, etc. 

Of these truths, to the knowledge of which 
we owe the present advancement in civilization, 
it is the object of the book to furnish a 
divinely accredited record. Its value is apparent 
on the face of the above statement, and 
is attested by the history of civilization. In 
these truths, and the divine attestation of them, 
lies the only basis of popular progress, and 
of permanent national prosperity; and on all 
these we should be in the profoundest ignorance, 
without the revelations contained in this book. 

Auberlen, in his defense of the Scriptures 
as a divine revelation, has the following just 
thoughts on the historical value of these eleven 
chapters: "If we had not the first eleven chapters 
of Genesis, if we had, on the beginnings 
of the world and of humanity, only the myths 
of the heathen, or the speculations of philosophers, 
or the observations of naturalists, we 
should be in the profoundest darkness concerning 
the origin and nature of the world 
and of man. It is with these chapters on the 
one side, as with the prophecies of Scripture 
on the other. There we get the true light on 
the first, here on the last things; there on the 
foundation principles, here on the ultimate 
tendencies of history; there on the first cause, 
here on the object of the world; without which 
a universal history, or a philosophy of history, 
is impossible. But prophecy itself also has its 
roots in these chapters, on which all later revelation 
plants itself. Happily, these primeval 
records of our race, far more widely than we 
are aware, have penetrated our whole mode of 
thinking, and sway even those who believe 
they must reject the historical character of these 
accounts. These chapters maintain the consciousness, 
in humanity, of its own God-related 



nature, of its original nobility and its eternal 
destination." 

From this results its relation to the divine 
canon. Its teachings are presupposed in all 
subsequent revelations, and are assumed to be 
known to the reader. Passing allusions are 
made to them, in which they are recognized 
as known; but no formal, full and connected 
statement of them is elsewhere made, as though 
it were not already done and familiar to the 
reader. The ground-truths, on which the whole 
structure of religious teaching rests, are assumed 
to have been already taught; such, for 
example, as the relation of the material world 
to the Supreme Being, who created it out of 
nothing, and who therefore controls all the 
forces of its elements, brought into existence 
by him, and hence subject to his will; the relation 
of man to the Being who created him, 
and who therefore has a sovereign right to control 
the use of the powers which he created; a 
right paramount to that of the creature himself, 
who possesses these powers by the gift of 
Him who brought them into being; the cause 
of the moral and physical evils that universally 
prevail, throughout the world and among 
all races and generations of men; the inviolable 
sanctity of human life in every individual, 
until forfeited by his own violation of it in another; 
the initiatory steps for perpetuating the 
knowledge of the true God, and for carrying 
into effect the divine plan for the redemption 
of the race. 

These are the ground-work of all subsequent 
teachings, and in all of them are assumed as 
known. 

Moreover, the histories of various personages, 
treated of here in their minutest details, 
are often referred to as already known; so that 
no part of subsequent revelation could be 

R1616 : page 44 

understood, without a familiar acquaintance 
with this book. 

UNITY OF PLAN IN THE BOOK. 



The book first reveals God's relation to the 
universe, and to its sentient and intelligent 
occupants, as the Creator and rightful Proprietor 
and Sovereign of all. 

It then records the early history and universal 
corruption of man, and the interposition 



of divine justice in the destruction of the 
guilty race. 

It then proceeds with the general history of 
the new race of man, till it becomes manifest 
that the original lesson is without effect, that 
the tendency to evil is innate and universal, 
and that there is no power of self-renovation. 

It then records the initiatory steps of the 
divine arrangement for the renovation of man, 
and for perpetuating the knowledge and worship 
of the true God. 

Thenceforward it is occupied with the personal 
history of the family, in whom and their 
descendants the divine purpose was to be carried 
into effect. In the details of their history, 
as in the subsequent history of the nation, it 
is made evident that the wonderful truths of 
which they were the depository did not originate 
from themselves, but were divinely communicated. 
If an intellectual and philosophic 
people, such as the Greeks for example, with 
a capacity for acute and metaphysical speculation, 
had been selected as the depository of 
these truths, it might with more show for 
reason be maintained that they originated in 
the tendencies of the national mind. But how 
should the pure monotheism of the Hebrew 
Scriptures, the doctrine of the One Eternal 
God, have originated with a people ever prone 
to idolatry? And whence was that light which 
illuminated Palestine, a mere patch on the 
earth's surface, while all other nations, the 
world around, were enveloped in darkness? 
And whence were those conceptions of God 
and his attributes sung by Psalmists and Prophets, 
and now the ground-work of the highest 
civilization to which man has ever attained, 
while Homer and Hesiod were singing of the 
gods of Olympus and the mythic fables of the 
Theogony? He who believes that the unphilosophical 
and unlearned Hebrews outstripped 
the most intellectual and wisest nations of antiquity, 
put to shame their learning and philosophy, 
and have become the instructors of 
the most enlightened nations of modern times, 
believes a greater wonder than the divine inspiration 
of the Hebrew Scriptures. 

In this plan of the book there is a manifest 
unity of design, indicating a special purpose 
and aim in its composition. 

It should be observed of this, as of every 
other part of the divine volume, that it is not 

R1617 : page 44 

a declaration of abstract principles, or of abstract 



truths, which convince without moving. 
It takes hold on the life, through its details of 
life, and influences action by showing the 
power and tendencies of principles in action. 
The minuteness of its details of every-day life 
is therefore in harmony with its spirit and 
purpose, as it is with all other parts of the divine 
Word; and on these depend its power, 
instrumentally, as an element in progressive 
civilization. — T. J. Conant. 



page 44 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1617:page44 

GOD'S COVENANT WITH ABRAHAM. 



I. QUAR., LESSON VI., FEB. 1 1, GEN. 17:1-9. 

Golden Text— "He believed in the Lord, and he 
counted it to him for righteousness."— Gen. 15:6. 

God had promised to make a definite covenant 
with Abram before he left his native 
land, Haran. (Gen. 12:1-4.) He actually 
made that covenant after Abram had complied 
with the conditions and come into 
the land of Canaan. (Gen. 12:6,7.) And now, 
in the words of this lesson, we find God 
encouraging Abram's faith by amplifying 
and explaining that covenant, and counseling 
him to continue to keep his heart in the 
proper attitude to receive such favors, saying, 
"I am the Almighty God; walk before 
me, and be thou perfect. And I will 
perform my covenant between me and thee, 
and will multiply thee exceedingly." 

The covenant was to give all "the land 
of Canaan" to Abram and to his seed for 
an everlasting possession. The terms of 
the covenant clearly indicate an earthly inheritance, 



an inheritance of that which 
Abram actually saw with his natural eyes. 
And Abraham (for his name was here 
changed as a confirmation of the covenant) 

R1617 : page 45 

believed the word of the Lord, and never 

relaxed his faith, even to his dying day; for, 

says Paul, he "died in faith, not having received 

the promises; but, having seen them 

afar off, he was persuaded of them and embraced 

them" (Heb. 11:13), although, during 

his past life, as Stephen said, "God 

gave him none inheritance in the land; no, 

not so much as to set his foot on; yet he 

promised that he would give it to him and 

to his seed after him, when as yet he had 

no child."— Acts 7:5. 

That was indeed a remarkable covenant, 
and a wonderful manifestation of the favor 
of God toward his faithful servant Abraham; 
and it was a remarkable faith on the 
part of Abraham which was able to grasp 
and appreciate a promise whose realization 
must be beyond the floods of death; and 
extending to a posterity so numerous as to 
be beyond all hope of reckoning. 

But, great as was Abraham's faith, there 
was a feature of that covenant of which it 
was impossible for him to have the slightest 
conception; for it was to have both a literal 
and an anti-typical fulfilment. This we 
are enabled to see from subsequent divine 
revelations through the Apostle Paul, who 
shows that the seed of Abraham was to be 
understood in two senses: that there was 
to be a natural seed, an Israel after the 
flesh (1 Cor. 10:18), and a spiritual seed, 
"which seed is Christ" (Head and body): 
"and if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's 
[antitypical] seed and heirs of the 
[antitypical] promise" (Gal. 3:7,29), which 
includes a much more glorious inheritance 
than the earthly possessions of the fleshly 
seed, rich indeed though their portion will 
be; for Christ is the heir of all things, and 
those who are Christ's are heirs together 
with him of all things. All things are yours, 
for ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's, 
who created all things by and for his well 
beloved Son.--Heb. 1:2; Rom. 8:17; 1 Cor. 3:21-23; 
Col. 1:16. 

A hint of this double significance of the 
promise to Abraham was given for our 
benefit in the illustrations which God gave 



of his numerous posterity. They were to 
be as the sand by the sea-shore and as the 
stars of heaven (Gen. 22:17)— the former an 
apt illustration of the fleshly, and the latter 
of the spiritual seed. 

Let all those who are of the faith of 
Abraham mark these precious promises and 
follow them up until, the eyes of their understanding 
being opened, they see by faith 
the city established for which Abraham 
looked, the city which hath foundations, the 
glorious Kingdom of God in both its earthly 
and heavenly phases. (Heb. 1 1:9,10. 
See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., Chap, 
xiv.) The prophet Micah describes its coming 
glory (Micah 4:1-7) and says that, when 
the children of Abraham do thus come into 
possession of the land, they shall rest there 
in peace; for the nations shall have beaten 
their swords into ploughshares and their 
spears into pruning hooks, and nation shall 
not lift up sword against nation, neither 
shall they have war any more. Then "they 
shall sit every man under his vine and under 
his fig tree, and none shall make them 
afraid; for the mouth of the Lord of hosts 
hath spoken it." And we believe it, because 
we are of the faith of Abraham, and 
know that all that the Lord has promised 
he is able to perform. 

And not only so, but to-day we stand 
upon the very threshold of that new dispensation 
—the Millennial reign of Christ, when 
all of these things are shortly to be fulfilled 
—when Abraham himself shall return from 
the captivity of death (Isa. 61:1; Luke 4:18), 
when his natural seed also shall return 
and possess the land; and when God will 
take away their stony hearts and give them 
a heart of flesh and enable them to keep his 
covenant and to walk before him with a 
perfect heart and make them indeed a channel 
of blessing to all the families of the 
earth. (Ezek. 11:19,20.) See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOLS. I & II. 

R1617 : page 45 

GOD'S JUDGMENT ON SODOM. 



I. QUAR., LESSON VII., FEB. 18, GEN. 18:22-33. 

Golden Text— "Shall not the Judge of all the earth do 
right?"-Gen. 18:25. 



The subject of this lesson is an important 
one, though the limits assigned do not cover 
the event, which includes all of chapter 1 8, 
and chapter 19:1-28. Though the narrative 
is familiar to every Bible reader, its lessons 
have been very generally overlooked. 

Before considering these it is well to note, 
in corroboration of our observations on 
lesson iv., concerning the ministration of 
angels prior to the beginning of the law 
dispensation, (1) how promptly they were 
recognized by those to whom they appeared. 
Although these appeared in human form, 
Abraham very quickly recognized them as 

R1617 : page 46 

more than human, and honored them accordingly. 

So also Lot recognized them; 

and, because he honored them as the messengers 

of the Lord, he sought to protect them 

from the Sodomite mob, even at the expense 

of his virgin daughters if need be. 

But while Abraham and Lot recognized 

them as the angels of God, the men of 

Sodom thought them to be only men. Nor 

were Abraham and Lot excited, or in the 

least disconcerted by the honor of such a 

visit. They received their remarkable guests 

with becoming dignity and grace, and with 

great composure; not with superstitious 

fear, nor as if it were a thing hitherto unknown; 

but as a rare occurrence and a 

special honor. 

(2) Note also the expression of one of 
these heavenly visitants— one of the three 
representatives of Jehovah, possibly his beloved 
Son, afterward our Savior. Speaking 
for Jehovah, he said, (verse 17), "Shall 
I conceal from Abraham what I am about 
to do, seeing that Abraham shall surely become 
a great and mighty nation," etc.? 
"The secret of the Lord is with them that reverence 
him," says the Psalmist. (Psa. 25:14.) 
Thus it was in Abraham's day, and thus it 
is still. The Lord does not honor the world, 
nor the worldly wise, with a knowledge of 
his secret purposes.— Dan. 12:10; 1 Cor. 1:19,20; 
3:18,19. 

In verses 22-33 we have the account of 
Abraham's pleading with the Lord for the 
possible righteous souls that might yet remain 
in Sodom, and an illustration of the 
promise that the fervent prayer of a righteous 
man availeth much. (Jas. 5:16.) But 



when not even ten righteous persons were 
found in Sodom, the four that were found 
were first gathered out before the visitation 
of wrath descended on the condemned city; 
for "the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, 
and his ears are open to their cry." 

Coming now to consider the severe judgment 
upon Sodom, let us note its prominent 
lessons carefully— (1) We see that the city 
was wholly given up to wickedness and the 
basest immoralities. Not even a strange 
man was safe in coming among them. Sin 
had there reached that dreadful enormity 
to which the Apostle Paul seems to have 
reference in Rom. 1:18-32. See also Jude 7 
and Ezek. 16:49,50. They were sinning, 
too, against sufficient knowledge from the 
light of nature, as Paul indicates, so that they 
were, as he affirms, "without excuse." 

(3) We observe next that the penalty inflicted 
upon them was not eternal torment, 
but a cutting short of the present life with 
its privileges and advantages: "I took them 
away as I saw good, saith the Lord." (Ezek. 16:50.) 
And by the same prophet he declares 

R1618:page46 

his intention to bring them back, together 

with wayward Israel, the children 

of the covenant, saying, "When I shall 

bring again the captivity of Sodom and her 

daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and 

her daughters, then will I bring again the 

captivity of thy captives in the midst of 

them. ...I will remember my covenant 

with thee in the days of thy youth, and I 

will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant. 

Then thou shalt remember thy ways 

and be ashamed when thou shalt receive 

thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger 

[Samaria and Sodom— Verse 46]. And I 

will give them unto thee for daughters, but 

not by thy covenant. And I will establish 

my covenant with thee; and thou shalt 

know that I am the Lord: That thou may est 

remember, and be confounded, and never 

open thy mouth any more, because of thy 

shame, when I am pacified toward thee for 

all that thou hast done [which he declares 

to be worse than Sodom had done— Verses 47,48], 

saith the Lord Jehovah." 

When the Lord thus declares his purposes, 
and that in full view and statement of all 
the circumstances, and signs his name to 
the document, there is no room left for cavil 



or doubt. Wicked Sodom and Samaria and 

Israel and all the families of the earth shall 

be brought back from the captivity of death 

—the only captivity which could possibly 

be referred to here; for this was spoken 

long after Sodom was laid in ashes. Nor 

was there a single Sodomite left to perpetuate 

the name; for it is written that, "the 

same day that Lot went out of Sodom it 

rained fire and brimstone from heaven and 

destroyed them all." (Luke 17:29; Gen. 19:24,25.) 

Our Lord also adds his testimony 

saying, "Marvel not at this, for the 

hour is coming in which all that are in the 

graves shall hear the voice of the Son of 

man and shall come forth; they that have 

done good unto the resurrection of life, and 

they that have done evil unto the resurrection 

of judgment"*— trial. (John 5:27-29.) 



*The Greek word krisis, rendered damnation in the 
common version, does not mean damnation, but a trial or 
judgment, and is so translated thirty-nine times in the 
New Testament. 

R1618:page47 

And the Apostle Paul states, "There shall 
be a resurrection of the dead, both of the 
just and unjust."— Acts 24:15. 

The statement of Jude 7 that "Sodom 
and Gomorrah are set forth for an example, 
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire," 
may be thought by some to be at variance 
with the above quoted scriptures. But not 
so. The word of the Lord spoken by prophets 
and apostles and by the Lord Jesus himself 
must of necessity be harmonious; and 
any interpretation which does not manifest 
that harmony must be erroneous. The word 
"fire" is here used as a symbol of destruction, 
and the word eternal is from the Greek 
word aionios, which signifies age-lasting. 
Thus Sodom and Gomorrah are represented 
as suffering the vengeance of age-lasting destruction. 
They were destroyed, says Luke (17:29), 
and they have remained so ever 
since, and will so remain until the appointed 
time for bringing them again from the 
captivity of death, as declared by the Prophet 
Ezekiel. 

Mark also the statement that these were 
set forth for an example of God's treatment 
of the evil doers (See also 2 Pet. 2:6)— an 



example both of his vengeance and of his 

mercy. His vengeance was manifested in 

their destruction; and his mercy is specially 

manifest in their promised deliverance. God 

will punish the evil doers, but he will have 

mercy also. Those who have sinned against 

a measure of light shall be punished accordingly 

(Luke 12:48); and those who, during 

this Gospel age, have been fully enlightened, 

and who have tasted of the heavenly 

gift of justification, and been made partakers 

of the holy spirit, and who have tasted 

of the good word of God (not its perversion), 

and the powers (advantages) of the coming 

age, and have spurned these, and counted 

the blood of the covenant wherewith they 

were sanctified a common thing (Heb. 6:4-6; 

10:26-31), will be cut off from life in 

the second death. 

However, the Sodomites and others, 
though great and shameful sinners, and 
worthy of many and severe stripes, some of 
which, at least, were received in their past 
life, as, for instance, in their fearful overthrow 
and destruction, were not thus fully 
enlightened, and consequently were not condemned 
to the second death, from which 
there will be no resurrection. And, therefore, 
even the wicked Sodomites will hear 
the voice of the Son of man and come forth 
in due time; for "God our Savior will have 
all men to be saved and to come unto the 
knowledge of the truth. For there is one 
[just and merciful] God, and one mediator 
between [that just and holy] God [who 
cannot tolerate sin] and [fallen, sinful] men, 
the man Christ Jesus [the only begotten 
and well beloved Son of God, whom God 
gave to redeem us, because he so loved the 
world even while they were yet sinners, 
and] who gave himself [in accordance with 
the Father's plan] a ransom for all [the 
Sodomites and all other sinners included], 
—to be testified in due time." (1 Tim. 2:3-6.) 
And while this testimony was not given 
to the Sodomites in their day, it is just as 
sure that they shall have it in the coming 
age under the Millennial reign of Christ, 
when they shall come forth to judgment— 
to a shameful realization of their guilt, and 
to an opportunity for repentance and 
reformation. 

Our Lord's statement with reference to 
their future judgment (Matt. 10:14,15) is 
also worthy of special note. In sending 
out his disciples to preach the gospel of the 



Kingdom of heaven (verse 7), he said it 

would be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah 

in the day of judgment than for the 

city or house that would not receive their 

message— "And whosoever shall not receive 

you, nor hear your words, when ye 

depart out of that house or city, shake off 

the dust of your feet. Verily, I say unto 

you, It shall be more tolerable for the land 

of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment 

than for that city." The implication is 

that it will be tolerable for both classes, but 

less tolerable for those who wilfully reject 

the light of divinely revealed truth, and 

thus prefer the darkness to the light, because 

their deeds are evil (John 3: 19,20), 

than for those who even sinned egregiously 

against the dimmer and waning light of 

nature. 

Hear again the Lord's warning to the 
caviling Jews who had seen his mighty 
works, but who wilfully refused to admit 
their testimony of his Messiahship— "Then 
began he to upbraid the cities wherein most 
of his mighty works were done, because 
they repented not: Woe unto thee, Chorazin! 
woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the 
mighty works which were done in you had 
been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would 
have repented long ago in sackcloth and 
ashes. But I say unto you, it shall be more 

R1618:page48 

tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of 
judgment than for you. And thou, Capernaum, 
which art exalted unto heaven, shalt 
be brought down to hades [the grave]; for 
if the mighty works which have been done 
in thee had been done in Sodom, it would 
have remained until this day. But I say unto 
you, that it shall be more tolerable for 
the land of Sodom in the day of judgment 
than for thee." (Matt. 11:21-24.) 

Tyre and Sidon had suffered a terrible 
overthrow in the midst of carnage, pestilence 
and blood, and Sodom had perished 
under a deluge of fire and brimstone*; but 
the more guilty (because more enlightened) 
Judean cities remained. Why? Because the 
great day of judgment had not yet come, 
and except in a very few instances— of 
which those cited are in point, which were 
summarily judged and punished before the 
appointed time for the world's judgment, 
for examples, as stated— the punishment of 



evil doers tarries until the appointed time, 
the Millennial age. Thus it is written, 
"The sins of some men are previously 
manifested, leading on to judgment, but in 
some [instances] indeed they follow after." 
(1 Tim. 5:24. See also Luke 13:1-5.) The 
Lord points forward to the day of judgment 
when all the guilty shall receive their 
just desserts, and when chastened and penitent 
sinners may return to God. 

The judgments of that day will be tolerable 
for all; and the special revelations of 
divine truth and the helpful discipline and 
instruction which were not due in the days 
of Tyre and Sidon and Sodom, but which 
our Lord says would have led them to repentance, 
will be given in the coming day 
of judgment, both to those wicked cities 
and also to the cities of Judea. 

How plainly all these scriptures point to 
the coming "times of restitution of all 
things" of which Peter speaks in Acts 3:19-21, 
saying, "Times of refreshing shall come 
from the presence of the Lord; and he shall 
send Jesus Christ, which before was preached 
unto you, whom the heaven must retain until 
the times of restitution of all things, 
which God hath spoken by the mouth of all 
his holy prophets since the world began." 

Then these times of restitution are the 
times of Christ's second presence; and this 
work of restitution is the grand object of 
his predicted thousand years reign on earth; 
and that must be the day of judgment to 
which the Lord referred as the time for the 
"tolerable" discipline and final settlements 
with Tyre and Sidon and Sodom and Chorazin 
and Bethsaida and all the rest of mankind 
—the day spoken of by the Apostle 
Paul (Acts 17:31), saying, "God hath appointed 
a day in which he will judge the 
world in righteousness by that man whom 
he hath ordained [Jesus Christ], whereof 
he hath given assurance unto all men in 
that he hath raised him from the dead." 



*The whole region about Sodom abounds with slime 
or bitumen pits (Gen. 14:10), sulphur and salt; and the 
fire was probably from lightning. Thus God used the 
natural elements with which they were surrounded in accomplishing 
their destruction. 

R1619:page48 



We rejoice in the blessed testimony thus 
assured to all men that God, who so loved 
the world, even while they were yet sinners, 
that he gave his only begotten Son that 
whosoever believeth on him should not perish 
but have everlasting life, hath also appointed 
a day— a period of a thousand years 
—in which he will grant to them all a righteous 
judgment, trial, by him— by that same 
Son, now risen from the dead— who also so 
loved us that he freely laid down his life for 
us all, that thus by the merit of his vicarious 
sacrifice he might remove the legal disability 
to our restoration. And we rejoice, 
too, in the mercy and love and helpfulness 
vouchsafed to our sin-sick race by the character 
of the Judge who has given such 
ample proof of his love. 

He will be a just Judge, laying "justice 
to the line and righteousness to the plummet;" 
"a merciful High Priest touched with 
the feeling of our infirmities;" a wise and 
good physician able to apply the healing 
balm of the tree of life which is for the 
healing of the nations; and indeed the 
blessed seed of Abraham in whom "ALL 
the families of the earth (from Adam to the 
end) shall be blessed." 

With such blessed assurances, who could 
doubt that the Judge of all the earth will 
do right? 



page 48 

KEEP ORDERS SEPARATE. 



We are always pleased to hear from TOWER 
readers everything pertinent to their spiritual 
welfare and the progress of the truth. In fact, 
we are disappointed to get a mere business 
order, and nothing more, from personal friends. 
But please always keep your general letter 
separate from your business order. This will 
be to your advantage, as well as ours. 



page 50 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 



HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



The Memorial Supper anniversary will this 
year be in April: particulars in due season. 

R1619:page50 

THE EUROPEAN OUTLOOK--YET THERE 
IS TIME. 



Washington Diplomats and others are calling 
attention to the fact that European armies 
were increased fully one hundred thousand 
men during 1893. They assert that the long 
feared, general European war involving all nations 
is sure to begin during 1 894. They expect 
that a movement in Norway, looking to a 
separation of that country from Sweden and 
its conversion into a Republic, is likely to be 
the beginning of a war between Norway and 
Sweden; that this will be followed by an attempt 
on the part of Russia to acquire certain 
winter ports for ships of war and commerce on 
the coast of Norway, said ports being desirable 
because, being warmed by the Gulf Stream, 
they are open the year round. This action on 
the part of Russia, it is asserted, would provoke 



Germany and England to opposition, and 
thus speedily the dreaded, greatest conflict of 
the old world be speedily precipitated. 

All this looks probable; but we nevertheless 
do not expect a general war, the great trouble 
of Scripture, for some years yet. We feel confident 
that the winds of war are being held, 
under our Lord's direction, until the "harvest" 
message shall have sealed in their foreheads (intellectually) 
all of God's saints in those lands; 
be they few or many, we know not.— Rev. 7:3. 

Who are ready to take the field as colporteurs 
amongst the Swedes, Danes and Norwegians? 
The Swedish edition of M. DAWN, VOL. 
I., is already out, and the Dano-Norwegian edition 
is nearly ready. These will be furnished 
to colporteurs at 12-1/2 cents (one-half their actual 
cost) per copy by freight or 15 cents by 
mail in packs of five or its multiples. 

Here is an excellent opportunity for Brethren 
and Sisters of those nationalities to serve 
the Lord and their countrymen— in this country 
or in their native lands. The books sell at 35 
cents, so that those who can sell only a few 
can cover their expenses. 

All should think soberly concerning their circumstances, 
and all the consecrated who are 
unencumbered should do what they can to 
spread the good tidings. Every foreigner in 
this country who becomes deeply interested is 
apt to send the truth to friends abroad as well 
as at home. Brother Larson, a deeply interested 
Dane, sent an English copy of M. DAWN to a 
friend in Denmark, who, not being able to appreciate 
it himself, forwarded it to Prof. Samson, 
of the Morgan Park University. The latter 
became deeply interested, and is the translator 
of the Dano-Norwegian edition now on the press. 

So the Truth is spread. Let each be sure 
that he is doing what he can do; and let all 
leave the general results to God. Sow the 
seed broadcast and liberally, wherever you 
have reason to surmise that it might take root; 
for thou knowest not which will prosper, this 
or that. 

A CANDID CONFESSION. 



On resigning his position as editor of The 
Review of The Churches, Archdeacon Farrar 
is quoted as having said— "The whole cause 
of the Reformation is going by default; and 
if the alienated laity do not awake in time, and 
assert their rights as sharers in the common 



priesthood of all Christians, they will awake, 
too late, to find themselves nominal members 
of a church which has become widely popish 
in all but name." 

Commenting on this, Brother Gillis remarks,— 
"He thus bewails the very state of things the 
clergy helped to bring about by suppressing 
the spirit of reform on all matters of faith and 
doctrine. In such pitiful straits they cannot 
contend against popish advances, their own 
clerical authority being involved. His confession 
implies that the court is called and 
Protestantism fails to appear. The case goes 
by default, and the pride of three hundred 
years falls in the dust, and defendant must pay 
the fearful cost."— How true! 



R1619:page51 

VOL. XV. FEBRUARY 15, 1894. NO. 4. 

KEEP YOUR EYES OPEN. 



SINCE the Lord has so graciously led his 
consecrated people into the knowledge, 
not only of his wonderful plan of salvation, 
but also of its times and seasons, it is important, 
especially in this eventful period of transition, 
that we keep our eyes open to observe 
the accurate fulfilments of prophecy now being 
brought to pass. Indeed, with open eyes, 
one can seldom glance over a daily newspaper 
without seeing some verification of the sure 
word of prophecy in the direction of a widespread 
expectation of some great revolutionary 
change in the social and religious conditions 
of the whole world. 

Even those who have no knowledge of the 
divine plan of the ages and its systematic and 
precise times and seasons are now reading the 
signs of the times so clearly as to approximate 
the time of their issuance in a new order of 
things within but a year or two of the time 
prophetically indicated. They see that a great 
revolutionary change is not only inevitable, 
but imminent; though they are quite at sea in 
their prognostications of the final outcome, believing 
as they do, that the shaping of the destinies 
of nations and individuals is in the hands 
of the present generation of "Christendom," 
instead of in the hands of him whose right it is 
to take the kingdom and to possess it forever, 



and whose time is come.— Ezek. 21:27. 

As a single illustration of this, out of many 
that might be adduced, we present to our 
readers the following able and significant address 
of the Rev. Dixon, of New York, on 

THE PERIOD OF TRANSITION. 



His text was Matt. 16:3,— "Ye can discern 
the face of the sky; but can ye not discern the 
signs of the times?" He said:— 

"History seems naturally to divide itself into 
periods. These periods of history have 
characteristics which distinguish them from the 
centuries which precede and the centuries which 
follow the era of the crusades as clearly and 
distinctly marked in medieval history. The 
period of the French revolution in like manner 
has its special characteristics, and is clearly defined 
in the history of the world. So in ancient 
times there were centuries of development 
which are distinctly marked. There are, upon 
the other hand, the crises of transition between 
the great historic centuries of development. 
These periods of transition are the seed times, 
while the great centuries of revolution and 
construction are the harvest times of history. 

"The nineteenth century is peculiarly a century 
of transition. It is a period of preparation. 
It has been one of tremendous development, 
and yet it is the development of a promise 
rather than the fulfillment of that which 
has gone before. The most marvelous development 
of the nineteenth century is the prophecy 
it gives of the twentieth. With all our 
wonderful achievements there is nothing so 
wonderful as the universal hope inspired in 
the human breast that we will do something 
better in the near future. 

"The import of action in a period of transition 
is of inestimable importance. What is 
impressed upon the character of this age will 
constitute the elements of strength or of weakness 
in the new century that is to be born. 
That which is now shaping the forces that shall 
dominate the life of the twentieth century must 

R1619 : page 52 

partake of permanence. In many respects it 
will be decisive. 

"There are certain elements in our current 
life which reveal to us the fact that the century 
before us must be constituted in its social, 



economic and political life upon a new basis. 
This must be so, 

(1) "Because of the rapidity of material progress 
during the past generation and its speed 
in this generation. The elimination of time 

R1620:page52 

and space has been one of the most remarkable 
developments of our period of invention, and 
the period of the world's invention is the latter 
part of the nineteenth century. 

"In the eighteenth century the world was 
divided into isolated continents and isolated 
nations. There was little intercourse, and 
what there was came through the slow travel 
by sail on water and stage on land. The facilities 
for gathering news and distributing the 
history of different nations among one another 
were of the most meager kind. 

"All this has been changed in the latter 
part of the nineteenth century. The world has 
literally been made a great whispering gallery, 
and every nation gives its quota to the day's 
story. There is no longer isolation of any 
sort. England and America are to-day in 
closer contact than were Massachusetts and 
New York in the eighteenth century. It is 
possible for a man to leave America in one 
week and visit the dead civilizations of the 
east in the next. It is possible for a man at 
his breakfast table to know all the important 
events that happened the day before in every 
nation of the world. We cross the ocean in 
less than six days. We go round the world in 
two months, and we come in contact with the 
current of the life of all people and all nations. 

"Our civilization is a symposium. The very 
delicacies of our table are the products of the 
whole earth. What we eat, what we wear, 
what we place in our homes are the joint product 
of the effort of the world. 

"The problem of time and space has within 
a few years been practically annihilated. The 
use of steam and electricity has brought the 
world thus in close contact. But the speed 
with which we are making progress even in 
annihilating time and space is so great that it 
is possible within the next generation that the 
rate of travel will be increased from four to five-fold 
at least. It may be possible for the children 
of the next generation to have their suburban 
homes 500 miles from the place of their daily 
business. Such an achievement would mean 
the development of the city until it shall literally 
cover the whole earth. 



"In mechanical developments our rate of 
progress has been a marvel during the past generation, 
but it is more marvelous to-day. 
Armies of men and women now give themselves 
exclusively to the work of mechanical invention. 
Our daily life has been literally revolutionized 
by mechanics. What our ancestors 
did by hand, we do by machinery. This tremendous 
force, brought into play by cranks 
and wheels and levers, is the development of 
the world's life. The bureau of statistics in 
Berlin estimated in 1887 that the steam engines 
at that time at work in the world represented 
not less than 1,000,000,000 workingmen. That 
is to say, the steam engines at work in 1 887 
did more than three times the working force of 
the entire earth. Their earning capacity at 
that time was three times greater than the 
muscle power of the world. 

"The advance in the application of mechanical 
power to the problems of life since 1 887 
has been most marvelous of all. Since that 
time electricity has taken in large measure the 
place of steam in a thousand avenues of life, 
and where the steam wheel made one revolution 
the electric motor makes ten. If we increase 
at this rate during the next generation 
the working force of the world, it will be possible 
to do all the work necessary for the production 
and distribution of economic goods 
within a few hours of every week, if society 
can be organized upon the co-operative rather 
than the competitive basis. 

"It can be seen at once that it is impossible 
for society to receive each day this tremendous 
army of wheels and levers without causing a 
radical disturbance in the existing social order 
within the near future. Labor organizations 
in their blind ignorance have fought the introduction 
of machinery in the labor of the world. 
But as they become educated they will not be 
slow in seeing that the work of the world can 
be done by machinery in a few hours when that 
machinery is harnessed by a co-operative social 
order. 

"The developments of science during the 
past generation have been so marvelous that 
we literally live in a new world because of those 
developments. Each day reveals new wonders. 
The present rate of progress, if maintained, 
will give a civilization in the early part of the 
twentieth century the very outlines of which 
no prophet can foretell to-day. The only 
problem is: Can the present rate of progress be 
maintained in the discovery of nature's secrets 
by those who are searching for them? The 



probability is that it will not only be maintained, 
but accelerated; for where there was 

R1620:page53 

one man in search of the secrets of nature for 
useful ends twenty years ago, there are 1 ,000 
men to-day searching with might and main 
for these secrets to give immediately to the 
world as a practical contribution to its social 
and economic life. Speculative science has 
everywhere given way to practical science, and 
the man of speculative mind cannot refrain 
from making the application even on the page 
of his philosophic speculation. 

(2) "The growth of cities has been so remarkable 
within the past generation, and is so 
rapidly increasing in the present, that it presages 
a new life in the near future— a new life, 
social, economic, religious. A glance at the 
development of the cities within the past decade 
and a comparison of each decade in the 
century will reveal that the growth of the city 
has been one of the marvels of modern life. 

"In 1790 the population of the United States 
was in round numbers 4,000,000. The population 
of the cities at that time was in round 
numbers 13 1,000— 3.35 per cent of the whole 
population, leaving a rural population of 96.65 
per cent In 1890 we had a population of 
62,000,000. The population of the cities had 
grown to 18,250,000, about 30 per cent of the 
entire population as contrasted with 3 per cent 
in 1790. The city has grown, in short, to 
dominate the life of the century. The rural 
district has lost its power. The scepter of import 
has been transferred to the streets of the 
great cities, and from the streets it has sunk to 
the gutters, and the dives, and the sewers. 

"The domination of city life over rural life is 
one that cannot continue long without a radical 
change in the whole social order. The growth 
of the city means the growth of the darkest elements 
of our life, at the expense, for the time 
being, of the saving elements. The growth of 
the city means the growth of the active principles 
of our civilization. The city is the center 
of activity. It is the center of good and 
the center of evil. It means, therefore, the 
necessary intensification of life. It means the 
intensification of crime. The development of 
crime within this latter part of our century has 
been put out of all proportion to the progress 
of law and order. We have 7,000 murders in 
America and 100 legal executions. 

"The daily record of our crime is something 



appalling to the heart of those that love 
their fellow man. The generation of criminals 
who have served their term in penal institutions 
is increasing with marvelous rapidity. A penal 
colony within the body of civilization is something 
with which we have never before been 
confronted. The number of convicts of various 
degrees which are at present adding to the 
slum population of our cities is something beyond 
computation. Corruption in society, in 
government and in commerce has increased in 
geometrical proportion to the pressure of life. 

"We have to-day the most corrupt civilization 
in some respects that the world has ever 
seen. If we take our own city of New York 
as an example in the development of political 
life in the close of the nineteenth century, we 
will have food for the philosopher and the 
philanthropist. In the past generation in this 
city corruption ruled in municipal life, but it 
was a corruption so manifest that public indignation 
could be aroused and the criminals 
brought to justice. The Tweed regime was 
routed in short order when once its rascality 
was made a matter of public comment and 
public suspicion. But this generation has 
reached a point of scientific development in 
public crime of which Mr. Tweed never dreamed. 
Tweed was a thief who rose from the lowest 
walks of life to roll in luxury, to sport his diamonds 
and his carriages out of public plunder. 
But he was a clumsy thief. 

"To-day his successor in office is the boss of 
our political life. He is the most important 
factor in our American politics to-day. 

"A few years ago he was a prize-fighter, a 
general sport, and he was poor. To-day he 
lives in a palace, he owns magnificent rural 
estates, he sports the finest blood horses in 
America and his wealth must be estimated by 
the millions. He holds no public office and 
has no visible means of support, save as the 
boss of a political club organized for plunder 
in a great city. 

"Not only have we such corruption before 
our eyes and absolutely master of our municipal 
life, but more— they add insult to injury. 
The people are unmercifully taxed to fill the 
pockets of these thieves, and the masses of the 
people in the cities must bear the burdens. 

"What is true of New York is true in a 
smaller degree in nearly all of the great cities 
of America to-day. This intensification of life 
has brought us the marvelous increase of wealth 
and the painful increase of poverty. Our life 
to-day may be termed the tropics of civilization. 



It is probable that the Astor estate alone 
has reached $500,000,000. 

"There are single individuals in this city 
whose income cannot be less than $20,000,000 
a year. 

"There are 1,000 men in this city whose 
wealth is vastly over $1,000,000. 

"There are a dozen men in this city who 
can, if they will, both control the financial 

R1621 : page 54 

development of the nation and dictate its political 
policies by the use of their money. 

"The poverty of the poor is in like manner 
increasing to the degree of starvation from day 
to day. 

"While 1,000 men in this city estimate their 
wealth at over $ 1 ,000,000, it can be safely 
said that there are 100,000 people in this city 
who are hungry for bread every day in the 
year. The number of people who sleep on 
boards, and who drift about with nowhere to 
sleep, approximates 100,000 daily. The children 
of this generation of paupers seem to increase 
with greater rapidity than the normal 
rate of the increase of the average population 
of the world. 

"While the evil elements of life have thus 
been intensified, we take hope from the fact 
that the better elements of life are also being 
intensified. The heroism of this life in its 
crying wants, its needs, is as brilliant in the 
individual examples as at any time in the history 
of the world. While crime and corruption 
and debauchery have increased in the city, the 
army of self sacrificing men and women who 
are willing to give their lives for the betterment 
of mankind daily increases. 

"The number of women that have poured 
their lives into the current stream of active endeavor 
has been, within the last twenty years, 
increasing as never before in the history of the 
human race. According to the report of the 
census of 1880 there were in America among 
women who earned their daily bread outside 
of domestic service the following numbers in 
different professions: 110 lawyers, 165 ministers, 
320 authors, 588 journalists, 2,061 artists, 
2,136 architects, chemists, pharmacists; 2,106 
stock raisers and ranchers, 5,145 government 
clerks, 2,438 physicians and surgeons, 13,182 
professional musicians, 56,800 farmers and 
planters, 21,071 clerks and bookkeepers, 14,465 
heads of commercial houses, 155,000 public 
school teachers. 



"This was by the census of 1880; but by the 
report of the last census of 1 890 there is recorded 
the remarkable fact that in these ten 
years the army of women who earn their daily 
bread outside of their homes now reaches the 
enormous total of 2,700,000. 

"For the first time in the history of economics 
woman has entered as an active factor. 
Her influence in developing the history of the 
next generation can but be marvelous. Her 
influence in molding and fashioning the life of 
society when thus brought in active contact 
with its working force cannot be less than it 
has been in other spheres where woman's influence 
has been felt when woman's position 
is recognized as it should be in the world of 
economics. 

"We stand upon the threshold of an economic 
evolution, of a new social order. It 
means, sooner or later, that woman will be 
emancipated from the slavery in which she has 
labored in the past, in an unequal struggle with 
man, and that society in its working force will 
be elevated, refined and humanized by her 
touch, her sympathies and her life. 

(3) "The rise of the common people to 
political equality in government with the traditional 
ruling classes has been accomplished 
within this century, and is but the beginning 
of a revolution that is not yet accomplished. 
Robert Mackenzie says: 'Sixty years ago Europe 
was an aggregate of despotic powers, disposing 
at their own pleasure of the lives and property 
of their subjects. To-day the men of western 
Europe govern themselves.' Popular suffrage, 
more or less closely approaching universal, 
chooses the governing power, and by methods 
more or less effective dictates its policy. 

"One hundred and eighty million Europeans 
have risen from a degraded and ever dissatisfied 
vassalage to the rank of free and self-governing 
men. This has been an accomplishment 
which has simply put into the hands of 
the common people the weapons with which 
they will fight their battles in the twentieth 
century. The battles are yet to be fought, the 
revolution is yet to be accomplished. They 
have simply been given the ballot, and the 
consciousness of their power has only begun 
to dawn upon them. 

"In the early part of the twentieth century 
we may surely look for a sufficient diffusion of 
intelligence to bring this tremendous mass into 
the aggressive assertion of the fullest rights 
of manhood. Hitherto they have been dominated 
by bosses, by tricky politicians, and they 



have followed skillful leaders blindly. 

"So intense are becoming these elements 
that they cannot continue longer without an 
explosion. The lamp has been lit and has 
been left burning. A woman in a western 
home during the war sent a servant into the 
cellar with a lighted candle to look for some 
object. The servant returned without the 
candle. The housewife asked where she had 
left it. She said she had left it in a barrel 
of sand in the cellar. The housewife remembered 
that there was a barrel of powder 
standing open in the cellar. Without a moment's 
hesitation she rushed below and found 
that the ignorant girl had thrust the candle 
down into the loose powder and left it burning. 

R1621 : page 55 

She carefully lifted it out and extinguished it. 

"The movement for universal suffrage in this 
century has placed the candle of knowledge, 
without a candlestick, in the loose powder of 
the common people. This light of knowledge 
is burning closer and closer, and the heat is 
becoming more and more intense with each 
moment. There is no power on earth, under 
the earth or above the earth that can remove 
that candle from its position. By a law as sure 
as the law of gravitation, the flame is approaching 
the powder, nearer and nearer every day. 
When it reaches the end, that is, the point of 
actual, conscious contact with their mind- 
there will be an explosion that will unsettle 
thrones and traditions, whether occupied by 
the Czar of Russia or Richard Croker I. of 
New York. 

(4) "The universality of education is a factor 
in the closing of the nineteenth century 
which must make a new world in the twentieth. 

"We have now entered upon the democracy 
of letters. Hitherto in the history of mankind 
knowledge was confined to the few. The higher 
professions were open only to the sons of distinguished 
men. Now they are opened to the 
child of the state born and reared in obscurity 
and disgrace and poverty. There is no limitation 
to the possibilities of human endeavor, 
because education has been brought within the 
reach of all. In America we have 13,000,000 
children in our public schools. This means 
that the next generation will be a new people. 
With this wide diffusion of knowledge has 
come the scientific spirit of inquiry. 

"New blood has been brought into our world 
of science, our world of philosophy. Men no 



longer reason by the standards of Aristotle and 
Plato. They do not ask what has been taught 
by the great men of the past and stop there. 
They do not seek authority for action. They 
search for truth itself. They refuse to be 
bound by the traditions of the past. The time 
was when knowledge was confined to a certain 
clique in society. They had their own peculiar 
ideas. They were educated in their own 
peculiar schools. They thought in ruts. Their 
minds never traveled beyond certain well-defined 
limitations, and in consequence they 
traveled in a circle continuously. 

"With the universal diffusion of knowledge 
and the introduction of new spirits in the field 
of investigation all this has been changed. 
Nothing is now settled save that which is settled 
upon the basis of proved fact. Every tradition, 
every theory, every creed must stand the 
test of this investigation. Every theory of 
State, every notion of society, every theory of 
religion must be resubmitted to this court of 
last adjustment— the truth, the whole truth and 
nothing but the truth. 

"For the first time in the history of the world 
this spirit dominates the educated mind. Hitherto 
we have simply clung to the past with 
passionate and blind devotion. Now all things 
are being made new. All things are being 
brought in question. Nothing is accepted as 
authoritative because it is ancient. The creeds 
of Christendom are all undergoing radical revision. 
The traditionalists may resist with 
all their power— they fight against the stars. 

"The creeds of the world within the next 
generation will be fixed on facts, not fancies. 
Superstition and tradition are being destroyed 
with a rapidity that will give the world a new 
religion within the next twenty years, and that 
religion will be the Christianity of Jesus Christ 
in its simplicity as Jesus lived it and preached it. 

"The barriers of national lines and prejudice 
have all been broken down. The heathen 
world is now in vital contact with the Christian 
world and the Christian world's civilization. 

"A hundred years ago Japan was utterly isolated 
from the rest of mankind. There was a 
law in force providing that 'no ship or native 
of Japan should quit the country under pain 
of forfeiture and death; that any Japanese returning 
from a foreign country should be put 
to death; that no nobleman or soldier should 
be suffered to purchase anything from a foreigner; 
that any person bringing a letter from 
abroad should die, together with all his family 
and any who might presume to intercede 



for him.' 

"Every heathen nation has been opened to 
Christian influences and to the advance of the 
civilization of Christian nations. Not only 
this, but they have of necessity been compelled 
to study modern science. Japan stands to-day 
practically within the pale of modern civilization. 
I took my seat in the Johns Hopkins 
University around the seminary table, in the 
study of political and social science, with 
young Japanese students from the capital of 
Japan. China is studying the methods of the 
modern world and introducing of necessity 

R1622 : page 55 

modern inventions. The whole human race 
is thus of necessity being brought into vital 
contact, and this for the first time in the history 
of mankind. 

"Thus the universal spread of education 
among all people ushers us immediately upon 
a new era in the history of mankind. We are 
not satisfied with the present attainment. The 
workingman's child who receives the same education 
as the millionaire will not be content 

R1622 : page 56 

to be his slave in the next generation, and 
there is no power of Church or State or society 
that can hold him so, for there are no traditions 
that can bind him. 

"President Andrews, of Brown University, 
says: 'If anything has been made certain by 
the economic revolution of the last 25 years, 
it is that society cannot much longer get on 
upon the old libertarian, competitive, go-as-you-please 
system to which so many sensible 
persons seem addicted. The population of the 
great nations is becoming too condensed for 
that.' 

"Bishop Westcost, of Cambridge University, 
says: 'On every side imperious voices 
trouble the repose which our indolence would 
wish to keep undisturbed. We can no longer 
dwell apart in secure isolation. The main interests 
of men are once again passing through 
a great change. They are most surely turning 
from the individual to the society.' 

"Another writer says: 'We are now approaching 
a crisis. No human wisdom can predict 
its shaping any more than it can prevent the 
issue. The air is full of auguries; even our 
fiction has become very precisely apocalyptic. 
It is theoretic prophecy, anticipating the realization 



of perfect scientific and social economics 
—the paradise of outward comfortableness.' 

"William T. Stead says: 'Everywhere the 
old order is changing and giving place to the 
new. The human race is now at one of the 
critical periods in its history, when the fountains 
of the great deep are broken up, and the 
flood of change submerges all the old established 
institutions, in the midst of which preceding 
generations have lived and died.' 

"It is impossible to educate the human race 
without at the same time lifting it into the consciousness 
of the resistless power of numbers. 
We are now about to enter upon the period of 
activity which will be the result of this universal 
consciousness of the inherent power of manhood. 
Who can foretell its results? 

"The child of the hodcarrier to-day is better 
trained than kings and princes in the not very 
far past. All the dishes placed on the table of 
Louis XIV. were tasted in presence of the king 
before he would touch them, and each guest 
was supplied with a spoon for the purpose of 
helping himself from a common dish. Anne 
of Austria, the queen who was celebrated for 
her beautiful hands, it is said, once gave a 
piece of meat to her neighbor, which she had 
just taken from her plate with her fingers, and 
allowed him (and this was the point which the 
historian recorded) as a special favor to lick 
off what remained on the hand. 

"The child, of the commonest workingman, 
that attends our public school is more cultured 
in all the essentials of real civilization than 
were kings and queens and princes in the 
eighteenth century. When the common herd 
are thus lifted to the position of kings, they 
will not be long in fitting themselves with a 
crown." 



R1622:page56 

A SERIOUS QUESTION. 



"Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, 

what manner of persons ought ye to be in 

all holy conversation and godliness."— 2 Pet. 3:11. 

IF this was a serious consideration in the 
Apostle's day, how much more weighty does 
it seem to-day, when we stand at the threshold 
of the new dispensation, and in the very midst 



of all the disintegrating influences of the old. 
A few more years will wind up the present 
order of things, and then the chastened world 
will stand face to face with the actual conditions 
of the established Kingdom of God. And 
yet the course of the Church is to be finished 
within the brief space of time that intervenes. 

Seeing, then, that all these things— present 
political, social, religious and financial arrangements 
—are to be dissolved, and that so 
soon, and also how apart from these things are 
the real interests of the saints, how comparatively 
unimportant should the things of this 
present order seem to us: they are not worthy 
our time or words, which should go to the 
things which alone will survive. And, having 
such hopes as are set before us, and so clear a 
knowledge of the grand outcome, as well as of 
the minutiae of the divine plan, what manner 
of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation 
and godliness? And yet with what 
carefulness we need to guard against being 
overcharged with the petty cares of this present 
time, and against imbibing the spirit of the 
world, which is all about us, and mixed with 
every question of the hour. 

Only by constant watchfulness and prayer 
can we keep ourselves unspotted from the 

R1622 : page 57 

world. We need to keep a vigilant watch over 

our general character to see that it bears the 

divine likeness: that meekness, sincerity, moderation, 

temperance and truth are always manifest 

in us. And then we should see that all 

our conversation is such as becometh saints. 



R1625:page57 
FAITHFUL OVER FEW. 



-MRS. F. G. BURROUGHS.- 

O BLESSED Lord, how much I lon| 
To do some noble work for thee! 
To lift thee up before the world 
Till every eye thy grace shall see; 
But not to me didst thou intrust 
The talents five or talents two, 
Yet, in my round of daily tasks, 
Lord, make me faithful over few. 



I may not stand and break the bread 
To those who hunger for thy Word, 
And midst the throngs that sing thy praise 
My feeble voice may ne'er be heard; 
And, still, for me thou hast a place, 
Some little corner I may fill, 
Where I can pray, "Thy Kingdom Come!" 
And seek to do thy blessed will. 

A cup of water, in thy name, 
May prove a comfort to the faint: 
For thou wilt own each effort made 
To soothe a child or aid a saint; 
And thou wilt not despise, dear Lord, 
My day of small things, if I try 
To do the little I can do, 
Nor pass the least endeavor by. 

To teach the wise and mighty ones 
The weak and foolish thou dost choose, 
And even things despised and base 
For thy great glory thou canst use: 
So, Lord, tho' humble be my sphere, 
In faith I bring to thee my all; 
For thine own glory bless and break 
My barley loaves and fishes small. 



R1622:page57 

THE WORK FOR A CONVERTED WILL. 



"The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the 
way of righteousness. He that is slow to anger is better 
than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit 
than he that taketh a city."— Prov. 16:31,32. 

TO besiege and capture a city is a great undertaking, 

because every city has its massive 

defences of law and force, and is built 

with all the probable contingencies of attacks 

from enemies in view. In olden times the defences 

were walls and gates; but now they are 

of the improved order of governmental arrangements. 

Cities and communities of immense 

proportions are now banded together 

into great nations for mutual co-operation and 

defense, so that to attack a city now is to attack 

a nation, and to be withstood with all 

the defensive armory of the nation; and in no 

instance can one undertake it single-handed 

and alone. He who would undertake it must 



be backed by other powers equal, or at least 
apparently equal, to the emergency. And the 
victory of such a general will depend on his 
superior skill and ingenuity in utilizing the 
various forces and advantages in his possession 
against those employed by the defenders of the 
city. 

Such ability as is thus required in a great 
general is quite rare. It indicates indomitable 
purpose, methodical planning and skill in execution, 
though these good qualities are often 
exercised in a bad cause. Such ability has always 
been highly esteemed among men, and 
the aspirants for fame have, therefore, in times 
past, sought it chiefly along this line, though 
they gained their laurels at the expense of the 
blood and groans of millions of their 
fellow-men. 

While the exercise of these successful qualities 
along the lines of human ambitions is 
required of earthly heroes, the exercise of the 
similar qualities along the lines of God's appointment 
is required of those who would be 
heroes in his estimation. If there were not 
a similarity in the kind of the effort and success, 
the comparison would not be instituted. 
Let us first notice the similarity, and then the 
difference, that we may see clearly what the 
Lord here commends. 

R1622 : page 58 

To rule one's spirit (mind, disposition) implies 
a conflict similar to that of taking a city; 
for, no matter when we begin, we find intrenched 
therein many armed and opposing 
powers. They have possession by heredity,— 
they are there as the result of the fall. And, 
if we have passed the days of youth, they are 
the more intrenched, and require the greater 
skill and generalship to rout them. But, 
whether he begin early or late, he that would 
rule his own spirit must war a good warfare- 
he must "fight the good fight" of faith down 
to the very end of the present existence. If a 
man would rule his own spirit, he must not 
only storm all the fortresses of inherited evils 
which seem to be almost a part of his nature, 
but, having gained possession and taken his 
seat upon the throne of this symbolic city (viz., 
the will), he must thereafter be continually on 
the defensive; for the old enemies are constantly 
on the alert, and ever and anon seeking 
to regain possession, so that he that continues 
to rule his own spirit is one who not 
only has routed the enemy, Sin, from the 



throne of his being, but who continues to keep 
him at bay. 

To rule one's own spirit is by no means an 
easy task; and, as in the illustration, it cannot 
be done single handed and alone. Consequently, 
the wise general will invoke all the 
assistance at his command, remembering the 
words of the Apostle— "We wrestle not against 
flesh and blood, but against principalities and 
powers, against the rulers of the powers of this 
world, against spiritual wickedness in high 
places." These powers of the world, the flesh, 
and the devil are all closely allied; and, therefore, 
he who plans for conquest and an established 
reign thereafter must seek alliance with 
another and a stronger power; which power is 
tendered to all who earnestly undertake the 
great work. This power is none other than 
the almighty arm of our God, who says to all 
who accept his strength, "Greater is he that 
is for you than all they that be against you;" 
gird yourselves like men, fear not, be strong. 

The ruling of this symbolic city— one's own 
spirit— never will be done until first the commanding 
general, the Will, has decided to 
change his allegiance from Sin to God, and to 
rout the rebels who resist the change. But, 
in the words of a trite saying, "Where there 
is a will there is a way;"— for good or for evil. 
God will assist, through various agencies, toward 
good; Satan, with various agencies, toward 
evil. If the Will says, It must be done, 
it calls in the needed and available help, and 
forthwith it sets all the other faculties of the 
mind at work, first to subjugate and then to 
rule and regulate the entire being. The Conscience 
is commanded to keep a vigilant watch 
over all the mental operations; and the Judgment, 
under the influence of the Conscience, 
must decide as to righteousness or unrighteousness 
and report to the Will, which is under 
the same moral influence. Thus we have the 
three departments of government established 
—the legislative, which should always be the 
Conscience; the judicial, the Judgment; and 
the executive, the Will. And in every well 
regulated or righteously ruled mind all the 
other faculties must make their appeal to this 
Congress, and that, as the Will insists, in due 
and proper order. Their appeal to the Will 
to execute their desires before submitting them 
first to Conscience and Judgment should never 
be tolerated; but, when approved there, they 
may freely urge their claims upon the executive 
power, the Will. But the Will governs; 
and, if it be weak, the government is slack, and 



the whole man's appetites and passions and 
unholy ambitions take advantage of the situation: 
they seek to overbalance Judgment and 
to silence Conscience, and loudly clamor to 
the Will to have their own wild way. If the 
Will be weak, yet striving to keep under the 
influence of Conscience and sound Judgment, 
it will be fitful and irregular in its rulings, and 
the government will be unstable and ultimately 
wholly at the mercy of the appetites, passions 
and ambitions. The condition of such a 
soul is one of anarchy, which, unless its wild 
course be speedily arrested, hurriedly sweeps 
the whole being toward destruction. 

It is all important, therefore, that the Will 
be consecrated to God and righteousness; and, 
secondly, that it strengthen itself with the 
Lord, and in his name and strength rule with a 

R1622:page59 

firm hand, cultivating as its assistants Conscience 
and Judgment, in determining the good 
and acceptable and perfect will of God, as expressed 
in his Word. 

The Will has the most difficult office to fill; 
and the Lord's commendation is to the man 
of resolute Will, under the influence of a divinely 
enlightened Conscience and Judgment. 
Blessed is the man who sets his house in order, 
and who maintains that order to the end of his 
days. Truly, to such a one the hoary head is 
a crown of glory. The warring elements of 
his nature having been brought into subjection, 
the arts of peace have been cultivated, and 
now they flourish and adorn his character; 
and as Mr. Whittier beautifully expressed it— 

"All the jarring notes of life 
Seem blending in a psalm; 

And all the angles of the strife, 
Now rounding into calm." 



R1622:page59 

THE BOOK OF GENESIS. III. 



DIVINE AUTHORITY AND INSPIRATION 
OF THE BOOK. 



THE claim of this book, to be regarded as a 



part of divine revelation, is established beyond 
question by the authority of Christ and 
his apostles. It was a part of that collection 
of sacred writings, the Oracles of God, which 
were committed to the care and guardianship 
of the Jewish people. (Rom. 3:2.) Of these 
writings, collectively, the Savior and his apostles 
often speak as the Word of God; recognizing, 
and directly asserting, their divine 
authority and inspiration. See such passages, 
for example, as Matt. 5:17-19; John 5:39; 
Rom. 3:2; Matt. 22:43; Mark 12:36; 2 Tim. 3:16; 
1 Pet. 1:10-12; 2 Pet. 1:21. This book, 
was, therefore, as a part of these divine writings 
(called in the New Testament the Scriptures, 
the Holy Scriptures, the Oracles of God), 
expressly recognized by the Savior and his 
apostles as of divine authority, and was declared 
to be "profitable for teaching, for reproof, for 
correction, for instruction in righteousness." 
--2 Tim. 3:16. 

The genuineness of the book (in other words, 
that it is a DIVINE BOOK; that, in this sense, it 
is not a spurious production) is thus established 
by the highest authority. It is a question 
of less importance by whom the book was 
written. In regard to many books of the Old 
Testament, this can not be determined with 
certainty. Nor is this necessary to be known; 
nor would it by itself prove their inspiration 
and divine authority, which must rest on 
other grounds. The authority of a writing, 
claimed to be divine, does not in any case rest 
on the particular writer or human instrumentality, 
but on the divine attestation given to 
it; and this attestation can be given, as in 
many cases it has been, to writings which have 
come to us anonymously, and of which the 
particular writer cannot be determined with 
certainty. 

COMPOSITION OF THE BOOK. 



The attentive reader will observe very marked 
peculiarities in the composition of the book. 

There are striking variations of style and 
manner, not only in treating of subjects differing 
in their nature, where it might be expected, 
but also where the subjects are of the same 
general character. These variations are observable 
even in a translation, and still more so 
in the original text, where words and forms of 
expression, familiar to some portions, are never 
found in others. With these variations in the 



general manner of the writer are connected 
certain other peculiarities, which mark the 
transition from one portion to another. In 
the first subdivision of the book, for example, 
embracing the first chapter and the first three 
verses of the second, the name of the Divine 
Being is uniformly GOD. In the second, extending 
from the fourth verse of the second 
chapter to the end of the third, it is uniformly 
JEHOVAH GOD, except in the quoted words of 
the tempter's address to Eve, and of her reply 
(chap. 3:1-5), which are not the language of 
the narrator. In the third, contained in the 
fourth chapter, it is uniformly JEHOVAH, except 
in the quoted language of Eve, verse 25. In the 
fourth, contained in the fifth chapter, it is 
again uniformly GOD, except in verse 29 in the 
words quoted from Lamech. 

In the subsequent portions of the book, the 
alterations are more frequent and less regular, 
but no less distinctly marked. 

R1623 : page 59 

For the object of this section it is not 
necessary to add further illustrations on this 
point. But the careful reader will also observe 
that there are portions where the name GOD is 
chiefly employed, with the occasional use of 
the name JEHOVAH, in which the sense is complete, 

R1623 : page 60 

and the connection clear, without the 
passages containing the latter name. Take, for 
example, chaps. 6-10. If the reader will inclose 
in brackets the passages containing the 
name JEHOVAH, namely, verse 3 and verses 6-8 
in chap. 6, verses 1-6 and the last clause of 
verse 16 in chap. 7, verses 20-22 in chap. 8, 
verses 20-29 in chap. 9, and verse 9 in chap. 10, 
he will find that the thread of the narrative 
is unbroken, and the sense complete, when 
this portion is read without these passages. 
They make additional statements which are 
important in themselves, but are not necessary 
to the coherency of the narrative. 

The natural inference is, that the Book of 
Genesis consists of different revelations, made 
at different times, anterior to the age of the 
inspired writer to whom we owe its present 
form; and that he embodied them in a connected 
narrative, supplying what was wanting 
in one from the others and adding himself 
what was necessary for its completion. This 
in no degree detracts from the divine authority 



of the book, which (as already remarked) 
depends not on the human writer, or on our 
knowledge of him, but on the divine attestation; 
and this is given to the book itself, irrespective 
of the human instrumentality through 
which it was communicated. 

This conclusion is strengthened by the character 
of large portions of its contents, consisting 
of genealogies, or accounts of births 
and other incidents of family history, anterior 
to the age of Moses, the writer of the book. 

Of the date of the earliest of these divine 
communications there is no intimation. But 
it would be unreasonable to suppose that the 
ancient patriarchs, Enoch and Noah, who 
"walked with God," Abraham the "Friend 
of God," had no authentic and divinely attested 
record of these truths, on which their own relation 
to the Divine Being depended, and without 
the knowledge of which it could not be 
understood. We have therefore reason for holding 
that these earliest revelations come to us 
from the inspiration of the remote and unknown 
past, beyond the date of the writings of Moses 
himself. 

THE WRITER OF THE BOOK. 



The truths recorded in the Book of Genesis 
are pre-supposed as known in the books which 
follow it in the Pentateuch, and in all the subsequent 
books of the Hebrew Scriptures. The 
Book of Exodus takes up and continues history, 
from the point where it is left in Genesis, with 
an express reference to what had been related 
in that book. (Compare Exodus 1:1-8.) It 
recognizes incidentally, as known facts, God's 
"covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and 
with Jacob" (chap. 2:24), his relation to 
them as "the God of Abraham, the God of 
Isaac, and the God of Jacob" (ch. 3:6), and 
their posterity as "his people" (verse 7), styling 
him "the God of their fathers" (verses 13,15,16), 
and "Jehovah, God of their fathers, 
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, 
and the God of Jacob" (chap. 4:5); his "appearing 
to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob," 
and his "covenant with them to give them the 
land of Canaan, the land of their sojournings" 
(chap. 6:3-5 and 8); the charge given by 
Joseph (Gen. 50:25) respecting his remains 
(chap. 13:19); the six days of creation and the 
rest on the seventh.— Chap. 20: 1 1. 

These are only incidental allusions to things 



known, and necessarily presuppose the revelations 
and historical details in this book, to 
which they refer. 

Without these revelations, the Hebrews would 
have had no knowledge of the God whom they 
were required to worship and obey, as the 
Creator and Supreme Lawgiver, or of the guilt 
of idolatry as a sin against him. Without 
these historical details, the frequent allusions 
to their connection with the early patriarchs, 
and with the promises made to them, would 
have been an unintelligible enigma. 

The Book of Genesis was therefore an integral 
and necessary part of that divine code, 
which, under the name Law (Deut. 31:9,24), 
Law of Jehovah (Ex. 13:9), Book of the Law 
of God (Josh. 24:26), Book of the Law of 
Moses (Josh. 23:6), Law of Moses (1 Kings 2:3), 
is ascribed to him as the writer. This is 
claimed by himself, in the body of the code. 
It is there said, that "Moses wrote this law" 
(Deut. 31:9), that he "made an end of writing 
the words of this law in a book, until they 
were finished."— Deut. 31:24. 

That the writings which bore this general 
name, including Genesis, were from the hand 
of Moses, is thus proved by his own assertion, 
and by the uniform testimony of the writers 
nearest to his own age. 

The Book of Genesis comes to us, therefore, 
with the authority of the inspired Lawgiver, 
having the same divine attestation as the writings 
first communicated through him. 

ITS DIVISIONS AND CONTENTS. 



The general divisions and contents of the 
book are as follows: 

First division, chapters 1-3. Account of the 
Creation, and of the entrance of moral evil 
into the world. 

R1623 : page 61 

Second division, chapters 4-9. Account of 
sinful man, and of the prevalence of irreligion 
and immorality, from the fall to the first universal 
manifestation of divine justice in the 
destruction of the guilty race. 

Third division, chapters 10,11. Continued 
development of its history and proof of its 
alienation from the true God, and of the want 
of a self-renovating power. 

Fourth division, chapters 12-50. Initiation, 



and progressive steps, of the divine arrangement 
for the renovation of the race. 



page 6 1 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1623:page61 

TRIAL OF ABRAHAM'S FAITH. 



I. QUAR., LESSON VOL, FEB. 25, GEN. 22:1-13. 

Golden Text— "By faith Abraham, when he was tried, 
offered up Isaac."— Heb. 11:17. 

VERSE 1. "God did tempt Abraham." 
This statement must be considered together 
with that of James 1:13,14. "Let no man 
say when he is tempted, I am tempted of 
God; for God cannot be tempted with evil, 
neither tempteth he any man. But every 
man is tempted when he is drawn away of 
his own desires and enticed." 

The words rendered "tempt" and "tempted" 
in both cases signify to try, to prove; and 
the statements seem contradictory until we 
consider the full statement of the Apostle 
James. He is referring to the fact that that 
which makes any applied test of character 
a temptation to evil is either the weakness 
of an undisciplined character, or else an inherent 
disposition to evil which has an affinity 
for the evil alternative before him, 
for neither of which things is God responsible. 
If the character were established in 
righteousness, no presentation of known 
evil could awaken a desire for it. Thus it is 
with God: he is so confirmed, so established, 
in righteousness, and he so fully recognizes 
the nature of evil, that "he cannot be tempted 
with evil:" no presentation of any evil 
could possibly induce him to turn from righteousness. 



In the sense, therefore, of inclining 
or inducing a man to evil, God never 
tempts any man, although he does frequently 
apply the tests of character by causing or 
permitting the alternatives of good and evil 
to be placed before the individual, the results 
of which trial or proving makes manifest 
the good or evil tendencies of the man's 
character and their strength or weakness. 

In the test applied to Abraham, God proved 
his servant under a fiery ordeal which manifested 
a character which he could approve 
and highly reward, and Abraham was called 
the friend of God.— James 2:23. 

VERSES 2,3. The test which God applied 
to Abraham was not an arbitrary one: 
the whole incident was designed to be a 
type of a subsequent transaction in the interests 
of the whole world. It was a typical 
prophecy of God's great gift of his only 
begotten and well beloved Son. 

To this typical feature of the transaction 
the Apostle refers, saying, "Abraham is the 
father of us all [who are of the faith of 
Abraham], like unto him whom he believed, 
even God, who...calleth those things 
which be not as though they were [using 
them as types]." (Rom. 4:17— margin.) In 
the type, as the Apostle suggests, Abraham 
represented God; and with this suggestion 
it is not difficult to see the significance of 
the whole event. If Abraham represented 
God, then Isaac his son represented the Son 
of God, and his offering up by Abraham 
was a symbol of God's sacrifice of his Son 
for the sins of the world, as the Apostle also 
indicates in Heb. 11:17-19, saying that 
Abraham offered up his only son in whom 
centered all his promises, and that in a figure 
he received him from the dead. And, 
looking still further, it is not difficult to see 
that Isaac's wife, Rebecca, was also a type 
of the true Church, the bride of Christ. A 
full consideration of these types would go 
beyond our present limits of space as well 
as lead away from the main feature of this 
lesson, viz., the faith of Abraham and its 
worthy example for our imitation. 

We observe, first, that Abraham's faith 
was a childlike faith. He trusted God's love 
and believed his wisdom superior to his own, 
and accepted his authority as paramount to 
every other consideration. The severest 
possible test of such a faith was the command 
to slay his son with his own hand 
and to offer him upon the altar of sacrifice. 



R1623 : page 62 

This, too, was his only son (for Ishmael was 
not counted in the full sense a son, but 
rather a servant): the son in whom centered 
all the great anticipation of his life, the son 

R1624:page62 

of promise and received in a miraculous 
way, the son of his old age, and the one 
through whom all the promises of God were 
to be fulfilled. Doubtless, too, he was a 
dutiful son and well instructed in the right 
ways of the Lord, and a joy and comfort to 
Abraham and Sarah. But all these considerations 
of head and heart were set aside, 
and with unquestioning promptness Abraham 
prepared to fulfil the Lord's command, 
to sacrifice his son, Isaac. 

VERSES 4-6. When they came in sight of 
the place of sacrifice, Abraham felt the need 
of renewed strength from on high that his 
courage might not fail; so, with Isaac, he 
withdrew from the servants that they might 
have a season of communion with God. 
This drawing near to God in private prayer 
and communion was the secret of Abraham's 
steady unwavering faith and obedience. 
He became personally acquainted 
with God; and the knowledge of God's works 
and ways and promises heretofore had been 
handed down through faithful patriarchs 
and were believed and trusted in by Abraham. 
And this knowledge of and acquaintance 
with God gave the faith and love and 
courage to obey. Thus it must be with all 
God's children who would be pleasing and 
acceptable to him. First let them make 
sure that it is God who speaks, and then let 
obedience be prompt and unquestioning. 
Then he sometimes spoke to his people by 
an audible voice, or by an angel, but in 
these last days he speaks to us through his 
inspired apostles and prophets; and their 
testimony he declares sufficient for our guidance 
into the doing of his will. (2 Tim. 3:17.) 
That upon which our faith should rest 
is not, therefore, voices from heaven, either 
real or imaginary, nor the whisperings of a 
diseased imagination, but the sure Word of 
prophecy unto which we do well to take 
heed, as did faithful Abraham to the voice 
of God as he then spoke. 

A faith thus rooted and grounded in a 



knowledge of God's works and ways and 
an intimate personal acquaintance with him 
is one which cannot be tossed about by 
every wind of doctrine, and which is pleasing 
and acceptable to God. 

"How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word!" 

R1624:page62 

SELLING THE BIRTHRIGHT. 



I. QUAR., LESSON IX., MARCH 4, GEN. 25:27-34. 

Golden Text— "The life is more than meat, and the 
body is more than raiment."— Luke 12:23. 

The incident of this lesson, which should 
be considered together with chapters 27 and 
28, is one which is generally viewed as casting 
great reproach upon Jacob, while Esau 
is regarded with sympathy and pity. Jacob 
is regarded as an unprincipled sharper and 
deceiver, and Esau as an innocent dupe, 
overpowered by unfortunate circumstances 
and his brother's ambitious cunning. But, 
since the special favor of God attended the 
transaction, it is evidently wise to reconsider 
the matter, lest haply our conclusions may 
be found to be against God as well as 
against Jacob. Since God seems to approve 
Jacob's course, we ought to expect to find 
some evidence of Jacob's integrity in the 
matter. And so we do. We find that which 
God could commend and reward, and which, 
properly viewed, was entirely right. 

The birthright, the chief inheritance in 
estate and authority, in patriarchal times belonged 
naturally to the eldest son of a family. 
And in the case of Isaac, the father of 
Jacob and Esau, it included not only personal 
possessions, but also the covenant 
blessing of God specially promised to Abraham 
and inherited by Isaac; and, as Isaac 
had reached advanced age, he began to realize 
that the covenant blessing was not to 
be realized in himself personally, but was 
to be transmitted to his posterity. This was 
also indicated to Rebekah, Isaac's wife, when 
she was told that "the elder should serve 
the younger." Thus Jacob was shown to 
be the divinely chosen line through whom 
the covenant blessings should be realized. 
The words of Isaac in blessing Jacob (chapter 27:28,29) 



indicate the transmitting of 

the Abrahamic covenant blessing to him— 

that in him and in his seed should all the 

nations of the earth be blessed;— and the 

blessing was further emphasized when Jacob 

was about to depart to seek a wife in Padan-aram, 

when he said, "God Almighty bless 

thee and make thee fruitful and multiply 

thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of 

people; and give thee the blessing of Abraham, 

to thee and to thy seed with thee, that 

thou mayest inherit the land wherein thou 

art a stranger, which God gave unto Abraham." 

(Chapter 28:3,4; Heb. 11:20.) And 

this covenant was confirmed to Jacob by 

R1624:page63 

a special message from God, as our next 
lesson indicates. See Chapter 28:13-15; 
1 Chron. 16:17. 

Now for the integrity of Jacob's course. 
Observe (1) that Esau manifested but very 
little appreciation of his birthright, in that 
he was willing to sell it for the small price 
of a mess of pottage; (2) that he only regarded 
so much of it as pertained to the 
present life, and that its chief feature, the 
Abrahamic covenant, was quite overlooked, 
showing that he had little or no faith in it 
and no appreciation of it. (See verse 32.) 
(3) We remember the line of descent of the 
covenant favor was hinted to Rebekah in 
the promise that the elder should serve the 
younger (Gen. 25:23), which promise was 
treasured up by Rebekah, and doubtless communicated 
to Jacob, who was inspired by it 
to look for some honorable way to acquire 
it from his brother to whom it pertained by 
natural descent, he being the first-born. 
The occasion above referred to was such an 
opening; and Jacob, who had faith in the 
promise of God to Abraham and its future 
fulfilment and also in the Word of the Lord 
to his mother, seeing his brother's lack of 
faith and appreciation, embraced the opportunity 
to lawfully purchase the birthright 
at the price freely agreed upon by Esau. 
Thus lawfully he came into the inheritance 
to which God had called him. 

(4) Some years after (25:27,31; 26:34,35; 
27:1-10), Isaac, feeling that his course 
of life was nearing the end, determined to 
bestow his blessing, the birthright, upon 
Esau; or, in other words, to make or declare 
his last will and testament. (27: 1-4.) Here 



Esau should have reminded his father that 
he had sold his prospective birthright to 
Jacob; but this he evidently failed to do, as 
he prepared to disregard the contract entirely. 
But, providentially, Rebekah overheard 
the father's expressed intention, and, 
fearing that his preference for Esau would 
lead him also to disregard the contract, if he 
indeed knew of it, she planned the artifice 
by which Isaac was misled and caused to 
bestow the blessing upon Jacob. 

That Jacob lied to Isaac in claiming to 
be Esau we do not understand, since in the 
lawful purchase of the birthright he stood 
in the place of Esau as the representative 
of the first-born. Even so the Levites were 
called the first-born of Israel because they 
represented the first-born. Esau, in selling 
his birthright, actually made Jacob his attorney 
in fact to receive, hold and exercise 
at any time and forever all of his (Esau's) 
rights and privileges pertaining to the birthright 
in every way and manner. So Jacob 
had a perfect right to appear as Esau, name 
and all; and Rebekah did no wrong in aiding 
in the transaction, she too being actuated 
by faith in the promise of God and by 
a due appreciation of it. And God showed 
his valuation of the faith which thus trusted 
and appreciated his promise. 

In this view of the matter we see a reason 
for God's approval and rewarding of Jacob. 
Jacob was a man of faith who had respect 
unto the promises of God, although, like 
Abraham, he might have to die in faith and 
to wait in the grave for the realization. 
This great favor he earnestly sought; and, 
having obtained the promise, he never bartered 
it away, nor walked unworthy of an 
heir of such a hope. He loved and worshiped 
God, and diligently sought to know 
and to do his will. 

Esau, on the contrary, steadily pursued a 
wayward course. He married heathen wives 
who were a cause of grief to Isaac and Rebekah 
(26:34,35); and he hated his brother, 
and determined to slay him. 

But, if we read this incident as a mere 
scrap of history, we fail to receive the special 
benefit which its recital was designed 
to teach, as indicated by the Apostle Paul, 
who refers to it as a type of God's purpose 
as to election, the two sons of Isaac representing 
the Jewish and Gospel dispensations 
of peoples— Esau the Jewish and Jacob the 
Gospel dispensation and house. 



The two boys were twins, and so were 
these two dispensations. (See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. II., chap, vii.) And as it was 
foretold of these that the elder should serve 
the younger, so also the Gospel Church, 
though younger, is to take precedence to 
the Jewish house or church. The younger 
or Gospel house is to partake of the root 
and fatness of the Abrahamic covenant, 
while the elder is to receive mercy and favor 
through its mercy.— Rom. 11:31. 

So God's purposes according to election 
stand (Rom. 9:1 1-16); and it is his will that 
all who in this acceptable day of the Lord 
make their calling and election sure shall 
have the chief blessing as the Church of the 
first-born (Heb. 12:23), though actually the 
Jewish house was first developed. The latter 
will constitute the earthly phase of the 
Kingdom, while the former will be the 

R1624:page64 

higher spiritual phase in power and authority. 

Those who in the Gospel dispensation 
make their calling and election sure, being 
counted the worthy seed of Abraham and 
heirs of the promise of God, will be such as 
have too high a valuation of it to part with 
it for a mess of pottage. Yet many who 
were called to this high office, like Esau and 
fleshly Israel, fail to appreciate the calling 
and, lacking faith and perseverance, ignominiously 
sell their high privilege as the prospective 
heirs of God and joint-heirs of Jesus 
Christ. Israel after the flesh, the natural 
descendants of Abraham and heirs of the 
promise, fell through unbelief and through 
failure to appreciate the goodness of God 
in the gift of his Son and in the blessings 
offered first to them through him. They 
preferred, instead, to pursue the course 
which their own pride and self-will dictated. 
Thus, as Esau, they profaned their birthright. 
(Heb. 12:16.) And so also many of the 
Gentiles, since favored with the call, have 
likewise fallen from this grace. 

Let those who appreciate their privileges 
in Christ take heed lest they also in some unguarded 
moment sell their privileges for the 
paltry recompenses of this present life. 



page 64 



ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



OUR DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:- 
Subjoined you will find list of subscribers, so 
that we may have the remainder of the sheet 
for personal chat. First allow us to send our 
most affectionate greeting, and to wish you all 
the joy of the season. But this, as you well 
know, is backed by our earnest prayers on your 
behalf, that you may not only be preserved 
from all evil but led into all truth. Truly, we 
need to bear each other up before the throne 
of grace in prayer, for the powers of evil are 
even now most malignant and manifest; and 
well need we take warning and comfort from 
our Father's message— "if possible, they shall 
deceive the very elect." Ah! thank him, we 
know that it is impossible; for he will never 
leave, never forsake; and "no man is able to 
pluck them out of my Father's hand." We are 
finding it a very trying time. The wheat is being 
sifted, and so, instead of increasing, our 
numbers are getting rather less; but this brings 
out a point that it is more and more needful 
we should keep to the front, and that is, real 
conversion and consecration, not to a particular 
work, but to Christ. This is forced upon 
us when we see some very eager for the "truth," 
and who seem most promising for a time; but 
the novelty wears off, the trials come and they 
stumble because they have not realized their 
greatest need; i.e., that they are only sinners 
at best, until they are wholly given up to and 
begotten again of Christ. Then, too, Spiritism 
is spreading so rapidly as to be almost a 
fashion, and the church nominal is most rapidly 
rushing to destruction. Here we thank 
God and you for the help received from 
TOWER, both on "Higher Criticism" and Parliament 
of Religions. 

But let us always be kept humble by remembering 
that we are acceptable only in Christ 
our Lord. I feel there is much danger of thinking 
that we are acceptable for our works' sake; 
and oh! I do pray, my dear Brother and Sister, 
that you, who have such a mighty responsibility 
upon you, may be kept from all evil. 

Brother Rogers will possibly tell you of my 
visit to and meeting him and the dear ones in 
London during my Christmas holiday. But I 
cannot help feeling uncomfortable and somewhat 
grieved that the meetings in London are 
likely to be more disputatious than is compatible 
with loving and gentle helpfulness. 



There are some such loving and dear souls 
amongst them; but some seem to manifest 
more of the contentious than the Christ-like 
Spirit. Perhaps it is that they are "freshmen." 
But we must pray the Lord to touch them, to 
search their hearts before them, to teach them 
and to keep them from divisions. 

The dear ones here send most loving greeting, 
and pray the Lord to keep your steps, and 
to bless you ever more and more abundantly. 

Ever yours in the Beloved, 

A. P. AND P. C. RILEY. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--I have felt very 
sorry that I could seemingly do so little, but 
God knows best. Now I am going to make a 
proposition to you. I own two forty-acre plots 
in Orange County, Florida. The town of 
Apopka lies between them, and there is a railroad 
depot near each. There are no improvements 
on either. Now, as I cannot do much 
any other way, if you will accept them for the 
Tract Fund, I thought you might sell them in 
five or ten-acre lots, and make more out of them 
than I could. Your Sister in Christ, 
MRS. M. TURNER. 

[We have accepted the Sister's kind donation, 
and now offer the land in plots of five 
acres each, to anyone desiring a Florida home. 
Price, $100. Five acres in Florida make a good 
sized orange grove.— W.T. Tract Society.] 



page 66 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1625 : page 66 

THE POPE AND THE BIBLE. 



THE wave of liberal sentiment which in this 

country lays irreverent hands upon every 

thing sacred, and which more and more tends 

toward bold and open infidelity, the denial of 

all divine inspiration of the Bible and the enthronement 

of Reason, has also recently found 

a voice within the pale of the church of Rome. 

A rector in the Catholic institute of Paris, 

Mgr. d'Hulst, has written a pamphlet teaching, 

in harmony with Dr. Briggs and those of 

his class, that the Bible as a whole is not an 

inspired book, but that it contains some inspired 

dogmas and moral precepts. 

The pamphlet was written in defense of doctrines 
already set forth by M. Loisy in the same 



institute. The stir which this public teaching 

of prominent Catholic authorities made, necessitated 

some prompt action on the part of 

the Pope, to whom other professors of theology 

were anxiously looking for some decision. 

And in consequence Leo has issued an encyclical, 

declaring the Bible to be inspired in 

whole and in detail— a verbal inspiration in 

the original languages. 

One cannot help remembering on reading 
such utterances the very different attitude of 
former popes toward the Bible, and how the 
hunting of heretics and the burning of Bibles 
were important features of papal policy a 
century or two ago. But now circumstances 
are changed: the Bible is in the hands of the 
people, and heretics are too numerous to persecute. 
But another fact has also become 
manifest; viz., that it is quite possible for men 
to reverently accept the Bible as a whole and 
as verbally inspired of God, and even to go 
through forms of Bible study, and still to reject 
or ignore its teachings, if only the mind 
be firmly fettered in a bondage to false 
creeds which pervert its solemn truths and 
make the Word of God seem to support false 
doctrines. 

Only so long as the mind can be thus held 
in slavery to priests and clerics can the Bible 
be of any use to the antichristian systems 
which claim its support. It was because the 
Papacy doubted its ability to effectually blind 
the eyes and fetter the consciences of men, that 
in the days of her power, she sought to conceal 
the book and to keep it in the sackcloth 
and ashes of dead languages. But, failing to 
do this, her present policy is to pose as the 
friend of the Bible and of Bible study. 

It is quite possible, however, that in the not 
far distant future the truths of the Bible, which 
now make the character of antichrist so manifest 
to the household of faith, will show to the 
world the enormity of her sins and her fitness 
for destruction; and that this book, which the 
"infallible" head of the papacy is now virtually 
forced to admit as inspired in every detail, 
will be seen to contain the most scathing denunciations 
of the whole antichristian system, 
and that it is really her death-warrant. 

R1626:page66 

MGR. SATOLLI PURCHASING CATHOLIC UNION. 



Father Kolasinski, some time ago, after a 
very sensational trial, was "unfrocked" and 
removed from the Roman Catholic priesthood, 
for insubordination and conduct unbecoming 
his office. Since then he has bestirred himself 
amongst the Polish Catholics, and has built 
"one of the finest churches in the West," 
furnished "with the finest organ in the city 
of Detroit," and other matters to correspond. 
He began preaching in it as an "Independent 
Church." An agent of Mgr. Satolli, ablegate of 
the Pope in the United States of America, recently 
visited Kolasinski; and, as a result of 
some bargain agreed upon, Father Kolasinski 
announced to his congregation on February 1 1 
that he would on next Sunday apologize in 
three languages before his congregation, and 
do a week's penance, and be received back to 
the priesthood. He has since done so. 



R1625 : page 67 

VOL. XV. MARCH 1, 1894. NO. 5. 

THE ANNUAL MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



THIS year, Thursday, April 19th, after six 
o'clock P.M., will mark the anniversary 
of our Lord's "Last Supper," which he gave 
as the memorial of his death on our behalf, 
saying, "This do in remembrance of me."— 
Luke 22:19. 

In previous issues of this magazine, we have 
given the evidence that the Last Supper was 
given us to take the place of the Jewish Paschal 
Supper, and to be celebrated at the corresponding 
time, yearly. As the Paschal lamb typified 
Christ, the Lamb of God, so its death was 
typical of his death, and therefore his death 
was upon the same day. We have shown, also, 
that the Jewish method of reckoning time, as 
beginning the day at six P.M., was so arranged 
that our Lord could institute the Last Supper 
upon the same night in which he was betrayed 
(1 Cor. 1 1:23)— the same day in which he died. 

As a Jew, under the Law Covenant, not yet 
supplanted by the New Covenant, it was the 
duty of our Lord to eat first of the typical 
lamb; and it was after that supper that he took 
bread and wine, as the symbols of his own flesh 
and blood, and instituted the Memorial Feast 
which we and all of his people since delight 



to celebrate. 

Taking the place of the typical lamb, our 
Lord could be crucified only upon the fourteenth 
day of the month Nisan; and the commemoration 
of his death, and the passing over 

thereby effected, taking the place of the commemoration 
of the Passover lamb and that 

typical passing over, it follows that the commemoration 
of the antitype should be an annual 
observance, as was the commemoration 
of the type. 

This we have seen was the custom of the 
early Church, which adopted for centuries the 
Jewish method of reckoning which we follow; 
viz., the evening, following the thirteenth of 
Nisan, which was the beginning of the fourteenth. 
This method of reckoning was afterward 
changed by the Church of Rome, although 
the thought and custom of a yearly commemoration 
of our Lord's death is still observed 
on "Good Friday" by the Church of Rome, 
the Greek Church, the Syrian Church and the 
English Church. 

Protestant Churches got the Romish doctrine 
of the Mass confounded with the Lord's 
Supper, whereas they have no correspondence 
(See Mass in M. DAWN, VOL. III. Pp.98- 101); 
and as a result they adopted various times and 
seasons, morning, noon and night, and monthly, 
bi-monthly and quarterly, seeing no reason 
for any particular date, and supposing that the 
Apostle's words, "as oft as ye do it," etc., 
Give full license to celebrate it at any time. 
On the contrary, we understand the Apostle 
to mean, Every time (yearly) that ye do this. 

Some dear Christian people have even fallen 
into the error of commemorating this feast 
every first day of the week; because they have 
not noticed what the supper means in connection 
with the type which it displaces; and because 
they erroneously think that they find a 
precedent for their course in the expression of 

R1625 : page 68 

the New Testament, "On the first day of the 
week, when the disciples were come together 
to break bread." This does indeed show that 
breaking of bread every first day was the custom 
of the early disciples; but it does not 
prove that the Memorial Supper is meant. 
Indeed, the fruit of the vine was as important 
as the bread in the memorial; but it is never 
mentioned in connection with these weekly 
meetings for breaking of bread and for prayers. 
These, on the contrary, celebrated, not our 



Lord's death, but his resurrection. They were 
remembrancers, not of the Last Supper, but 
of the "breaking of bread" on the day of our 
Lord's resurrection, when their eyes were 
opened and they knew him, and he vanished 
out of their sight. 

Had the Memorial Supper been meant, it 
surely would have been so stated. Like ourselves, 
the early disciples ate or brake bread 
every day: but they did not come together to 
do it except on the first day of the week, which 
celebrated our Lord's resurrection and not his 
death. 

A little investigation will convince any one 
that these weekly gatherings were customary 

R1626:page68 

with all Jews, who, however, met on the last 

or seventh day and on festivals, instead of on 

the first day of the week for their "social" 

meals. On this point let us quote from McClintock 

and Strong's Religious Cyclopedia, 

Vol. 8, page 68, merely enough to corroborate 

our statement above, as follows:— 

"In consequence of the vigorous laws about 
the observance of the Sabbath, it was enacted 
that no Israelite is to walk on the Sabbath beyond 
a certain distance, called a "Sabbath-day's 
journey," nor carry anything from one 
house to another. The Sadducees, or priestly 
party, who celebrated their meals on the Sabbath 
in different places, could go from one 
to another, and carry to and fro anything they 
liked, because they regarded these meals as 
constituting part of their priestly and sacrificial 
service, which set aside the sanctity of the 
Sabbath. But the Pharisees, who made their 
Sabbatic repast resemble THE PRIESTLY SOCIAL 
MEALS, had to encounter difficulties arising 
from the vigorous Sabbatic laws." 

THE CELEBRATION. 



Simplicity should combine with reverence 
in all of our worship; and our Lord's example 
in respect to this memorial speaks of solemnity 
combined with simplicity and reverence. 

On Thursday evening after six o'clock, April 
1 9th, therefore, let as many as love the Redeemer 
and have pledged themselves to be his 
followers in faith and practice, celebrate his 
death— "for our sins; and not for ours only, 
but also for the sins of the whole world." 



Meet with all of like precious faith convenient 
to you, who would like to meet and celebrate 
this, the greatest event of history. It is to be 
a gathering of professedly consecrated believers 
in the Redeemer; but if others come in making 
such profession reject them not: remember 
that Judas met with the Lord and the other 
eleven. Remember, too, that the greatest among 
you is servant of all, who washes the feet; i.e., 
Performs even the humblest service for the 
cleansing of God's people from the defilements 
of earth. 

The emblems used by our Lord were unleavened 
"bread" and "fruit of the vine." 
Unleavened cakes can generally be had of some 
Jewish neighbors for a few cents; if not, water 
crackers are practically the same thing. It is 
probable that our Lord used a "light" wine; 
but he has merely said, "fruit of the vine": 
hence we may with propriety use unfermented 
grape juice or raisin-juice— from raisins stewed 
in water. This is as truly fruit of the vine as 
intoxicating wine would be. And we believe 
that our Lord would approve it, seeing how 
many are now addicted to the abuse of liquor, 
and might be misled by even a taste of such 
wines as are generally obtainable. 

In our April 1st issue we will make a few remarks 
upon the meaning of these symbols. 

THE ALLEGHENY MEMORIAL SERVICE. 



The service here will be held, as usual, in 
Bible House chapel, No. 58 Arch St., at 7.30 
O'clock P.M. All who trust in our Lord Jesus' 
death as their ransom, and who are fully consecrated 
to him, will be made very welcome. 
But we extend no special invitation to visitors 

R1626:page69 

from a distance this year; nor are there any 
arrangements for other than our usual Sunday 
services, except as above mentioned. If there 
be any solitary ones in near-by towns, we shall 
be glad to have them attend with us; but 
where there are even two or three who can 
unite in this memorial, our suggestion is that 
they had best meet together at home. 

On previous occasions of conventions here, 
we have always been rather painfully aware of 
the fact that the various local gatherings of believers 
were interfered with and impaired by 
the absence of those who were most needed. 



This year we would like to see this matter quite 
reversed; and therefore advise that, wherever 
even two or three can meet together, they do 
so; and that even the solitary ones, if within 
reach of a larger and a smaller circle of believers, 
prefer to give their presence to the 
smaller rather than the larger gathering, and 
thus encourage and help those who need their 
presence most. Those who thus strive to do 
good to others will be the more blest themselves. 

We request that a Postal Card Report from 
each little group celebrating this Memorial be 
made out by the one who officiates on the occasion, 
and sent to the TOWER office the next 
day. 



R1626:page69 

THE UNJUST STEWARD. 

--LUKE 16:1-8.-- 



THIS parable furnishes a text for a discourse 
on the claims of God and Mammon upon 
Christians. (Verses 9-16.) The parable is plain, 
if it be borne in mind that stewards in olden 
times had much greater power and authority 
committed to them than now. They had all the 
authority of the master himself to make and 
to settle accounts. The steward of this narrative, 
when informed that he was about to 
lose his situation, used the power still vested 
in him to make personal friends out of his 
master's debtors, by treating them leniently. 
When the master of this worldly-wise steward 
heard of his course, he commended it as a 
stroke of worldly wisdom and prudence. Nor 
are we sure that the steward's course was one 
working injury to his employer's real interests: 
in view of the disproportionate reductions of 
twenty per cent on one account and fifty per 
cent on the other, it seems not improbable 
that the steward saw that the one never could 
pay more than fifty per cent of his debt, nor 
the other more than eighty per cent of his. 

This illustration of worldly wisdom or prudent 
thought for his own interests in the future 
was our Lord's text for a little discourse to his 
disciples. They were each stewards of certain 
talents, opportunities, money, etc. Two masters 
claimed their allegiance; viz., Sin and 
Righteousness, and they must choose to which 



they would be loyal; for they could not serve 
both. "Ye cannot serve God and Mammon." 

Sin claimed them and all of Adam's race, 
with all their talents, as his servants, since all 
had been "sold under [captivity to] Sin." 
They knew, however, that Sin had no just, no 
true right of control, but merely one of force: 
hence in every way that they could they had a 
right and privilege to divert their talents from 
the service of Sin and to devote them to the 
good of others. Wealth and influence in the 
present time are properly reckoned as the 
mammon of Sin. Sin, at present the master of 
the world, is represented as having control, 
not only of the people (Rom. 6:12,14,17,18,22,23; 
7:14), but also of all the wealth-talents 
of the present; so that he claims each individual 
to be merely his steward, and demands that he 
use his mammon in his interest, else he will 
dispossess him. But our Lord taught that allegiance 
really belonged to another Master, even 
God, and that they should not serve Sin; that 
our Lord, as God's representative, was about 
to set up God's Kingdom, and overthrow Sin- 
binding the strong Master of the present time 
and spoiling his arrangements. (Matt. 12:29; 
Mark 3:27.) In view of this knowledge, our 
Lord said to his disciples:— 

"I say unto you, Make to yourselves friends 
out of [or by means of] the mammon of unrighteousness 
[the earthly wealth or valuables 
under your control now, which at one time 

R1626:page70 

were in whole or in part controlled by Sin, 
your long-time task-master]; that when ye fail 
[when the present life ends], they may receive 
you into lasting habitations," into heavenly 
conditions— the using of our talents, once active 
in Sin's service, in the Lord's service being 
counted as laying up treasures in heaven. 

This is the wise, proper course, whether you 
have little of earthly riches— honor, money, 
talent— or whether you have much; for "he 
that is faithful in that which is least is faithful 
also in much: and [knowing to which master 
his allegiance and talents really belong] he that 
is unjust in the least is unjust also in much." 

If, to please "the prince of this world" and 
to be in harmony with those who serve him, you 
own Sin as your master and selfishly serve him, 
using time and talents as his steward, for the 
short time of the present life, and for the small 
advantages which such a course would bring 



R1627:page70 

you, your unfaithfulness in these respects would 
prove you unworthy of the share promised to 
you in real riches of the real kingdom soon to 
be set up.-Rom. 6:14-18. 

As those who have deserted the service of 
Sin the Usurper, and who have consecrated 
their all to God, you have been appointed by 
him stewards of those consecrated talents, with 
a promise that if faithful he will in the world 
to come make you more than stewards— kings 
and priests unto God. But if you prove unfaithful 
to your stewardship, if you love and 
serve mammon [wealth, either honor, money 
or other wealth of this world, highly esteemed 
by all natural men], can you hope that God 
will give you the true Kingdom riches which 
are yours conditionally? Be assured, "Ye cannot 
serve God and Mammon." 

This was our Lord's discourse to his disciples 
respecting their proper course in life as 
stewards of the manifold grace of God. "And 
the Pharisees who were covetous [who dearly 
loved the riches and honors of this present 
time] heard all these things; and they derided 
[ridiculed] him. And he said unto them, Ye 
are they which justify yourselves before men 
[you succeed in getting men to think you very 
holy]; but God knoweth your hearts [that 
much that you do is merely of outward show, 
mock humility and pretended self-denials]: 
for that which is highly esteemed among men 
[which deceives the natural man, which he 
thinks very praiseworthy] is abomination in 
the sight of God."-Luke 16:14,15. 

The Law and the Prophets were until John, 
—but now a new dispensation is being ushered 
in; and if you were wise you would see the 
change at hand and begin to act accordingly. 
Now the Kingdom of God is preached, and 
every man desires to get into it. You therefore 
should begin at once to so dispose of the 
stewardship yet in your hands that you might 
at least be on favorable terms with those who 
shall so soon possess the power of the Kingdom. 
This, to the Jews, was not a case of deserting 
the Law Covenant to which they were married; 
the Law Covenant was fulfilled, died a natural 
death, which permitted them to give their allegiance 
to Christ and the New Covenant.— 
Verse 18; Rom. 7:4. 



R1627:page70 



APPLYING TRUTH TO ONE'S SELF. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I cannot tell you 
how highly I have appreciated the WATCH 
TOWER of 1893. I have derived much spiritual 
benefit from its study. Every number has 
been full of rich things— things which should 
be treasured up in the hearts of those who are 
running for the great prize and striving to 
make their calling and election sure. 

Your aim has been to make the TOWER readers 
better men and women— more like our 
blessed Redeemer and Lord, and also to protect 
them from the snares of the adversary. 

Your articles, From Glory to Glory, Taking 
God's Name in Vain, Unequally Yoked, and 
others of a similar character, must have had a 
transforming power over the truly consecrated 
—those who are anxious to have the Lord's 
will done in them— while your various articles 
on the Ransom and Pulpit Infidelity have 
been and will be a source of protection to those 
who are truly the Lord's (in this evil day). 
I have found out that the TOWERS have not to 
be read, merely, in order to be appreciated, 
but they have to be studied. While away from 

R1627:page71 

home I copied parts of various articles from 
the TOWER and sent them to Sister McPhail to 
copy and return to me. I changed all the pronouns 
to the first person singular. I consider 
this an excellent way to study the TOWER, and 
would recommend it highly to all its readers. 
It helps to impress it upon the memory, and 
it gives one the power to tell what he knows or 
what he has copied. I know that it has been 
of great benefit to me. 

I enclose you parts of two articles which will 
explain what I mean. Remember me kindly 
to Sister Russell and all of your household, and 
may the Lord bless you in all your efforts to 
"send out the light and the truth." 

Your brother, in Christ, M. L. McPHAIL. 

The articles referred to follow. 

TO BE ESTABLISHED IN THE PRESENT 
TRUTH SIGNIFIES 

That I have carefully studied and thoroughly 
proved it by the law and the testimony (Isa. 8:20), 



and 

That as a consequence I am convinced of its 
verity, so 

That my faith is steadfast and immovable. 
--1 Peter 5:9; 1 Cor. 15:58. 

That I know in whom I have believed. -- 
2 Tim. 1:12. 

That I have tasted and seen that the Lord is 
good.-Psa. 34:8. 

That I have partaken of the sweets of fellowship 
with him.— 1 John 1:3-7. 

That I have partaken of his spirit of meekness, 
faith and godliness to such an extent as 
to be led into a joyful realization of the fulness 
of his grace as manifested in the wonderful, divine 
"plan of the ages."-John 14:26; 16:12-15; 
1 Cor. 2:10-16. 

That I have been permitted to see not only 
the various features of that plan,— The Worlds 
and Ages, Permission of Evil, Ransom, Restitution, 
Kingdom of God with its Human and 
Divine Phases, Second Death, Great Time of 
Trouble, Times and Seasons, Chronology, Harvest 
and its Work, etc., but also the necessity 
and reasonableness of its various measures in 
order to the full accomplishment of its glorious 
outcome in the fulness of the appointed times. 

This is what it is to be established in the 
present truth. It is indeed a most blessed condition, 
bringing with it such peace and joy as 
the world can neither give nor take away. 

But though I be thus established in the 
present truth, there are quite a number of 

THINGS WHICH I MUST REMEMBER. 

That my election to the high position to 
which I am called is not yet made sure— the 
race for the prize of my high calling is still 
before me. 

That I am yet in the enemy's country, surrounded 
by many subtle and powerful foes. 

That if I would be successful I must fight 
the good fight of FAITH. 

That the weapons of my warfare are not 
carnal, but (God's truth is) mighty to the 
pulling down of the strongholds of error, superstition 
and inbred sin.— 2 Cor. 10:4. 

That I wrestle not with flesh and blood, but 
against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against 
spiritual wickedness in high places."— 
Eph. 6:12. 

That it is in view of the warfare before me— 
the subtlety of my temptations, the weaknesses 
of the flesh— that the faithful Peter urges all 



diligence in the cultivation of the Christian 
graces, and a continual calling to remembrance 
of the precious truths I have learned— that I 
may be strengthened for the conflict, and thereby 
able to make my calling and election sure. 

That faith is a good thing (without which I 
cannot please God, I cannot be justified, I 
cannot maintain my justification or have access 
into the additional favor, I cannot be an overcomer); 
yet faith without virtuous works is 
dead; and to hold the truth in unrighteousness 
is worse than never to have received it. 

That the truth is given to me for its sanctifying 
effect upon my heart and life— it should 
have free course and be glorified— its precious 
fruits should appear more and more from day 
to day. 

That I must add to my faith, VIRTUE- 
true excellence of character that will mark me 
as separated from the world and its spirit. 

That in me the world should see those moral 
qualities which they must approve— however 
they may oppose (the objects of) my faith. 

That I must add sterling honesty, truth and 
fair dealing in all business relations; moral 
integrity in all social relations; manifestly 
clean hands and a pure heart, and a bridled 
tongue that works no ill to a neighbor. 

That all of these the world has a right to 
expect from me and all others who call themselves 
Christians; and that all of these are 
indispensable features of that virtuous character 
which must be added to my faith. 

That if my hands be clean, they will not 
dabble in anything that is not virtuous;— they 
will have nothing to do with unrighteous 
schemes or projects in business. 

That if my heart be pure, it will not devise 
evil things, or harbor evil thoughts, or plot 
mischief. 

R1627 : page 72 

That if my tongue be bridled, it will not be 
given to evil-speaking, but will hold its peace 
when it cannot speak well and wisely. 

That the promptings of virtue go further 
than merely these negative features which refuse 
to do anything which would work ill to a 
neighbor; they incite not only to passive, but 
also to active goodness— in benevolent charity 
which seeks to alleviate suffering; to sympathize 
with sorrow; to comfort those in distress, 
and to elevate and bless others; to assist "all 
men as" I "have opportunity." 

That I must gain a KNOWLEDGE of 



God's character in order that I may the more 
thoroughly imitate it, and of his truth, that 
I may more fully conform to its teachings. 

That I must exercise TEMPERANCE--or 
self-control— in all things, letting my moderation 
be known unto all men, and taking care 

R1628:page72 

not to be hasty, hot-tempered, rash or thoughtless; 
but endeavoring to be evenly balanced, 
thoughtful and considerate. 

That my whole manner should be characterized 
by that carefulness which would indicate 
that I am ever mindful of the Lord's pleasure, 
of my responsibility to him as his representative, 
and of my influence upon my fellow-men 
to see that it always be for good, never for evil. 

That I must let "PATIENCE have her 
perfect work, that I may be perfect and entire, 
wanting nothing." 

That this grace smooths the way for every 
other, because all must be acquired under the 
process of patient and continuous self-discipline; 
and that not a step of progress can be 
gained without the exercise of this grace. 

That not one of the graces more beautifully 
adorns the Christian character, wins the approval 
of the world's conscience or glorifies 
the God of all grace, whose truth inspires it. 

That it is long-suffering meekness earnestly 
striving to stem the tide of human imperfection 
and weakness, and endeavoring with painstaking 
care to regain the divine likeness. 

That it is slow to wrath and plenteous in 
mercy; quick to perceive the paths of truth 
and righteousness and prompt to walk in them; 
mindful of its own imperfections, and sympathetic 
with the imperfections and shortcomings 
of others. 

That I must add to "patience GODLINESS" 
—I must carefully study and imitate 
the divine character as presented in the Word. 

That I must exercise BROTHERLY 
KINDNESS towards my fellowman. 

That I must add to brotherly kindness 
LOVE. 

That kindness may be manifested where but 
little love exists toward the subject of such 
kindness; but I cannot long persevere in such 
acts of kindness before a sympathetic interest 
is awakened; and by and by that interest, continually 
exercised, deepens into love, and even 
though the subject may be unlovely in character 
the love of sympathy for the fallen and 
the degraded grows, until it becomes tender 



and solicitous and akin to that of a parent for 
an erring son. 

That Peter describes a most admirable character 
—one which cannot be acquired in a day, nor a 
year, but the whole life must be devoted to it. 

That day by day, if I am faithful, I will be 
able to realize a measure of growth in grace 
and development of Christian character. 

That it is not enough that I know the truth 
—nor should I be contented to hold it in unrighteousness. 
I must see to it that the truth is 
having its legitimate and designed effect upon 
the character. 

That if I receive the truth into a good and 
honest heart, I have the assurance of the Apostle 
that I shall never fall, and that in due time 
I shall be received into the Kingdom of my 
Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. 

That I should see the necessity of ever keeping 
the instructions and precepts of the Lord 
fresh in my mind, and of drinking deep into 
their inspiring spirit— although I am already 
established in the faith. 

That to be established in the faith is one 
thing, and to be established in Christian character 
and in all the graces of the spirit is quite 
another. 

In claiming to be a divinely recognized child 
of God and a follower of his dear Son, I stand 
before the world as God's representative; and, 
presumably, all my words and actions are in 
harmony with his indwelling Spirit. 

I stand as a guide-post in the midst of the 
world's dark and uncertain way; and, if I am 
not true to my profession, I am a deceitful 
sign-board, causing the inquirer to lose the 
right way and to stumble into many a snare. 
Therefore, to take the name of God, claiming 
to be his son, a Christian, a follower of Christ, 
without a fixed determination and careful effort 
to fairly represent him, is a sin against God of 
which I will not be held guiltless! 

I realize that to undertake the Christian life 
is to engage in a great warfare against iniquity; 
for, though the grace of God abounds to 
me through Christ to such an extent that my 
imperfections and short-comings are not imputed 
to me, but robed in Christ's imputed 
righteousness I am reckoned holy and acceptable 
to God, I am not, says the Apostle (Rom. 6:1,2), 

R1628:page73 

to continue in sin that grace may 

abound; for by my covenant with God I have 

declared myself dead to sin and that I have 



no longer any desire to live therein. But having 

made such a covenant with God and having 

taken upon myself his holy name, if I continue 

in sin, or cease to strive against sin, I am 

proving false to my profession. (Rom. 6:1,2,11,12.) 

This means a great deal. It means 

a constant warfare against the easily besetting 

sins of my old nature; and the struggle will 

be long and constant until the power of sin is 

broken; and then only constant vigilance will 

keep it down. 

If I be true to my profession, I will daily 
strive to realize an increasing mastery over sin 
in myself, and will be able from time to time 
to distinguish some degree of advancement in 
this direction. I will grow more like Christ- 
more self-possessed, more meek and gentle, 
more disciplined and refined, more temperate 
in all things, and more fully possessed of the 
mind that was in Christ Jesus. My old temper 
and unlovely disposition will disappear, and my 
new mind will assert its presence and power. 
And thus the silent example of a holy life will 
reflect honor upon that holy name which it is 
my privilege to bear and to represent before 
the world, as a living epistle, known and 
read of all men with whom I come in contact. 

1 realize that the formation of such a noble 
and pure character is the legitimate result of 
the reception of divine truth into a good and 
honest heart. Or, rather, such is the transforming 
power of divine truth upon the whole 
character, when it is heartily received and fully 
submitted to. "Sanctify them through thy 
truth: thy word is truth," was the Lord's petition 
on the Church's behalf; and may I not 

fall into the error of some, of presuming that 
the sanctifying work can go on better without 
the truth than with it?— 2 Peter 1:4; 1 John 3:3; 
John 15:3; 17:17; Eph. 5:26; Rom. 12:2; 

2 Cor. 3:18; 7:1; Psa. 19:7-14; 1 Tim. 4:16. 

I need the instruction and guidance and inspiration 
of the truth for holy living; and our 
Lord's words imply that all the truth that is 
necessary to this end is in the Word of God, 
and that, consequently, I am not to look for 
any further revelations through visions or 
dreams or imaginations of myself or others. 
The Word of God, says the Apostle (2 Tim. 3:16,17), 
is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, 
for correction, for instruction in righteousness 
(Heb. 4: 12), that the man of God 
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all 
good works. It reveals to me the spirit, mind 
or disposition of God, and exhorts me to let 
the same mind dwell richly in me; and in conjunction 



with the study of the mind of God as 
revealed in his Word and communion with him 
in prayer, I receive the blessed influences of 
his spirit, which brings me more and more into 
conformity with his perfect will. I realize 
that to live a holy life is not to do some great 
and wonderful things: it is only to live from 
day to day a life of quiet unostentatious conformity 
to the will of God— of secret communion 
with him in my closet, devotions and 
daily walk, and of jealous activity to the extent 
of my ability and opportunity in his service. As 
I have named the name of Christ (2 Tim. 2: 19), 
it is my determination— God helping me— to 
depart (more and more) from iniquity and 
apply my heart unto instruction, confident that 
I shall be led of God into green pastures and 
beside still waters: my table will be richly and 
bountifully spread, and my cup of blessing 
and joy and gladness will overflow; while the 
wrath of God will in due time be revealed 
against all who take his hallowed name in vain, 
however they may band themselves together, 
and however loudly they may proclaim themselves 
heaven's appointed messengers. 



R1628:page73 

PERSONAL LIBERTY,-ITS RESPONSIBILITY. 



LIBERTY always increases responsibility. 
Each consecrated believer has the full 
liberty to use his consecrated talents in the 
Lord's service; but each should see to it 
that he does not misuse this liberty. Some 
are naturally inclined to undervalue their 
own abilities, and hence fail to be so useful 
servants of the truth as they might be. Others 
overestimate their natural talents, and waste 
valuable opportunities in trying to do things 
for which they have little or no talent; and 
neglect the exercise of other talents which 
they really do possess. 

"Use not your liberty for an occasion of 
the flesh"— to cultivate pride and vainglory 
in yourself or in others. Let a man "think 
[of himself] soberly, according as God hath 
dealt out to every man the measure of faith." 
"All things are lawful for me [permitted by 
the loose rein of Christ's commands], but 
all things are not expedient: all things are 
lawful for me, but all things edify not." 



R1628:page74 

"Having then gifts differing, according to 

the grace given unto us"— whether our gift 

be a qualification for prophecy, serving, 

teaching, exhorting, giving of means, or presiding, 

let us use to our best ability the gift 

or gifts possessed; rather than fail by trying 

to use other gifts not granted to us;— 

"In honor preferring one another,"— "Mind 

not high things,"— "Be not wise in your 

own conceits."— Rom. 12:3-16; 1 Cor. 10:23. 

R1629:page74 

These Scriptural injunctions apply to 
everything we may do, or endeavor to do, in 
the Lord's service. Those who have the 
money talent should not only use it "with 
simplicity" (without ostentation), but they 
should use it with wisdom. It should not 
go to assist in preaching either slight errors 
or gross ones, if they know it— neither by 
assisting in paying the expenses of meetings, 
nor in paying publishing expenses. And 
each one should know, directly or indirectly, 
what he is assisting to promulgate as 
truth. If you have read and failed to comprehend 
a publication, do not suppose your 
mind incapable of grasping anything so 
deep and complex, and then proceed to circulate 
it among others; but conclude that if 
you have not the mental capacity to understand 
it, your safest plan will be not to run 
the risk of choking anyone else with it. 
"Whatever is not of faith is sin," applies to 
this as well as to other matters. 

These criticisms apply to WATCH TOWER 
publications as well as to others. Prove by 
God's Word all that you receive from this 
office. (1) See if it squares with the doctrine 
of the ransom: if it does not, you need 
go no further with the proving. (2) If it 
is in accord with that foundation of the 
gospel, proceed to examine it in the light 
of all the Scriptures. (3) If it stands these 
tests receive it and hold it fast, as being 
from God; and (4) circulate it wherever 
you can. (5) But if ever you get from us 
either tract or paper which you do not find 
in harmony with the Scriptures, surely let 
us know wherein it disagrees, and do not 
circulate it. 

This advice in no way conflicts with our 
Lord's words in Mark (9:39), when, in reply 



to the disciples' statement that they had 
forbidden some one to cast our devils because 
he followed not with them, he said, 
"Forbid him not." It is not for us to forbid 
anyone the exercise of his own talents 
according to his own wisdom. But if any 
one exercise his talents in a manner which 
we consider unwise or wholly or partially 
erroneous, it is our duty not to render any 
assistance to the unwise course. It is one 
thing to forbid, and to use sword and fagot 
to restrain, and quite another thing to leave 
them to themselves and to exercise your 
own talents according to your own judgment 
of the Lord's will. Some who are only 
babes in the present truth send in manuscript 
for publication in the TOWER and as 
tracts. With childlike simplicity they sometimes 
remark that their articles, etc., are 
chiefly extracts from the DAWN and TOWER. 
We have but one motive in publishing— 
namely, to disseminate the truth, as the 
Editor understands the Word of God to teach 
it. Let others publish what they please, and 
how they please; we forbid them not, and 
we assist them not if they follow not the 
lines of truth as we have been guided of the 
Lord to see them, and are seeking to follow 
them. Nevertheless, to guard against the 
rejection of truth from other quarters, if the 
Lord shall choose to send it, we have appointed 
a committee of three, consisting of 
the Associate Editor and two others, to examine 
every article sent in for publication. 
Upon the recommendation of any two of 
that committee the Editor will publish any 
manuscript sent in;— even though he should 
think it necessary to review and contradict 
the conclusions reached. It is the truth, 
and the truth only, that we desire to publish 
and circulate, and that in the best form 
of statement known to us. Take it kindly, 
therefore, if your articles are oftenest rejected; 
and know nevertheless of our love 
and sympathy and appreciation of your desires 
and efforts. 

Some of the dear friends while desiring 
to do good are in danger of doing the reverse, 
by expecting that MILLENNIAL DAWN 
colporteurs have all the gifts and talents 
necessary for the public expounding of the 
truth, and therefore encouraging some to 
do so who have not those talents. This is 
a serious mistake which has already drawn 
some discredit upon the truths we all love 
to honor. The leaven of pride and ambition 



is perhaps not yet fully purged out of 
any, but is merely kept in subjection by 
grace; and all require help to overcome it 
and to purge it out, rather than suggestions, 
etc., which might develop it. Let us consider 
one another to provoke to love and 
good works. If you find a humble one with 
ability, encourage him in its exercise; but 

R1629:page75 

if he be not humble minded encourage him 
not, even though he have the ability; for the 
higher you push him the greater will be his 
fall; because "Pride goeth before destruction, 
and a haughty spirit before a fall." — 
Prov. 16:18. 

None love or appreciate the Colporteurs 
and the work they are doing for the Lord 
and his sheep in the spread of the truth 
more than do we. But none more than we 
realize the danger to which some of them 
are exposed by dear Brethren and Sisters 
who, meeting them, expect that they are 
Masters in Israel and able expounders of 
the Word. In endeavoring to meet this expectation 
some stumble over supposed types, 
and some over parables and over symbols 
of Revelation, and in general, over "questions 
to no profit, but to the subverting of 
the hearer." Read 2 Tim. 2:14-21. 

Of course the abilities or talents of God's 
servants differ; and it is proper that we 
should encourage such as have talents to 
use the best they possess in the most useful 
manner; but great care should be exercised 
to encourage only the humble, and then only 
in the exercise of talents or gifts possessed, 
and not in grasping for gifts with which 
they are not endowed. Our experience 
surely confirms the Lord's Word, that Not 
many great or learned or wise hath God 
chosen— now, nor at any time. Surely our 
Lord's leading and blessing seem to have 
accompanied the circulation of the printed 
truth in a remarkable degree, in the present 
harvest: Had he desired that the work 
be carried on in another way, he would 
have raised up more possessing the requisite 
abilities. 

The Lord's blessing has wonderfully attended 
the colporteur work; so that through this 
agency over half a million volumes of the 
DAWN series are in the hands of the people, 
each preaching sixteen sermons on the Bible 
over and over again, and yielding greater and 



more lasting results than any public speaking. 
But the tendency we here mention (far more 
than the stringency of the times) has recently 
caused a great slackening of the colporteur 
work. Some of the ablest "harvesters" are 
doing less than one-tenth what they formerly 
did. And this in turn puts them back in their 
accounts with the TOWER office, so that at present 
the indebtedness of Colporteurs amounts 
to about seven thousand dollars, and causes 
serious inconvenience at a time when it is 
difficult to borrow money at a high rate of interest. 
This latter, however, is a secondary 
matter. We are glad to be able to give credit 
to all who need it, and whose time and energy 
are being expended in the work in the manner 
for which they have shown that they have the 
necessary gift or talents. 

If we thought this to be a leading of Divine 
Providence, pointing us to a change of methods, 
we should at once fall into line with it and cooperate. 
But we do not so view it. We believe, 
on the contrary, that it is but another 
of Satan's delusions and snares by which he 
would hinder the work and injure the harvest 
laborers. If we knew of any better publications 
for presenting the truth than those of the 
Tower Tract Society, we would surely discontinue 
present publications and put our energy 
upon those. But so long as you and we 
know of no other publications in any degree 
entering the field of present truth and standing 
fast upon the one foundation— the ransom 
—we cannot doubt that this agency, so far 
used, should continue to be used, with all of 
our united energies, until the Lord shall say 
"Well done, thou good and faithful servant: 
...enter thou into the joy of thy Lord," or 
until we see some better way and are sure it is 
the Lord's way. On the contrary, the Lord 
is continually sending out new laborers, and 
opening the way for translations of M. DAWN 
into other languages. 

Since Christmas a Baptist Brother has received 
the truth, and is working at his trade 
and laying by the money needful to defray his 
expenses to New Zealand, where he hopes to 
spread the truth. And we have a proposition 
from two others to go to Australia. 

All who are in agreement with the above sentiments 
should cast their influence by word and 
deed with their judgment. But let none misunderstand 
the loving motive which prompts 
you. Speak the truth in love (Eph. 4: 15); 
"others save with fear, pulling them out of the 
fire. "-Jude 21-23. 



To those possessed of fewer or humbler talents 
than some others, and who are diligently 
and faithfully using such as they do possess, 
we would suggest that the time is not far distant 
when all the faithful will be crowned with 
the perfect abilities which will be common to 
all who shall become partakers of the divine 
nature. Meantime, each should use what talents 
he has to the best of his ability; assured 
that the faithful over one or two talents will 
receive the same blessed plaudit as the faithful 
with five talents— "Well done, thou good and 
faithful servant:... enter thou into the joy 
of thy Lord." 



page 76 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1629:page76 
JACOB AT BETHEL. 



I. QUAR., LESSON X., MAR. 11, GEN. 28: 10-22. 

Golden Text— "Behold, I am with thee, and will keep 
thee."-Gen. 28:15. 

VERSES 10,1 1. Because of his faith in 
the promises of God and his appreciation 
of them, Jacob now undertook a long and 
lonely journey on foot, and unaccompanied, 
that he might escape the murderous wrath 
of his brother. And in so doing he was 
leaving behind him and practically abandoning 
the earthly inheritance of flocks and 
herds, the wealth of his father Isaac, to 

R1630:page76 

Esau his brother, while he went forth empty-handed, 

with nothing but his staff. But he 

had what he appreciated more than all else, 



the blessed inheritance of the Abrahamic 
covenant, whose fulfilment could not be 
reasonably expected until the city for which 
Abraham looked (Heb. 11:10, the Kingdom 
of God) should be established in the 
earth. He evidently did not expect temporal 
blessings, and he actually forsook them; 
but while he sought first the Kingdom of 
God and its righteousness, all needful temporal 
blessings, and more, were added. 

VERSES 12-15. Here is sufficient evidence 
of the correctness of our estimate of 
Jacob's character, as presented in our last 
lesson. Jacob was neither condemned nor 
repudiated by God. On the contrary, his 
faith and his appreciation of God's promise 
made him beloved of God; and now, as he 
was a wanderer from home and family for 
the sake of his trust in God's promises, God 
went with him on his lonely journey; and this 
confirmation of the original covenant must 
have been most refreshing and strengthening 
to him. Truly, "If God be for us, who 
can be against us?"— Rom. 8:31. 

A comparison of verse 14 with chap. 22:17 
will show that while the Abrahamic 
covenant was to have a double fulfilment- 
first, in a literal sense to him and his posterity; 
and, second, in a spiritual sense to the 
spiritual children of God of whom Abraham 
was a type (Rom. 4:17— margin), and 
who are therefore called the children of 
Abraham— this covenant makes mention 
only of the literal fulfilment which is to be 
realized by Jacob and his descendants— 
"Israel after the flesh"— as well as by Abraham 
and Isaac and all the prophets who shall 
constitute the earthly phase of the Kingdom 
of God.-See MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
VOL. I., Chap. xiv. 

The promise to Abraham in part was, "I 
will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, 
and as the sand which is upon the sea 
shore," which language, in the light of subsequent 
revelations of the Apostles, is seen 
to signify both a spiritual and an earthly 
seed, the former being Christ and his body, 
the Gospel Church (Gal. 3:16,29), and the 
latter, the literal descendants of Abraham 
and Jacob— "Israel after the flesh." And in 
this seed of Abraham and posterity of Jacob, 
in both the literal and spiritual senses, all 
the families of the earth shall be blessed. 
The two phases of the Kingdom will cooperate 
in the glorious and blessed work of 
the restitution of all things, foretold by the 



mouth of all the holy prophets since the 
world began. —Acts 3:19-21. 

VERSE 15 was the blessed assurance to 
Jacob of that which is now very shortly to 
be brought to pass, and which is even now 
beginning to be fulfilled. It signifies the 
regathering of Israel— often called Jacob; 
see Rom. 1 1:26— to the land of promise. It 
signifies not only their regathering out from 
among all the nations whither they have 
been scattered (Ezek. 11:17; 20:34,41; 28:25), 
but also their coming out of their 
graves. (Ezek. 37:12-14.) Consequently, 
at the appointed time (See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. II.), we expect that Abraham 
and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets and 
all Israel will be regathered from "the land 
of the enemy"— the grave, and from among 
all nations whither they have been scattered, 
and firmly planted in the land which God 
sware unto Abraham and unto Isaac and 
unto Jacob. We expect all this and much 
more when the city is established for which 
Abraham looked, and unto the promise of 
which all the ancient worthies had respect. 
-See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III. 

VERSES 16-19. Jacob's reverent appreciation 
of the Lord's communion with him 
in the dream is commendable. Wherever 
God communes with his people the place 
becomes a sanctuary— Bethel, or house of 

R1630:page77 

God. Now the Lord speaks to us through 
his Word, and we speak to him in prayer; 

"And wheresoe'er God's people meet 
There they may find the mercy seat: 
Where'er they seek him, he is found, 
And every place is hallowed ground." 

VERSES 20-22. A realization of God's 
favor, instead of making Jacob arrogant and 
haughty, as less noble natures are often affected, 
led him in humility to a grateful 
consecration of himself to God, and to a 
sense of his own unworthiness. The word 
"if" in this verse might more properly 
be substituted by the words since, or inasmuch 
as, because Jacob is not here introducing 
a condition with God, but is expressing 
his acceptance of God's promise (of verse 15) 
to do these things. Then note how 
moderate were Jacob's desires for temporal 
blessings. All he craved for the present 



life were the simple necessaries of existence, 
while he solemnly obligated himself to tax 
all that he might in future acquire at the rate 
of 10 per cent, for the Lord's special service. 
And there he set up a memorial pillar that 
that place should ever thereafter be to him 
a sacred place of worship and a reminder 
of the goodness of God, of his covenant 
and of the obligations which he had assumed 
as a thank-offering to the Lord. 

This grateful consecration on Jacob's part 
was a voluntary offering, not from constraint, 
but from love and gratitude. And 
in the course of all the ancient worthies 
who shall inherit the earthly phase of the 
Kingdom we see the same spirit of grateful 
sacrifice, which is only excelled by that of 
our Lord Jesus and those who closely follow 
in his footsteps, freely consecrating and 
actually sacrificing, not only one tenth, but 
all that they have— even unto death— that 
they may thereby accomplish the work 
which God has given them to do, and prove 
their worthiness of the covenant blessings 
to the spiritual house of Israel and seed of 
Abraham. 

Those who have thus solemnly covenanted 
to present themselves as living sacrifices 
together with Christ, that thereby they may 
be heirs together with him of the spiritual 
blessings vouchsafed in this Abrahamic 
covenant, would do well to mark with what 
faithfulness the heirs of the earthly inheritance 
paid their vows unto the Most High. 
Mark also how thoroughly they were tested, 
and how bravely they stood the tests 
applied; and from their noble examples let 
us take courage while we run our race, inspired 
by the exceeding great and precious 
promises hidden for us also in that Abrahamic 
covenant. If Jacob asked no more 
than the actual necessities for the present 
life, surely we may be satisfied with nothing 
more; while we look for a still more 
glorious inheritance in the promised time 
of blessing. "Having food and raiment, 
let us therewith be content."— 1 Tim. 6:8. 

Yet it is to be feared that many who covenant 
to sacrifice their all in the Lord's 
service actually render far less than one 
tenth. The size of our sacrifice is the measure 
of our love and zeal in the Lord's 
service; and time and influence, as well as 
financial ability, are parts of our possessions 
to be rendered to the Lord as thank-offerings, 
while out of that consecrated to him 



the things needful for our sustenance may 
be retained in harmony with the spirit of 
our covenant. 

And, while we run, let us remember for 
our consolation the promise to Jacob, and 
through him to us— "Behold, I am with 
thee, and will keep thee." "Faithful is he 
who hath called you, who also will do it." 
--1 Thes. 5:24. 

R1631 : page 77 

WINE A MOCKER. 



I. QUAR., LESSON XL, MAR. 18, PROV. 20:1-7. 

Golden Text— "Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging; 
and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise."— 
Prov. 20:1. 

The moral precepts of this lesson need 
little comment; but it is well for all to lay 
them to heart. There can be no vital piety 
where the simple precepts of morality are 
ignored. He who would live godly must, 
at the outset, abandon every vile and evil 
thing— must seek to purify the earthen vessel, 
and pray for divine grace to keep it so, 
and he must earnestly strive against all the 
downward tendencies of his fallen nature. 

It has been well said that the intemperate 
use of spiritous liquors is an apt illustration 
of the course and effects of sin in 
general. It benumbs the sensibilities, beclouds 
and stupefies the judgment, weakens 
the will, enslaves and degrades the whole 
man, and finally wrecks his health and all 
his manly hopes and aspirations, and brings 
him in haste and disgrace to the grave. 

Yet, while this vice is a visible and most 
prominent illustration of the course and effects 
of sin, such is the actual tendency of 
all sin, though its effects may not always be 

R1631 : page 78 

so visible, nor so hateful, nor so rapidly ruinous. 

All sin is intolerable in the sight of 

God; and to love and cherish it in its less 

obnoxious and more secret forms is as worthy 

of condemnation as enslavement to its 

grosser forms. Only those who abhor sin 

in all its forms, and who strive against the 

sinward tendencies of their fallen nature, 

and who, because of such realized and acknowledged 



tendencies, avail themselves of 
the robe of Christ's righteousness through 
faith in his precious blood as their ransom 
price, are acceptable to God. Let us flee, 
therefore, from every sin, and from every 
appearance of evil; and let us manifest our 
hatred of sin by a continual and lifelong 
striving against it; and day by day and year 
by year will manifest more and more of a 
mastery over it. 

Below we add some statistics showing in 
figures something of the immense expense 
of the single sin of intemperance in the use 
of spiritous liquors; yet we may safely say 
that the half cannot be told in any such way. 
But who can compute the enormous expense 
of the whole retinue of sins, great 
and small, to our fallen and enslaved humanity? 
What enormous expense of misery 
and wretchedness has been incurred, for 
instance, by the intemperate propagation of 
the human species, begotten in sin, shapen 
in iniquity, and brought forth with the 
deeply engraven hereditary marks of sin into 
a world of temptations, deceptions and 
snares! 

In the Boston Herald of Jan. 30, '93 were 
given the following statistics by Edward 
Atkinson, the well-known statistician. 

STANDARD OF COMPARISON. 



THE PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION OF LIQUORS. 

Spirits withdrawn, including 

fruit brandy-gallons, 89,554,919 

1 2 per cent, used in the arts,. 1 0,746,5 89 

Consumed as beverage, 

gallons, 78,808,330 

Valuation spirits-78,808,330 

gallons @ $4.50, $354,637,485 

Valuation beer-974,247,863 

gallons @ 50 cents, 487,123,931 

Domestic wines-25,000,000 

gallons @ $2.00, 50,000,000 

Imported beer, 3,051,898 

Imported wines, 40,000,000 

Total in 1891, $934,813,314 

Estimated increase spirits in 

1892, 35,000,000 

Actual increase beer, 21,070,963 

Increase domestic and imported 

wines, 10,000,000 



Total, 1892, $1,000,884,277 

Authority, F. N. Barrett. 
Consumption of liquors per capita 

U.S. population in 1892, $15.28 

Total expenditures of the U.S. 
Government 1892 per capita of 

population, $5.27 

Total cost of U.S. Government aside 
from war debt and pensions per 

capita of population, 2.53 

Spirits, beer, etc., per day per person, 4 + cts. 
All government expenditures 1892 
per day per person, 1 + cts. 

Truly none are wise who permit themselves 
to be deceived by sin in any of its 
forms; for the pleasures of sin are brief, ignoble 
and unsatisfying, and the dregs of the 
cup are a bitter recompense. 

R1631 : page 78 

THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST. 

--MARK 16:1-8.-- 



I. QUAR., LESSON XII., MAR. 25, HEB. 11:1-20. 

Golden Text— "I am the God of Abraham, and the 
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. God is not the God 
of the dead, but of the living."-Matt. 22:32. 

"Now is Christ risen from the dead."— 1 Cor. 15:20. 

The term "Easter" occurs but one place 
in the Bible (Acts 12:4), where it signifies 
the passover. There is no precedent in the 
Scriptures for the Easter festivals which 
have been celebrated with pomp and ceremony 
in the Roman and Greek Catholic 
churches, where, it is said, it was introduced 
to displace a pagan festival, the only change 
being in name. But, while avoiding the 
multiplying of the forms of godliness, whose 
tendency is to impoverish its spirit, it is 
quite in place for Christians to reverently 
and joyfully call to mind the Lord's resurrection 
on its anniversary. The birth, death 
and resurrection of our Lord are the three 
circumstances of his first advent which 
should be remembered by every child of 
God with reverent thanksgiving and praise. 
His birth was the dawn of hope for our 
race, as Simeon said, "Now. ..mine eyes 



have seen thy salvation;" his death was the 
seal of pardon and peace to every believer 
in his precious blood; and his resurrection 
was the assurance which God gave to all 

R1631 : page 79 

men of the efficacy of his precious blood 
and of their consequent privilege of sharing 
the ransom blessing of restitution by faith 
and obedience. 

The resurrection of Jesus is the guarantee 
of God's expressed purpose to restore to 
life and to all the blessings of his favor all 
of the human race who come unto God by 
him. And it is in view of this fact, that 
God declares himself the God of the living, 
and not of the dead, for they all live unto 
him (Luke 20:37,38)— in his purpose. And, 
because of this also, our Lord spoke of death 
as a sleep,— in view of the awakening in the 
morning of the resurrection. 

Death implies extinction; for if once condemned 
by God as unworthy of life, there 
being no chance for reform or change in 
death ("In death there is no remembrance 
of thee: in the grave who shall give thee 
thanks!") it follows that there could be no 
hope in death. But what man could not do 
for himself God has done for him through 
Christ,— He has redeemed man from the 
death sentence and provided for the reawakening 
of all. Therefore God does not 
think of us as dead (annihilated), but as 
sleeping until the Millennial morning. 

It is interesting to note with what carefulness 
the important facts of the death and 
resurrection of the Lord are noted in the 
Scriptures: that so our faith and hope might 
be firmly established; for, said the Apostle, 
"If Christ be not risen, your hope is vain." 
The precautions, too, were taken not by the 
Lord's friends, but by his enemies.— Matt. 27:62-66; 
John 19:34,35. 

For a full treatment of the subject of resurrection, 
see our issues of April 1 and 
October 15, 1893. 



R1630:page79 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT." 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--For many 
years I have been familiar with your name 
and with the title, MILLENNIAL DAWN, and 
have occasionally met those who have accepted 
your views of Bible interpretation; 
but I have never been inclined to look into 
the teachings you put forth until about a 
month ago, when some ladies, who were at 
one time members of a church (undenominational) 
over which I was pastor, became 
interested in Brother West's teachings, and 
wrote to me desiring to know whether I 
had read MILLENNIAL DAWN, and what I 
thought of the same, finally sending me 
VOL. I. I took it up to read, that I might 
know under what influence my friends had 
fallen. I became so much interested that I 
have spent all my spare time (often until 
midnight) reading, with my different translations 
of the Bible before me, comparing 
each of your references with the Book, etc. 
I have now finished VOL. III., and wish to 
express to you my appreciation of the truth 
you have brought to light. While I do not 
see eye to eye with you in every minute 
detail, I can sincerely say that I have never 
before seen the beauty and harmony of the 
Word brought out in such clear and satisfying 
order. Many of the thoughts you 
bring out have been shown me by the 
Spirit; but what I most appreciate in your 
book is the clear and orderly arrangement 
of those things of which I have had glimpses. 

Two great truths which you bring out 
are— in the way you handle them— entirely 
new to me; viz., First, Restitution in the 
Millennial age. I have clearly seen that 
"old School" teachings limited the ransom 
of Jesus Christ, but never until now have I 
seen restitution presented in what seemed to 
me a Scriptural and logical manner. I am 
filled with great joy, as I now contemplate 
this precious truth. God's plan is certainly 
much larger than theology (?). 

The second great truth greatly surprises 
me: that Christ has come is a most astonishing 
statement. I cannot yet fully take 
it in. For years I have fully believed, 
taught and preached his coming in person; 
but I have always thought it would be in 
the flesh; although I have believed that only 
the Bride would know. But now I admit 
the truth you advance: that his coming 
must be as a Spirit being. Is not that included 
in the divine order— first the natural, 
then the spiritual? My earnest cry has 



been, "Behold, the Bridegroom cometh!" 
I believed the time had come for that cry. 
Is it possible that, instead of that, I am to 
cry, "Behold the Bridegroom?" I am seeking 

R1631 : page 79 

light on this one point; for surely, if that 

be true, there is no time for God's messengers 

to tarry in the harvest work. 

Well, Brother, I thank God for all the 
truth he has given you to give out to us. I 
have been preaching the gospel to the best 

R1631 : page 80 

of my light for seventeen years (I am 
now almost an old man). For the past year 
I have not been in active gospel work; but, 
singularly, just as I have been brought to 
read your writings, I am asked to go forth 
again to give out the Word of God. For 
years I have been out of "Babylon," and 
of necessity my work must be among the 
humble and poor, and those who are hungry 
for the Word. I go where he calls. 
During the past ten years I have built two 
chapels and gathered two congregations; 
but now it seems to me there is time only 
to call out— not to build and gather. May 
he, the Lord of the Harvest, guide me, is 
my earnest prayer. 

May God bless thee, and use thee more 
and more to give out the truth. 

Yours in the Christ, JOS. C. YOUNG. 



page 80 

MY DEAR SIR:--Two months ago, at a 
small hotel in a small town of this State, I 
came across the third volume of your MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. I did not have time to 
read it, but was so much interested that I 
sent for the three volumes. I have just completed 
the third volume: it has been to me 
like a shower in a desert. I am thirsty and 
hungering for more. 

For ten years, while living on a homestead, 
I read my Bible in the Orthodox way, 
and prayed to and trusted in God; yet something 
kept me out of the denominations. I 
was not satisfied to subscribe to any creed. 
On coming to the city, I resolved to unite 
with some church and Sunday School, and 



become an active worker; but, after visiting 
all of the Protestant denominations, I found 
so much unchristlike behavior, that I could 
not join any of them. The past year I have 
awakened from the indifference into which 
I had settled, and have been in a small way 
trying to get at the truth; and now I feel as 
if I wanted to engage in some way in this 
harvest work. Please send me all the information 
you can. J. HAWLEY. 



R1631 : page 80 

MY DEAR SIR:-I have read with pleasure 
and delight the first volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, and would say, it just suits me. 
These sublime truths are in perfect accord 
with my conception of the word of the Lord, 
and thrill my whole being. It fills my soul, 
puts wings on my feet and energizes every 
power of my being, as I contemplate the 
coming glory of the Millennial morning! 

I am a local preacher in the M.E. Church, 
and you can imagine how much I am at 
home there. For more than twenty years 
I have been engaged in the temperance 
work as a lecturer, and have many opportunities 
of presenting my opinions on these 
subjects. From childhood I have hated the 
Romish church (as a system), and I equally 
abominate the popery of Protestantism. Indeed, 
our Protestant churches (it seems to 
me) are rapidly counter-marching Rome-ward. 
I long for kindred spirits: those who 
"keep the commandments of God and the 
faith of Jesus." 

Your Plan of the Ages has solved one 
dark problem: the heathen world. Your 
teaching on this subject seems in perfect 
accord with the Scriptures, and I share with 
you the joy of such a revelation of the divine 
Word. 

These lines, my brother, are not hastily 
written, for I have read your Plan of the 
Ages three times during the last four months. 
I can see the hand of God in the work in 
which you are engaged. Ever praying for 
your success in proclaiming the coming 
Kingdom of our ascended Lord, I remain, 
Yours in "the faith once delivered to the 
saints." RICHARD GROGAN. 



page 80 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--I thank our 
Father that he, through the instrumentality 
of his children, ever opened my eyes to the 
wonderful Plan of the Ages contained in 
the Scriptures of truth, and unlocked to me 
by MILLENNIAL DAWN. My aged mother 
and myself have been for years students of 
the Word, and lovers of the Lord's appearing, 
and our minds were prepared to receive 
the fuller light which the DAWNS shed forth. 
The Word becomes more and more a source 
of light and delight; and, as we see more 
deeply into that wonderful plan, we are 
amazed at the infinite love, wisdom, power 
and justice of our God; and yet, we ask, 
why this amazement? For it is just like God. 
The trouble was, we have been worshiping 
something that was not God. May God 
help each one of his children to be diligent 
in making the truth and his true character. 

If you have any extra copies of TOWER, 
January 15, 1 wish you would send one-half 
dozen, for I wish to send the sermon, 
"The Future— Social and Religious," to 
several of my friends. I think it will help 
to awaken them and to see for themselves 
that the morning dawns. 

Yours, earnestly watching for the morning, 
ANNA P. NICHOLSON. 



page 82 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1632 : page 82 

BINDING THE BUNDLES TIGHTER. 



[A Brother who was at one time a prominent 
Mason, but who has since discontinued 
his relationship with the Order, believing that 
he can spend time and money to better advantage 
as a member of the "Royal Priesthood," 
sends us the following from the Chicago 
Inter Ocean of March 7, and adds:— "Every 
Mason is now in honor bound to remain by 
the Ancient and Honorable Order.' Thank 
God for his opening, permitting my escape 
before this. Every Mason who now escapes 
from this 'bundle' must, in addition to the 
loss of many agreeable associations, submit to 
a painful singeing of his honor, so-called, and 
which will be worse with every day's delay."] 

The clipping reads as follows:— 

"MASONS ARE DOOMED. 

"MAYOR HOPKINS MAKES WAR ON SECRET SOCIETY MEN.-ALL 
ARE TO QUIT.-LIST OF THOSE ALREADY DISCHARGED FOR 
THIS CAUSE.-EMPLOYES WHO HAVE BEEN TWENTY YEARS IN 
SERVICE REQUESTED TO LEAVE. 

"In his zeal to fill all places in the City 
Hall with 'suitable Democratic substitutes' 
Mayor Hopkins has caused to be discharged a 
number of Masons of high degree. 

"The well-known enmity of the papists toward 
this society gives color to the statement 
made yesterday by a prominent Mason, that 
all who belong to that or any other Protestant 
order are doomed. 

[Then follows the first list of seven prominent 
Masons, with no doubt appropriate statements 
of their moral worth, and mental and 
physical qualifications fitting them for their 
respective offices.] 



"Beyond doubt Mayor Hopkins intends to 
cut out every member of the society now in 
the city's employ. Nothing has been done 
openly, but the quiet tip has gone around that 
every Mason may expect his discharge. 

"The mayor has no reason for discharging 
members of any secret society, except that 
they are of necessity Protestant." 

EXTRACT FROM AN EPISCOPALIAN RECTOR'S 
SERMON. 



"There is danger of offence, danger of apostasy. 
Let him that thinketh he standeth take 
heed lest he fall! Never was it more important 
that a Christian should be Christlike. 
Before God, I think that we are to follow our 
Lord through a dark valley, and to drink a 
bitter cup. There is a mighty movement 
toward the consummation of all unbelief and 
opposition to the Lord's Anointed: a movement 
long ago forewarned, yet none the less 
terrible as it sweeps over Christian lands. We 
see many wise, mighty and learned fascinated 
with its falsehood, and giving to it the weight 
of their influence and genius. But we wait— 
'how long, O Lord, how long!'— for the day 
when the lofty looks of man shall be humbled, 
and the haughtiness of men shall be made 
low, and the Lord alone shall be exalted. For 
'I know that my Redeemer liveth; and that I 
shall stand in the latter day upon the earth; 
whom I shall see for myself; and mine eyes 
shall behold, and not another.'" 

page 82 

THE DANO-NORWEGIAN DAWN, VOL. I. 



We regret to say that this book will not 
be ready this month, as formerly hoped and 
announced. We hope to be able to fill orders 
before May 1st. 

A COLPORTEUR GROUP. 



After our last Summer's Convention at Chicago 
had adjourned, and only about sixty of the 
friends remained, mostly colporteurs, Brother 
Witter took a Cabinet photograph of all in a 



group. 

He has supplied a copy free to all the colporteurs 
known to desire them and has donated 
a quantity to the Tract Fund. These we 
now offer to any who may desire them at 
fifty cents per copy. The receipts will go to 
forward the general work. 



R1632 : page 83 

VOL. XV. MARCH 15, 1894. NO. 6. 

TOUCHED WITH THE FEELING OF OUR INFIRMITIES. 

"For we have not an high priest which cannot be 
touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but one 
who was in all points tempted like as 
we are, yet without sin."— Heb. 4:15. 



WHILE in this our judgment day we find 
great comfort in this blessed assurance, 
realizing as we do our own weaknesses and 
shortcomings and manifold temptations, we 
call to mind this statement now for another 
purpose; viz., to remind the members of the 
elect Church of God, who are to constitute the 
Royal Priesthood of the new dispensation, that 
they, like their Lord and Head, must also be 
touched with the feeling of the world's infirmities, 
else they would be totally unfit for so 
exalted and responsible a position. 

In the Royal Priesthood of that age the 
world is to have the same comfort in its priesthood 
that we in our present infirmities find in 
Christ. For this cause, chiefly, we apprehend 
that the priesthood is chosen from among men 
—that redeemed men who were once in the 
same plight with all the rest of humanity, being 
thus exalted to the divine nature with all 
its power to bless, might also, from their past 
experience and observations while they were 
men amongst men, be thereby qualified to be 
very wise and merciful priests, knowing well 
how to deal with the poor sin-sick world; and 
that the world might find comfort and consolation 
in the realization of such sympathy. 

Such being the mission of the Church, in 
the not far distant future, all who expect to be 
of its approved membership in glory should 
now be cultivating a broad and generous sympathy 
for all their fellows of the "groaning 
creation"— a sympathy which considers the 



weaknesses and temptations of fallen men, 
mental, moral and physical, and which is ready 
to forgive and help the repentant erring; a 
sympathy illustrated by the verse— 
"A bending staff I would not break, 
A feeble faith I would not shake, 
Nor even rudely pluck away 
The error which some truth may stay, 
Whose sudden loss might leave without 
A shield against the shafts of doubt." 
It is not enough that we know the truth and 
rejoice in hope of a future personal exaltation: 
we must not forget the very object of that exaltation 
—the blessing of all the families of the 
earth— and the present duty of conformity to 
the word and example of our Lord, that thus 
by his Word and Providence he may fit us for 
the duties and honors to which he has called 
us. Only by so doing can we make our calling 
and election sure. 

If we turn our eyes to the pattern, we see 
in our Lord Jesus one who was deeply moved 
at the sight of human degradation, moral and 
physical. So must it be with all his followers. 
We must be in sympathy with every impulse 
of the world which is toward righteousness and 
reformation of character and life; we must 
rejoice at every movement that is made in this 
direction; and our sympathies should go out 
toward all who are laboring for the common 
uplifting as well as for all the oppressed everywhere. 
And so we trust they do. We sympathize 
with the temperance work and would 
not have one abandon the ranks of its laborers, 

R1632 : page 84 

except to engage in the higher work of 

this harvest time, to which the elect consecrated 

sons of God are now specially called. 

And we say, God bless every truly philanthropic 

heart and hand that is trying to rescue 

the unfortunate victims of strong drink. We 

would have all such go on until the Master, 

noting their zeal, where it springs from love 

to him, shall say, "It is enough; come up 

higher"— to the higher work, the harvesting 

or gathering together of his elect from the 

four winds.-Matt. 24:31. 

We sympathize also with the social purity 
movement, which aims at the emancipation of 
woman and the elevation of man, and which 
eloquently appeals to the conscience of the 
present generation for the pre-natal rights of 
the yet unborn generations of the twentieth 
century— their right to be well born and bred 



—with as little of the taint of hereditary evil 
as the present generation can give. It, however, 
grapples with an evil so deep-seated that 
little can be hoped for from it, except the 
creating of a more healthful sentiment on the 
part of thoughtful and well disposed people, 
and a greater realization on the part of many 
of the giant proportions and exceeding hatefulness 
of sin. 

We sympathize, too, with the demand of another 
class of reformers for a single standard 
of virtue for man and woman alike— that public 
sentiment should be no more lenient toward 
the sins of men than toward the sins of 
women; and believe that a single standard of 
virtue, which would as completely ostracize a 
guilty man from society as a guilty woman, 
would be a safeguard to many a young man to 
whom the path of vice is made, alas! too easy. 

We sympathize with Law and Order Societies 
in their efforts to enforce laws, although 
their methods are not always the wisest. 

We have much sympathy with the Salvation 
Army in its attempts to rescue the submerged victims 
of the world's selfishness and wickedness. 

We are glad, too, to see the evidences of 
philanthropy and moral reform in some heathen 
lands, though we know how necessarily feeble 
must be the resistance to the mighty waves of 
corruption against which they battle. 

And so with every good work and with every 
noble sentiment our hearts are and should be 
in accord; and we rejoice with them over 
every victory they gain for righteousness and 
truth, however small, although we are not with 
them on the same plane of endeavor; for God 
has given us the higher commission. The 
priesthood may not despise the Levites, nor 
even the children of the camp. We rejoice that 
there are Levites— hewers of wood and drawers 
of water (See TABERNACLE SHADOWS), and 
that even in the world's great camp there 
are some who not only incline to righteousness, 
but who are bravely endeavoring to stem 
the overwhelming tide of evil. But we rejoice 
more in the fact that it will ere long be our 
privilege to take hold of all these much needed 
reforms with energy and power and push 
them forward to glorious success, when in 
God's due time we shall be endued with power 
from on high.-Matt. 13:43; Gal. 3:29. 

Dearly beloved of the consecrated household, 
let us not forget to keep in touch with the 
groaning creation; to sympathize with its sorrows 
and its woes; to realize its deep degradation 
and misery; to remember its frailties, 



its awful burden of hereditary taints and consequent 
weaknesses; its present environments of 
ignorance and superstition; and its long established 
errors of public sentiment; remembering 
that we too are still in the sinful flesh, and 
that the motions of sin are still often painfully 
manifest in us, in some directions at 
least, if not in many. And as the cries of the 
groaning creation come up into the ears of the 
Lord of hosts (Jas. 5:4) with strong and pathetic 
pleading to his loving heart, so let them 
come into our ears and gain our sympathies, 
and quicken our zeal to co-operate with our 
Heavenly Father's plan for the establishment 
of his Kingdom of righteousness and peace. 
But let us bear in mind that a real pity for 
the world, a full sympathy with every good 
work of reform, and an active co-operation 
with God in the necessary preparation for our 
great future work, imply also that we have 
no fellowship with the unfruitful works of 
darkness and that our lives be a standing rebuke 
to them. "How," says the Apostle, 

R1632 : page 85 

"shall we that are dead to sin live any longer 
therein?. ..Our old man [our justified human 
nature] is crucified with Christ that the 
body [organization] of Sin might be destroyed, 
that henceforth we should not serve Sin"— 
nor in any sense recognize Sin as our master. 
-Rom. 6:2-6. 

It should be our constant effort, therefore, 
to seek to discern the course of righteousness 
on every question of moral obligation, and to 
see to it that our conduct, our sympathies and 
our influence, however small, are on the side 
of righteousness. In this day of searching 
judgment it should be observed that every principle 
of moral obligation is being brought forward 
for searching examination. One cannot 
thoughtfully read the daily press without observing 
this tendency of the times in which we 
live. No matter how long and firmly established 
have been the old ideas, nothing can 
escape this scrutiny. And the principles of 
righteousness are being boldly set forth— here 
on one subject, and there on another; and 
that in defiance of the thundering anathemas 
from all the old fortresses of sin, iniquity and 
superstition. 

But right and truth must and shall prevail 
when our Kingdom has been established (Matt. 6:10; 
Luke 12:32; 22:29), however feeble now 
may be the voices lifted in their defence. Let 



our sentiments and our course of action always 

be noble and pure, and on the right side 

of every subject that comes forward for ventilation 

and investigation; for we should be 

"a peculiar people, zealous of good works." 

--Titus 2:14. 



R1632 : page 85 

THE FINANCIAL STRAIN WORLD-WIDE. 



"IMPECUNIOSITY hangs like a dark and 
almost universal cloud over the nations 
of Europe. Times are very bad for the Powers 
all around, but worst of all for the small ones. 
There is hardly a nation on the Continent 
whose balance-sheet for the departed year does 
not present a gloomy outlook; while many of 
them are mere confessions of bankruptcy. Our 
columns have recently contained careful reports 
upon the financial condition of the various 
States, and we shall continue the series; but 
from first to last it has exhibited and will exhibit 
a struggle in the several exchequers to 
make two ends meet which has never been so 
general. The state of things is indeed almost 
world-wide. 

"If we look outside our own Continent, the 
United States on one hand, and India, Japan, 
with their neighbors, on the other, have felt 
the prevalent pinch. The Great Republic is 
too vast and resourceful to die of her financial 
maladies; but even she is very sick. Great 
Britain, too, has a deficit to face in the coming 
Budget, and has sustained costly, perhaps 
irreparable, losses by the mad business of the 
coal strike. 

"France, like ourselves and America, is one 
of the countries which cannot well be imagined 
insolvent, so rich is her soil and so industrious 
her people. Her revenue, however, manifests 
frequent deficits; her national debt has assumed 
stupendous proportions, and the burden 
of her Army and Navy well-nigh crushes the 
industry of the land. Germany must also be 
written in the category of Powers too solid and 
too strong to suffer more than temporary eclipse. 
Yet during the last year it is computed that 
she has lost L.25 ,000,000 sterling [$125,000,000], 
which represents about half the national 
savings. Much of this loss has been due to 
German investments in the stocks of Portugal, 



Greece, South America, Mexico, Italy and 
Servia; while Germany has also sharply felt 
the confusion in the silver market. An insufficient 
harvest, scarcity of fodder, the outbreak 
of the Russo-German Customs War, and 
the ever-impending dread of cholera have 
helped to depress her trade, while, of course, 
the burden of the armed peace weighs upon 
her people with a crushing load. Among the 
Powers which we are grouping together as naturally 
solvent, it is striking to find that Austria-Hungary 
has the best and happiest account to 
give. The year 1 893 was one of prosperity 
and progress for the Dual Realm. Her exports 
showed an increase on the year before of 10-1/2 
per cent. Austria managed, before the close 
of the year, to lock up in her cellars and those 
of Hungary nearly 350,000,000 guldens in gold; 
and, though her currency has yet to be reformed, 
she stands mistress of the situation. 

When we turn aside from this great group 
and cast our eyes on Italy, there is an example 
of a "Great Power" well-nigh beggared by 
her greatness. If it were not too Irish, one 
might almost say that Italy has been ruined by 

R1632 : page 86 

coming into existence. Year by year her revenue 

drops— her expenditure increases. The 

weight of the armaments which she keeps up 

in accordance with the programme of the Triple 

Alliance might be better borne if it were not 

for her recent mad prodigality in useless public 

works, etc. She must pay L.30,000,000 

sterling as interest on her public debt, beside 

a premium for the gold necessary. Her securities 

are a drug in the market; her prodigious 

issue of bank-notes has put gold and silver at 

fancy prices. Her population is plunged in a 

state of poverty and helplessness almost unimaginable 

here, and when her new Ministers 

invent fresh taxes sanguinary riots break out. 



As for Russia, her financial statements are 
shrouded in such mystery that none can speak 
of them with confidence; but there is little 
reason to doubt that only the bigness of the 
Czar's Empire keeps it from becoming bankrupt. 
The population has been squeezed until 
almost the last drop of the life-blood of industry 
is extracted. The most reckless and remorseless 
Financial Minister scarcely dares to give 
the screw of taxation another half-turn. "Every 



copeck which the peasant contrives to earn is 
spent, not in putting his affairs in order, but 
in paying up arrears in taxes. ...The money 
paid by the peasant population in the guise of 
taxes amounts to from two-thirds to three-fourths 
of the gross income of the land, including 
their own extra work as farm laborers." 
The apparent good credit of the Government 
is sustained by artificial means. Close observers 
look for a crash alike in the social and 
financial arches of the Empire. Here, too, 
the stupendous incubus of the armed peace of 
Europe helps largely to paralyze commerce and 
agriculture. 

Looking the Continent all round, therefore, 
it cannot be denied that the state of things as 
regards the welfare of the people and the national 
balance-sheets is sorely unsatisfactory. 
Of course, one chief and obvious reason for this 
is that armed peace which weighs upon Europe 
like a nightmare, and has turned the whole 
Continent into a standing camp. Look at 
Germany alone! That serious and sober Empire! 
The Army Budget there has risen from 
L. 17,500,000 sterling in 1880 to L.28,400,000 
in 1893. The increase under the new Army 
Defence Act adds L. 3,000,000 sterling a year 
to the colossal mass of Germany's defensive 
armour. France has strained her strength to 
the same point of proximate collapse to match 
her mighty rival. It is needless to point out 
the terrible part which these war insurances 
bear in the present popular distress of Europe. 
Not merely do they abstract from profits and 
earnings the vast sums which buy powder and 

R1633 : page 86 

shot and build barracks, but they take from 
the ranks of industry at the commencement of 
their manhood millions of young workmen, who 
are also lost for the same periods to the family. 
Nature, and the seasons, and embarrassments 
about silver and gold are not to blame for the 
impoverishment of what we call Christendom. 
The bitter and unchristian spirit of the blood-feud 
is to blame— the savage instinct of mutual 
animosity not uprooted yet from the bosom of 
what we falsely style civilization. The possession 
of these prodigious means of mutual 
destruction is a constant temptation to use them, 
and some day, it is to be feared, the pent-up 
forces of this war-cloud will burst forth. The 
world has not yet invented a better clearing-house 
for its international cheques than the 
ghastly and costly Temple of War. 



—London Daily Telegraph. 



R1633 : page 86 
STRIVING LAWFULLY. 



"No soldier on service entangleth himself in the affairs of 
this life, that he may please him who enrolled him as a 
soldier. And also if a man contend in the games, he 
is not crowned except he have contended lawfully." 
"Know ye not that they which run in a race all run, 
but one receiveth the prize? So run that ye may obtain. 
And every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate 
in all things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible 
crown; but we an incorruptible. I therefore 
so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as 
one that beateth the air: but I keep my body 
under and bring it into subjection, lest that by 
any means, when I have preached to 
others, I myself should be a castaway." 
-2 Tim. 2:4,5; 1 Cor. 9:24-27. 

THESE earnest exhortations of the faithful 
Apostle to the Gentiles were most clearly 
illustrated in his noble course of life. He 
shunned no danger, shrank from no labor, or 
reproach, or privation, and bravely and cheerfully 
endured hardness and suffered the loss of 
all things temporal that he might win Christ 
and be approved of him. As we look upon 
such a course and consider the fortitude and 
the strength of character necessary so to run, 

R1633 : page 87 

we may well conclude that, except we be similarly 
supplied with the help of divine grace, we 
shall not be able to persevere to the end. 

Paul sped along in that race, not in his own 
strength, but in the strength which God supplied. 
And the promise of such aid is none 
the less ours than it was his. The divine grace 
is imparted to us through the exceeding great 
and precious promises of God inspiring us with 
new and glorious hopes beyond the wreck and 
ruin of the present order of things. Permitting 
our minds to dwell upon these, we see in the 
now rapidly approaching dawn of the day of 
Christ a new heavens and a new earth; and by 
faith we sit together with Christ in the heavenly 
places of glory and honor, and together with 
him are crowned with immortality. By faith we 



see also the blessed privileges of such an exalted 
station, and the divinely appointed work 
in which we will be engaged together with 
Christ. A weary, groaning creation awaits our 
ministry of power, and in proportion as we 
partake of the loving, pitiful spirit of our Master 
will we be able to appreciate such a privilege. 
If we are cold and selfish and untouched 
with the feeling of earth's infirmities; if the 
woes of our fellow-men awaken in us no feelings 
of sympathy and of desire to help, we can 
have no appreciation of the prize of our high 
calling. But if on the contrary we love our 
fellow-men as God and Christ loved them; if 
we pity their weaknesses and, remembering the 
hereditary cause, lay not all their sins and 
short-comings to their personal charge, but are 
anxious to clear their minds from the mists of 
ignorance and superstition and the biases of 
prejudices; to help them to more rational 
modes of thought and action, and to better 
ideas of life and its relationships and responsibilities; 
to gather out of their pathway all the 
stumbling stones whereby so many are now 
precipitated into a course of vice; to cast up 
a highway of holiness upon which no lion of 
intemperance or other evil thing may be found; 
and to declare to them all the everlasting gospel 
of their salvation, and to open their deaf 
ears to hear it and their blind eyes to see the 
salvation of God— if such are our sympathies 
toward the world of sinners which God so 
loved, then we are able to appreciate to some 
extent the privileges of our high calling, when, 
as joint-heirs with Christ of his Kingdom and 
power, we shall be able to put into actual execution 
all our benevolent desires for the uplifting 
and healing of our sin-sick world. 

If you have ever experienced the joy of converting 
one sinner from the error of his ways, 
or of establishing the feet of one of Christ's 
little ones, then you may have some idea of the 
joy that will attend the ministry of the saints 
when they are fully endued with divine power 
for the great work of their Millennial reign; 
for they will not be hampered as now, but every 
effort will be a successful one. 

The privilege of such a blessed work, even 
aside from the precious thought of association 
with Christ and of our blessed relationship to 
the Father, is a wonderful inspiration to every 
benevolent heart, which even now would fain 
take upon itself the burdens which they see oppressing 
others whom they love and pity. 

But though inspired with such a hope of benevolent 
service for the whole world in God's 



appointed time, and of blessed association with 
Christ in it, we must remember that we have 
yet to "strive" for the prize of our high calling; 
and not only so, but we must strive "lawfully." 
We must run our race, not only with 
diligence, energy, patience and perseverance, 
but we must run according to the prescribed 
rules, as otherwise our labor will be in vain. 
First of all we must enter into this course by 
the strait gate— by faith in the precious blood 
of Christ as our ransom price. If we do not 
enter by this door, we are not counted in the 
race for the prize, no matter how zealously we 
run. This is the first rule for those who would 
so run as to obtain. "Enter ye in at the strait 
gate;... because strait is the gate and 
narrow is the way that leadeth unto life, and 
few there be that find it." 

Having so entered, the Apostle now urges 
that we be filled with the Spirit of Christ, that 
we may not be led by the desires of the flesh 
away from God and from the course which he 
has marked out. Then the body, the human 
nature, must be kept under the control of the 
new mind, the spirit of Christ in us. Its ambitions 

R1633 : page 88 

and hopes and desires must be kept 

down; and the only way to do this is to keep 

filled with the spirit. "Walk in the spirit, 

and ye shall not fulfil the desires of the flesh."— 

Gal. 5:16. 

If we are filled with the spirit— with the 
same mind that was in Christ Jesus— we will 
act from the same motives: it will be our meat 
and drink to do the Father's will. We will engage 
in his work because we love to do it, even 
aside from the inspiring prize at the end of our 
course. Christ was so full of sympathy with 
humanity, and so thoroughly of one mind with 
the Father, that he could not do otherwise than 
devote his life to the good of others. Yet in 
all his labors he strictly observed the divine 
plan. Though, like the Father, he loved the 
whole world, he did not go beyond Israel to bless 
the Gentiles with his ministry, because the appointed 
time for that work had not yet come. 

He observed God's times and seasons and 
methods. He never recklessly exposed his life 
until from the prophets he recognized that his 
hour had come to be delivered into the hands 
of his enemies. He taught his disciples not 
to go into the way of the Gentiles until the 
due time: and then he sent them forth. He 
did not make long prayers on the street 



corners to be heard of men, nor exhort the 
multitudes with noisy harangue; as the prophet 
indicated, he did not lift up his voice nor cry 
aloud in the streets. (Isa. 42:2.) He chose 
God's methods which were rational and wise, 
and which were effective in selecting out from 
among men the class which he desired to be 
heirs of the promised Kingdom. Let those 
who would so run as to obtain the prize mark 
these footprints of the Master, and be filled 
more and more with his spirit. 

If so filled with the same mind that was in 
Christ Jesus, we, like him, will desire to be as 
free as possible from entangling earthly affairs, 
and to have our time as free as possible for the 
Lord's service, and then to devote all energy 
ability and effort to that service. 

To have the mind of Christ is indeed the one 
requirement of lawful striving— a mind which 
humbly and faithfully submits itself to the will 
of God as expressed in his great plan of the 
ages, and which devotes all energy to the accomplishment 
of his will because of an intelligent 
appreciation of the ends he has in view. 

R1636 : page 88 

BEHOLD THE BRIDEGROOM! 

--MRS. F. G. BURROUGHS.- 

BEHOLD, behold the Bridegroom! 

He's in our midst to-day! 
O Bride, put on thy jewels, 

And all thy fine array! 
His saints he now will gather 

To crown and glorify; 
And bring them to the mansions 

Prepared for them on high. 

Behold, behold the Bridegroom! 

In beauty see your King! 
And in triumphant measures 

The happy tidings sing. 
Awaken those that slumber, 

And bid them all arise 
To welcome his blest presence 

With all the faithful wise. 

Behold, behold the Bridegroom! 

Oh, ready stand with those 
Whose lamps are filled and burning 

Before the door shall close! 
The nuptial feast is waiting 

For these to enter in, 
And then the joy, exceeding, 



With Love's reign, will begin. 

Behold, behold the Bridegroom! 

Our fast-days now are o'er; 
For in the Bridegroom's presence 

We need not hunger more. 
We know him in the breaking 

Of truth's sustaining bread; 
And at the King's own table 

Abundantly are fed. 

Behold, behold the Bridegroom! 

Nor cry, "Lord Jesus, come!" 
Lift up your eyes, ye reapers, 

And bring the harvest home! 
The sowing time is over; 

Your night of weeping gone: 
Oh, joy, the morning breaketh! 

Tis now Millennial dawn! 



R1633 : page 89 

"OUR SUFFICIENCY IS OF GOD." 



THE following was written to a Brother who, 
having engaged in the Colporteur Work, 
was discouraged and stopped by being told by 
some that his work was doing harm— disintegrating 
churches, arousing questions disconcerting 
to ministers, etc., and that in some 
cases some who believed seemed if anything 
more careless than ever of religious matters. 
The Brother stopped his labors, and then wrote 
to us explaining his course. 

However, after writing to us and before our 
reply reached him, he sat down to re-study 
the DAWN, and not only convinced himself of 
its Scripturalness, but got his zeal again enkindled, 
wrote to us accordingly and resumed 
his labors as a Colporteur. We publish the 
letter now in hope that it may benefit others 
who may be similarly beset by the Adversary. 

Dear Brother:— Your letter, just at hand, 
was, as you surmised it would be, a complete 
surprise. I knew that the Enemy had tempted 
you severely on the other side of the question 
—to believe in universal, everlasting salvation 
—but I had not supposed you in any 
danger from the quarter from whence your besetment 
has so quickly come. 

Again, as I sometimes wonder why those 
who go into Universalism and begin to think 



they believe it, do not see first what CAN BE 
SAID AGAINST THAT VIEW, before they jump at 
an immature conclusion and do injury to 
others, as well as to themselves, so now I 
wonder in your case. Would it not have been 
better to have stopped work for a week: to 
have written me candidly of your perplexity 
and asked a reply— if one could be given— to 
your objections? I believe that you will agree 
that such would have been a better course. 
Even now, you do not ask, nor even hint, 
your willingness to consider what can be said 
upon the other side of this question. And 
modesty, and a dislike to intrude where not 
invited, naturally cause me to hesitate in offering 
counsel not sought. But I banish this; 
and, considering myself merely as the Lord's 
servant and as your brother (and as to some 
extent my brother's keeper, whether he ask 
aid or not), I will now proceed as though you 
had asked my assistance, or the Lord's aid 
through me, in the answer of your perplexities, 
as follows:— 

"LIGHT IS SOWN FOR THE RIGHTEOUS." 

-PSA. 97:11. - 

How anyone can read MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
and reach the conclusion that it favors the 
everlasting salvation of all mankind, is more 
than I can comprehend. It does point out a 
universal redemption from the curse (Rom. 5:19; 
1 Tim. 2:4-6); but, with equal clearness, 
it points out that this redemption merely secures, 
to all under the New Covenant, an opportunity 
for attesting their love of righteousness 
and its peaceable fruits, and their hatred 
of sin and its baneful results. It shows that as 
a ransom was necessary to man's recovery from 
the Adamic condemnation, so, if all or any 
were tried and individually found unworthy 
of life, it would require another ransom for 
each one before he could be restored or tried 
again, and that God has made no such provision, 
but calls the second death "everlasting 
destruction." 

It is not surprising, either, that, when the 
two-edged sword of truth enters, it creates a 
division. This is one evidence that we are 
now in the harvest, and that this truth is the 
harvest sickle. So it was at the first advent. 
Wherever our Lord and the apostles and their 
message went, there was a division of the people 
concerning him: so much so, that in one 
place "they entreated him that he would depart 



out of their coasts." (Matt. 8:34; Mark 1:24; 
Acts 13:50.) What did our Lord do, 
—change his gospel to suit them? No: he 
continued his work, until the whole city was 
in an uproar and the order-loving scribes and 
Pharisees had him executed, saying that it was 
expedient that one die for the (good of) the 
people, that all might not perish. -- 
John 11:49-53. 

Wherever the truth goes it has such an effect. 
The heathen nations all claim that it disturbs 
the spirit of their devotions and distracts the 

R1633 : page 90 

reverence formerly paid to Brahm and Buddha. 
The effect was the same in the days of the 
apostles (Acts 13:50.) Paul and Barnabas 
were arrested for disturbing the peace and unsettling 
the minds of those who worshiped the 
goddess Diana; and "the whole city was in 
an uproar." (Acts 19:40; 20:1; 21:31.) But 
the apostles, instead of wavering and stopping, 
went right along and preached the same gospel 
which made a disturbance everywhere. It became 
so notorious, that the knowledge of it 
spread from city to city, in times when they had 
neither mail routes nor telegraph lines; so that 
it was declared at Thessalonica, "These who 
have turned the world upside down are come 
hither also."— Acts 17:5,6. 

The difference between now and formerly 
is that then some were in the formalism of 
Phariseeism and the bondage of the law, others 
under the bondage of philosophy, and some 
others to Dianaism, and like fallacies; while 
now, some are deluded by Roman Catholicism, 
some by Universalism, some by Unitarianism, 
some by Methodism, some by Presbyterianism, 
and some by Know-nothing-ism. Like children, 
some asleep and some at innocent play, 
it seems perhaps at first a pity to disturb them, 
even to give them God's message. But as 
sleep must be disturbed and plays broken, in 
order to prepare the children for school, so 
the various groups of larger children (Presbyterian, 
Methodist, Roman Catholic, etc.) must 
now be awakened, called from present diversions 
and prepared for the great examination 
that is to come to all in this evil day. (1 Pet. 4:12.) 
What if it does cause a commotion as 
with the children, showing some to be bad-mannered, 
others disobedient and wilful. It is, 
nevertheless, the right and only thing to do, if 
we are guided by the Word of the Lord. They 
that can interest and awe each other with accounts 



of their dreams and nightmares, may 

be vexed beyond measure by the telling of the 

simple truth of God's gospel; but the Lord 

nevertheless says— "The prophet that hath a 

dream, let him tell a dream; but he that hath 

my Word let him speak [only] my Word faithfully." 

(Jer. 23:28.) Blessed those faithful 

servants whom the Lord, at his arrival, shall 

find so doing— giving the meat which is in 

due season to the household of faith. 

Our gospel is of necessity to some a savor 
of life unto life, and to others of death unto 
death; and who is sufficient for such things— 
to bear such a message? 

As it was in the days of the apostles, so it is 
now: some held by fear are moderate, and 
outwardly may have a form of godliness, who, 
when the shackles of fear are removed, manifest 
their real preference to be for sin and its fruits, 
rather than for righteousness, peace and joy 
in the holy spirit. We regret this; so did the 
apostles regret this side of the question in their 
day; saying, "We beseech you that you receive 
not the grace of God in vain." (2 Cor. 6:1.) 
But did they stop preaching because 
they found that some were disposed to take 
advantage of God's mercy and goodness to 
continue in sin? Surely not: they declared 
that they knew beforehand that such would be 
the effect of the truth— to some it would become 
"a savor of life unto life [everlastingly]," 
and to others "a savor of death unto death 
[everlasting]." They felt their insufficiency 
for such responsibility as this implied, but concluded 
that their sufficiency rested in God, 
who had qualified them as ministers and sent 
them forth. 

So now, when we learn that any become 
careless or plunge into sin, after learning that 
God is love, and that he will not torment sinners 
to all eternity, but that evil-doers shall be cut 
off, and that provision has been made for the recovery 
of all who will return to God in penitence, 
we regret it and feel as the Apostle expressed 
himself of some in his day: It had been better 
that they had not known the way of righteousness, 
than that, after having learned it, they 
should sin, and, like the sow, return to their 
wallowing in the mire. (2 Pet. 2:21,22.) But this 
should not hinder us from preaching the truth; 
for, like the apostles, we are not ashamed of 
the gospel of Christ, but realize it to be the 
power of God unto salvation to every one that 
believeth. We know how it has sanctified our 
hearts, as fear or error or nothing else ever did. 
We know of many others to whom it has been 



R1634:page90 

God's power to lift them out of Infidelity and 

R1634:page91 

sin into faith and righteousness, when nothing 
else could have so helped them. 

Then, too, we remember that this is the time 
for thrusting in the sickle and separating the 
wheat from the tares. If some we had supposed 
wheat prove to be tares, when brought to the 
test which God now sends, that is no fault of 
ours. The sickle we use is his sickle— his truth. 
He is responsible, and will see that all the 
wheat is gathered into the garner, and that 
none of the multitude of tares get there, even 
though we, mistaking them for wheat, should 
feel for a time disappointed. The truth is 
testing and proving what we are— wheat or 
tares. 

God seeketh not always what man seeketh. 
God seeketh only such as worship him in the 
spirit of the truth; and seeketh not, and will 
not have, amongst his elect, such as merely 
worship him in error under the bondage of fear. 
He is now testing his people. 

We have seen that the effect of the truth in 
the hands of the Lord and the apostles was the 
same as it is now— to make division, and to 
prove unworthy those who received it in vain— 
whose lives were not thereby brought more into 
harmony with God. Why has it not been so 
down through the Gospel age? How was it 
that for a long time there was so much unity 
and peace, until the Reformation period? and 
how is it that of late years there has been so 
much peace in the nominal church? 

We answer: because the church about the 
second century began to lose the truth, and 
took instead much error. Therefore the fear 
and superstition brought quiet submission to 
the error, and permitted her to slumber and 
divert herself with forms, etc., during the period 
known in history as "the dark ages." But just 
as soon as the Word of God began to be heard 
again, in the days of the Reformation, the 
trouble and division began. And it continued 
until the doctrines of the Scriptures began to 
be lost sight of again in unions and harmonies 
based upon the errors of men,— fear, etc. 

But now the Millennial morning is here, and 
all must be awaked; for a great and dark hour 
(a night) of unbelief approaches, in which all 
will be tested. If some on being awakened 



receive the grace of God in vain, we cannot 
stop for them. They would reach the same 
results later on anyway. We must awaken and 
enthuse the real saints of God, whom we are 
commissioned to "seal in their foreheads" and 
"gather unto him," out of sectarian bondage 
and error, from the four quarters of heaven. 

"Let the dead bury their dead: Go, thou, 
and preach the gospel ! " 

Very truly, your brother and servant, 
C.T.RUSSELL. 



page 9 1 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1634:page91 

JACOB'S PREVAILING PRAYER. 



II. QUAR., LESSON I., APRIL 1, GEN. 32:9-12,24-30. 

Golden Text— "I will not let thee go except thou bless 
me."— Gen. 32:26. 

The journey of Jacob back to the land of 
his nativity and to the presence of a presumably 
hostile brother, now wealthy and 
powerful, and from whose face he had fled 
for his life some twenty or perhaps forty 
years previous, was another evidence of his 
faith in God and of his respect for, and valuation 
of, the promises of God, whose fulfilment 
could be expected only in a far distant 
future, between which and the present 
the Jordan of death rolled. Like Abraham, 
he looked for a city whose builder and 
maker is God— the New Jerusalem, the Kingdom 
of God on earth. He knew that Abraham 
had died in faith not having realized 
the promises, and he was willing to likewise 
patiently wait. 

This return from Padan-aram to the land 



of Canaan, the land of promise, can by no 
means be considered the fulfilment of the 
promise of possession of the land, the whole 
land of Canaan, for himself and his posterity 
for an everlasting possession, as some 
teach. And that Jacob did not so regard 

R1634:page92 

it is very manifest from his message to Esau 
on coming into the land— "And he commanded 
them [his servants] saying, Thus 
shall ye speak unto my lord Esau, Thy servant 
Jacob saith thus, etc." (Gen. 32:3,4.) 
To such a claim the Apostle Paul gives 
most emphatic denial, and shows that this 
promise never was fulfilled to them; nor has 
it even yet been fulfilled to their posterity, 
though it most assuredly will be, both to 
them, and to their posterity, at the time 
appointed. Paul says "By faith Abraham, 
when he was called to go out into a place 
which he should after receive for an 
inheritance, obeyed. ...By faith he 
sojourned [moved about, not settling down 
as an owner] in the land of promise 
as in a strange country, dwelling in tents 
[temporary, movable dwellings] with Isaac 
and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same 
promise; for he looked for a city [an established 
Kingdom] which hath foundations 
[permanence], whose builder and maker is 
God.. ..These all died in faith, not having 
received the promises, but, having seen 
them afar off, were persuaded of them, and 
embraced them, and confessed that they 
were strangers and pilgrims on the earth." 
--Heb. 11:9,10,13. 

After forty years' absence from home, 
Jacob was ready at the Lord's command (Gen. 31:3,11-13; 
28:15,20,21; 32:9) to return. 
Experience had taught him confidence in 
God and lack of confidence in his uncle Laban. 
Jacob was now ninety-seven years old, 
and rich in flocks and herds; and with his 
wives and twelve sons he started on the then 
long journey of four hundred and fifty miles, 
humanly fearful of the consequences, yet, 
notwithstanding his fears, boldly walking 
out on the promises of God. 

VERSES 9-12. This is the first recorded 
prayer in the Bible, and it is beautifully 
humble, simple and trustful, and was acceptable 
to God. Verse 9 is a reverent and 
trustful address to the God of his fathers, 
Abraham and Isaac, recalling the divine 



command and promise of protection. (31:3,11-13.) 
Verse 10 disclaims any personal 
worthiness of this divine favor, not only of 
present protection and care, but also of "the 
truth," the precious promises granted unto 
him. Then he thankfully acknowledges the 
blessings already received. While with his 
staff only he had passed over the Jordan, 
now he had become two bands. This much 
in fulfilment of the promise of a numerous 
posterity—"as the sand of the sea-shore." 

VERSES 11,12 tell the Lord of his fears 
of his brother, and ask for the promised 
protection. Thus with childlike simplicity 
he comes to God as to a loving father. 

VERSES 24-28. In answer to Jacob's fervent, 
trustful prayer God sent an angel, evidently 
to comfort and direct him. But Jacob 
was anxious for more than comfort and direction 
in mere temporal things, and all 
night therefore he pleaded with the angel 
for some special evidence of divine favor 
beyond temporal things. The angel, too, 
had a blessing in store for him, but delayed 
its bestowal until the break of day, that 
Jacob might have a chance of proving the 
strength of his desire and appreciation of 
the divine favor. Thus God would have 
all his children "strive to enter in" to the 
blessings promised, and to "fight the good 
fight of faith," and so lay hold on eternal 
life. We may not listlessly drift into the 
divine favor. We must greatly appreciate 
and earnestly seek for it. As another test 
of Jacob's faith and earnestness, instead of 
the desired blessing came a severe affliction 
—probably what is now known as sciatica, 
a most painful affliction of the sciatic nerve. 
But even this affliction did not in the least 
dissuade Jacob from his desire and determination 
to have, if possible, some special 
evidence of divine favor. Still he plead 
with the angel of the Lord. 

And the angel said, "Let me go, for the 
day breaketh." And Jacob answered, "I 
will not let thee go, except thou bless me." 
Then came the blessing, a blessing worthy 
of the night's striving, and one which doubtless 
made his affliction seem comparatively 
light. Like Paul's thorn in the flesh, the 
affliction became but a reminder of the promise 
and favor of God, and served doubtless 
to keep him from being unduly elated. 

"And the angel saith unto him, What is 
thy name? And he said, Jacob. And he 
said, Thy name shall be called no more 



Jacob, but Israel; for as a prince hast thou 
power with God and with men, and hast 
prevailed." 

In these words was couched the future 
glory and exaltation of Jacob as a prince in 
the earthly, visible phase of the Kingdom 
of God. "Ye shall see Abraham and Isaac 
and Jacob in the Kingdom of God." (Luke 13:28; 
Matt. 8:11. See also Psa. 45:16 and 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., Chapter xiv.) 
Jacob was satisfied. And now, but one 

R1634 : page 93 

more thing he would ask— Was it for relief 
from his affliction? No; but he would know 
the name of his benefactor, this messenger 
of the Lord, that he might hold him in lasting 
and grateful remembrance. "And Jacob 
asked him, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, 
thy name. And he said, Wherefore is it 
that thou dost ask after my name?" He 
would have Jacob understand that the blessing 
was from God, whose messenger he 
was, and therefore he did not tell his name. 
The case is parallel to that of Manoah and 
the angel that visited him: "And Manoah 
said unto the angel of the Lord, What is 
thy name, that when thy sayings come to 
pass I may do thee honor? And the angel 
of the Lord said unto him, Why askest thou 
thus after my name, seeing it is secret?" 
Thus the true messengers of God always 

R1635 : page 93 

seek to give the honor unto God, and decline 
it for themselves.— See Rev. 19:10; 
John 14:28; Acts 3:12. 

Thus Jacob was blessed again as at Bethel. 
The darkest seasons of his life were the special 
occasions for the manifestation of divine 
favor. And so the children of God ever 
find it when in their fears and perplexities 
they come to God for rest and consolation. 

"E'en sorrow, touched by heaven, grows bright 

With more than rapture's ray, 
As darkness shows us worlds of light 
We never saw by day." 

VERSE 30. "And Jacob called the name 
of the place Peniel; for [said he] I have 
seen God face to face, and my life is preserved." 
Here and in other instances the 
Hebrew word rendered God is elohim, 
meaning mighty one— a representative of 
God. "No man hath seen God at any time." 



--John 1:18. 
R1635:page93 
ENVY AND DISCORD. 



II. QUAR., LESSON II., APRIL 8, GEN. 37:1-11. 

Golden Text— "See that ye fall not out by the way. 
--Gen. 45:24. 

The slow rate at which the promises to 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob of a numerous 
posterity were being fulfilled is quite noteworthy 
here. It was now two centuries 
since Abraham was called, and yet his posterity 
were but few. Jacob was now one 
hundred and nine years old, and had but 
twelve sons and one daughter. But they 
were well-born children, desired and welcomed, 
and considered gifts of God (Gen. 29:32-35; 
30:6-13,17-24),-and they were 
taught to reverence God and his promises. 
Yet over against these good influences were 
others less favorable— (1) The conditions 
of a polygamous home, with four sets of 
children, were not those which tend to peace 
and harmony and love in the family. Such 
a home was not after God's institution, but, 
as the Apostle Paul intimates, "the times 
of this ignorance God winked at." (See our 
issue of Nov. 1, '92; Article, The Law of 
God.) (2) They came in contact with an 
immoral heathen community, both in Haran 
and in Shechem. (3) And their shepherd 
life, caring for large flocks and herds which 
must necessarily be widely scattered, separated 
them from home and gave them much 
leisure for either good or evil. 

The experience of Joseph here introduced 
was the beginning of a train of providential 
circumstances which gave to the children of 
Israel the very necessary experience in Egypt 
in contact with the highest civilization and 
learning the world had then realized. There 
they remained under peculiar circumstances 
of discipline and training for four hundred 
years; and there as a people they learned to 
some extent the important lesson of humility 
and faith in the love and power of God. 

Joseph, a bright boy of seventeen and 
the special favorite of his father because he 
was a son of his old age and a very exemplary 
son, seemed to incur the displeasure 



of his brethren through envy on their part 

and guilelessness on his own. The elder 

brethren, instead of sharing the father's love 

for their young and promising brother, were 

envious of him and could not speak peaceably 

to him. Joseph was innocent and unaware 

of the malice that their envy was fast engendering 

and was shocked at what he did 

see and know of their misconduct, and very 

naturally reported the state of affairs to his 

father on his return home. 

Then, too, in his artlessness he told them 
his very significant dreams, which he probably 
did not understand, but which they 
interpreted as an indication of his future 
supremacy; and this, together with their 
knowledge of his father's special favor, 
probably made them fear a future supremacy, 
which idea they could not endure. 
Hence the plot to get him out of the way. 
Envy and hatred fast matured their bitter 
fruitage of a murderous spirit and intent. 
While God permitted all the sons of Jacob 
to thus manifest their disposition, he stood 
ready to overrule their course of conduct 
for the furtherance of his purposes. Thus 

R1635 : page 94 

the overruling providence of God is always 
compatible with man's free agency. 

The coat of many colors— a royal garment 
—which Jacob gave to Joseph, probably was 
also interpreted by the brethren as an indication 
of the father's purpose to bestow the 
chief blessing on him, the eldest son of the 
second wife, since Reuben, the eldest son 
of the first wife, had already forfeited it. 
-Gen. 49:4. 

The dreams of Joseph were quite prophetic 
of his later supremacy in Egypt, when 
his father and brethren all came in the extremity 
of famine to do him honor and to 
receive of his bounty. Doubtless also the 
impression they made on his mind by them 
proved a source of comfort and cheer in the 
midst of severe trials and temptations in 
Egypt, before he was summoned to the seat 
of power and influence. 

The envy of Joseph's brethren, although 
eventually overruled in harmony with God's 
promise to Abraham, brought upon them 
severe experiences and bitterness. Envy is 
one of the indigenous fruits of the fallen 
nature: itself bad, it is almost sure to lead 
to every evil work; and, unless corrected, it 



will eventuate in death. 



R1635 : page 94 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



page 94 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:-I will enclose 
an order for a few tracts. I do not 
come in contact with many people, but I 
want to have the "bread" on hand, when 
I do meet some who are starving for God's 
righteous plan, even when they do not know 
what they need. I often wish I could engage 
in the Lord's work more actively; but 
at present I am cut off from so doing in 
many ways, though since the new year 
dawned I have been trying to find more 
opportunities, also to appreciate those I have. 
I believe it is possible to neglect the privileges 
within our reach, by looking out to 
those which lie beyond our environment. 

No one need conclude he is without opportunities. 
All have the privilege daily 

in their respective families, and among acquaintances, 
to endeavor to fill their mission 
as representatives of Christ's Kingdom, holding 
up the divine standard of justice, love, 
etc., to the best of their ability, by the grace 
so freely given. Individual development, 
spiritually, is so necessary, that we may not 
be "castaways" from the prize. 

One way of spreading the truth, which I 
appreciate more fully now, is by means of 
the Missionary Envelopes. If the knowledge 
of God is to overthrow all error, the slightest 
means to that end should be used, that 
individually we should do all we can toward 
filling the earth with the truth, "as 
the waters cover the sea;" hence I feel there 
is power in the message on the Missionary 
Envelopes, and I am thankful for the privilege 
of using them. The "Good Hopes" fund 
is another blessed privilege, and although I 
can do so little toward that fund, I rejoice 
to know the "mite" is acceptable, if prompted 
by a willing spirit. 

The privilege of tract distribution; also 
of writing to some dear saint, thereby ministering 
to the body of Christ; in fact, so 
many privileges of building each other up 



in the most holy faith, present themselves 
to the mind of the thoughtful and watchful, 
that no one need be without work in this 
harvest time. I believe if we use the given 
opportunities, others will be presented to us. 

The answer to "Representative or Substitute" 
elucidated the doctrine of justification 
satisfactorily. The robe of Christ's righteousness 
grows lovelier and more precious 
daily to those who prize it. It is invaluable 
to the saints, for in no other garb would 
they be acceptable as kings and priests to 
our Father. May we continue to guard it 
carefully from fleshly stains, as we by grace 
strive toward actual righteousness. 

Kind greeting to Sister Russell and all 
others of the Church at Allegheny. 

Yours in our Redeemer, 

MRS. R. W. POWER. 



R1635 : page 94 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I want to 
tell you of a door our Lord has opened to me 
for spreading the glad tidings. 

Some weeks ago an article appeared in 
the Winnipeg Tribune, headed "Hell," 
and giving an imaginary description of a 
place of torment. I wrote a letter to the 
paper, giving the real meaning of the word, 
and saying I would be glad to correspond 
with any person who wished to look into 
the subject. The Tribune published my 
letter, and I have already heard from seven 

R1635 : page 95 

people. To each one I sent a copy of the 
"Hell" number of the TOWER and "The 
Hope of the Groaning Creation," together 
with a very few words of explanation of the 
ransom and advising the parties about the 
DAWNS. 

With loving remembrances, yours in the 
brotherhood of Christ, W. HOPE HAY. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-To-day's 
papers furnish a report of a Dr. Stebbins' 
discourse yesterday, in which he descants 
upon the Scriptures as being the unreliable 
and uninspired utterances and writings 
of fallible and ignorant men. To 



what straits a so-called "Minister of the 
Gospel" must be reduced, when, failing 
comprehension, his only alternative is to 
discredit and denounce the blessed Word 
of God; and how it makes one burn with 
indignation to know with what baleful influence 
such blasphemous mouthings are 
fraught, and that they are accepted as the 
utterances of a "learned" (?) and devout 
man, instead of what they really are, the 
vain and pompous frothings, and merely 
sensational statements, of a hireling shepherd, 
a blind leader of the blind. 

The more I read the DAWNS, the more am 
I interested, and the more am I impressed 
with their wonderful unfolding of the truth 
and of the hitherto hidden mysteries of the 
sacred Scriptures. I shall rejoice when the 
succeeding volume is announced. 

May the Lord continue to bless you and 
your labors in His service. 

Yours in fellowship and faith, 
B. C. HUGHES. 



page 95 



TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-Kindly fill enclosed 
order. 

I am thankful to be able to tell you that 
the good work of truth is yielding some 
fruits in this place; but we find a merely 
mental reception of truth to be only a partial 
work. For satisfactory results we find consecration 
the important feature. Wishing 
all co-workers in this grand harvest work 
God-speed, I remain, 

Yours in the blessed hope, 

WM. EYRES. 



R1635:page95 

BROTHER RUSSELL:-I feel myself under 
many obligations to you, and below you will 
find my acknowledgements of same, which 
is the only way I can repay you, except by 
prayer to the Master. 

Eight months ago I was in the "hedges;" 
but the Master rubbed "clay" on my eyes, 
and gave me no rest until I went and 
washed in "Siloam;" since which I have 
been gaining eyesight very fast, for which 
I never cease to praise the Lord. The Bible 



now looks so plain, that it seems that a blind 
man ought to understand it, but the trouble 
seems to be that they will not take the trouble 
to examine the matter. Oh! If poor, fallen 
humanity only knew the blessings in store 
for them, how quickly they would flee from 
the wrath to come. 

I have 36 copies of VOL. I., which I loan 
almost exclusively to train men; and I hope 
in this way to spread the truth still more. 
Men that read them are telling others about 
them. 

Some time ago I wrote you about my 
brother-in-law, to whom I had been talking 
in regard to DAWN; also about a man 
who had killed several men for revenge. 
Here is the latest from them: "Am studying 
all the time I have,. ..my faith in the 
Bible getting stronger all the time.... 
Mr. P. Says it (DAWN) is the grandest book 
he ever read. Have loaned him the second 
volume." Yours in the Lord, 

B. R. MONTAGUE. 



page 95 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:- 
We are daily feasting our souls on the Word 
and by communion with our Head and Redeemer, 
and have been much encouraged 
by finding several to whom we sold DAWNS 
several years ago gradually coming into the 
truth. 

I wish to tell you of one brother in particular. 
Two months after selling him 
DAWN, I stopped at his house. Said he, 
Are not you the man who sold me the 
DAWNS? I replied, "Yes sir." "Well," said 
he, "I am happy in the love of Jesus, and 
I am trying to live a fully consecrated life. 
When I got that book, I was an infidel. 
My parents were infidels and I had been 
taught infidelity all my life. If it had not 
been for DAWNS and like helps, I would 
have been one still." 

The tears coursed down his cheeks while 
he gave me this part of his history. You 
well know it did me good to hear him relate 
it. 

Wife and daughter join me heartily in 
sending love to you. We daily pray for 
you both and for each colporteur. We 
have very little Christian fellowship except 



page 96 

at home; but, thank God, we have sweet 
fellowship here. Pray for us. Yours in 
the bonds of the Gospel, and in loyalty to 
our Head, E. R. WEST. 



DEAREST FRIENDS :- While working my 
"trick" one day last week, I overheard a 
conversation at the wire between two of 
our operators in regard to some books they 
were exchanging and reading. When they 
got through, I asked who it was, among 
our operators, that was such a philosopher. 
One replied, Here I am. I asked his name, 
told him I had been a student of your 
publications for some years and found them 
just what suited me, and said if he had no 
objections I would like to have him read a 
volume of your works. 

Enclosed please find a letter I received 
from him after reading VOL. I. It gave me 
such unspeakable joy to receive, as it were, 
from the dear Savior's own hand confirmation 
of his appreciation of my little service 
in the harvest. I am not relating you this 
for vain-glory or any praise; but that you, 
too, may share in the joy of the fact that 
the work is appreciated when received into 
good, honest hearts. 

In reply to the request for more on the 
subject and to allow the agent's wife to read 
the book, I sent him some tracts and an 
old TOWER and referred him to you. May 
the Lord give it increase as it pleaseth him, 
and give those who are actively engaged in 
the "harvest" the needed encouragement to 
press on. 

Yours in Him, S. M. TAYLOR. 

Following is the letter mentioned. 

FRIEND:— I received the book, and am 
more than pleased with it. Never took any 
"notion" to such kind of works until now. 
I think you have opened my eyes, so I can 
see better. You need not be afraid you 
have offended me, not in the least. When 
I first received the volume I thought, "How 
absurd;" but after looking it over I changed 
my opinion somewhat. Now I can thank 
you for changing my course. I have read 
this through. Have you any objections to 
the agent's wife reading it? She said she 



would like to read it. I am afraid I cannot 
send you any books that you would care to 
read. I have given up reading this "silly 
stuff." 
Yours very truly, J. C. S . 

R1635 : page 96 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:- 
I recently sent a letter to the First Congregational 

Church of S (of which I was 

so long a member), addressed to the pastor. 
I have a reply from him, in which he says, 
"Your candor in not wishing to remain 
where your membership would misrepresent 
you does you honor. Nor shall we fail 
to appreciate the sentiments of Christian 
sympathy and of love for all of God's children 
which pervade your letter. I am sure 
the church would not do such violence to its 

R1636:page96 

love for one of the disciples of our Lord as 
to drop your name, leaving the record to be 
interpreted by those who, not knowing the 
cause, might infer excommunication." He 
then adds, "With your consent, therefore, 
I shall recommend the granting of a letter 
in which your reasons shall be fully stated, 
and in which we will state that while differing 
from your views we still retain you as a 
child of God, a disciple of our common Lord." 

I have talked with Brother F about 

it, and he thinks it will be right for me to 

receive a letter under those conditions. 

What do you think? I made use of the 

letter you published in the TOWER [Sept. 

'93], with some changes to suit the circumstances, 

and I am very grateful to you for 

the help it was to me. 

Please see that my TOWERS are sent regularly. 
I miss them so much, if they do 
not come on time; for their contents are 
such a rich feast. Praise the Lord for meat 
in due season for hungry souls! May God 
spare you both to feed his flock until the 
fulness of his time has come. 

Yours in Christ, MRS. A. E. TORRY. 

[In reply: We congratulate you, dear 
Sister, upon your action here related. We 
advise that you accept the proffered Letter. 
The minister's letter certainly shows an excellent 
spirit. Such a man should be ripe 
for present truth. Be sure that you at least 
offer him some reading matter bearing thereon. 



Perhaps he would accept as a loan or as a 
gift the first volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN? 
The Sept. '93, and Jan. 15, '94, TOWERS 
would also be good for him. 

May you seek and obtain the wisdom 
necessary to the proper use of your liberty 
in Christ: that your days and hours may be 
full of his service and of blessing to all 
about you.-EDITOR.] 



page 98 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



THE NEXT TOWER will contain an article of 
some length on Immortality. Those desiring 
5 or more extra copies at half rates will please 
order at once. 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



We again remind those who are trusting in 
the precious blood of the propriety and profit 
of celebrating our dear Redeemer's death upon 
its anniversary, after the example of the early 
Church,— this year on Thursday evening, April 
19th, after 6 P.M. See particulars in TOWER of 
March 1, 1894. We also repeat our suggestion 
that the little groups be supported— that the 
abler ones do not forsake their brethren at home 
to attend the Allegheny meeting or any other. 

In reply to inquiries as to a good order to 
be observed at such meetings we suggest the 
following:— 



Meet at 7.30 P.M. Open with a hymn and 
a prayer. Then explain the import of the Memorial 
Supper and its type, the Passover supper. 
Then explain (or read from this TOWER) the import 
of the bread. Then have a prayer of thanks 
for the bread. Then pass it to all the believers. 
Next speak of the import of the "cup" as an 
emblem (or read from TOWER). Then let some 
one offer prayer and thanks specially for the 
blessings represented in the "cup." Then pass 
it to those who commune. Close with a hymn, 
and disperse (without gossip) with your minds 
resting upon the remarkable events which followed 
the first memorial— Gethsemane, Pilate's 
court, Herod's soldiers, and Calvary. 

SUGGESTIONS ABOUT ADDRESSES. 



We are always glad to receive lists of addresses 
of persons likely to be interested in the 
truth— good people, honest people, regardless 
of church-membership. Send all you can that 
we may send them reading matter— Old Theology 
Tracts, Sample TOWERS, etc. 

We have inquiry from some as to what they 
would best do when others ask them for addresses 
of WATCH TOWER subscribers. We answer, 
You would best not comply with such requests. 
You do not know what use may be made of them. 
You do not know but what some kind of poison 
might thus be administered to some "babe" 
in Christ, for whose injury you would thus be 
partially responsible. When you send us names, 
you know the kind of reading matter we intend 
sending. It is only those who know what we 
publish and who agree with the same that we 
invite to send us addresses. 

The article "Personal Liberty— Its Responsibility," 
in March 1, TOWER applies to this matter 
and to everything else we seek to do for God. 

R1636:page98 

WILL IT APPLY TO THE BIBLE? 



We are asked how the following extract from 
the article, "Personal Liberty— Its Responsibility," 
in our issue of March 1 , would apply to 
the WATCH TOWER, MILLENNIAL DAWN, and 
the BIBLE. 

"If you have read and failed to comprehend a publication, 
do not suppose your mind incapable of grasping 



anything so deep and complex, and then proceed to circulate 
it among others; but conclude that if you have not 
the mental capacity to understand it, your safest plan will 
be not to run the risk of choking any one else with it." 

We reply: that whoever has not had satisfactory 
evidence of the general truth of the 
BIBLE, the DAWNS and the TOWERS should not 
circulate them. Everyone should have a conscience 
and no one should be asked or expected 
to violate his conscience, in the interest of any 
theory, person or publication. 

"A PRINCE OF PEACE LIKE MYSELF." 



Emperor William of Germany recently described 
the Czar of Russia as "a prince of 
peace like myself." The true Prince of Peace 
will very soon conquer a peace that will last 
a thousand years, without ten millions of soldiers 
to maintain it. He will use the present 
"powers that be" in overthrowing and conquering 
each other,— shortly. 



R1636:page99 

VOL. XV. APRIL 1, 1894. NO. 7. 

THE IMPORT OF THE EMBLEMS. 



WHEN announcing the date of the Memorial 

Supper and stating our reasons for 

its yearly commemoration, in our issue of 

March 1, we promised that in this issue we 

would examine briefly the import of the emblems 

used to represent the body and blood of 

our Redeemer. 

Of the bread our Lord said: "This is my 
flesh;"— that is to say, the unleavened bread 
represents his flesh, his humanity, which was 
broken or sacrificed for us. Unless he had 
sacrificed himself for us, we could never have 
everlasting life, as he said: "Except ye eat 
the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood 
ye have no life in you."— John 6:53. 

Not only was the breaking of Jesus' body 
thus to provide bread of life, of which if a man 
eat he shall never die, but it also opened the 
"narrow way" to life, and broke or unsealed 
and gave us access to the truth, spiritual food, 
as an aid to walk the narrow way which leads 



to life. And thus we see that the broken loaf 
fitly represented the breaking of him who said, 
"I am the WAY, the TRUTH, and the LIFE; no 
man cometh unto the Father but by ME."— 
John 14:6. 

Hence, when we eat of the broken loaf, we 
should realize that had he not died— been 
broken— for us we would never have been able 
to come to the Father, but would have remained 
forever under the curse of Adamic sin 
and in the bondage of death. 

Another thought: the bread used was unleavened. 
Leaven is corruption, an element 
of decay, hence a type of sin, and the decay 
and death which sin works in mankind. So, 
then, this symbol declares that our Lord Jesus 
was free from sin, a lamb without spot or 
blemish, "holy, harmless, undefiled." Had 
he been of Adamic stock, had he received his 
life in the usual way from any earthly father, 
he, too, would have been leavened with Adamic 
sin, as are all other men; but his life came 
unblemished from a higher, heavenly nature, 
changed to earthly conditions; hence he is called 
the "bread from heaven." (John 6:41.) Let 
us then appreciate the pure, unleavened, undefiled 
bread which God has provided, and so let 
us eat of him— by eating and digesting the truth, 
and especially this truth— appropriating to ourselves, 
by faith, his righteousness; and let us 

R1637:page99 

recognize him as both the way and the life. 

The Apostle, by divine revelation, communicates 
to us a further meaning in this remembrancer. 
He shows that not only did 
the loaf represent our Lord Jesus, individually, 
but that after we have thus partaken of him 
(after we have been justified by appropriating 
his righteousness), we, by consecration, become 
associated with him as part of the one 
broken loaf— food for the world. (1 Cor. 10:16.) 
This suggests the thought of our privilege 
as justified believers to share now in the sufferings 
and death of Christ, the condition upon 
which we may become joint-heirs with him of 
future glories, and associates in the great work 
of blessing and giving life to all the families 
of the earth. 

R1637 : page 100 

This same thought is expressed by the Apostle 
repeatedly and under various figures, but 
none of them more forceful than this, that the 



Church, as a whole, is the "one loaf" now being 
broken. It is a striking illustration of our 
union and fellowship with our Head. 

We quote: "Because there is one loaf, we, 
the many [persons] are one body; for we all 
partake of the one loaf." "The loaf which 
we break, is it not a participation of the body 
of the Anointed one?"-l Cor. 10:16,17.- 
Diaglott. 

The "fruit of the vine" represents the sacrificed 
life given by our Lord. "This is my 
blood [symbol of life given up in death] of the 
new covenant, shed for many, FOR THE REMISSION 
of sins." "Drink ye all of it."— 
Matt. 26:27,28. 

It was by the giving up of his life as a ransom 
for the life of the Adamic race, which sin 
had forfeited, that a right to LIFE may come to 
men through faith and obedience under the 
New Covenant. (Rom. 5:18,19.) The shed 
blood was the "ransom [price] for ALL," which 
was paid for all by our Redeemer himself; but 
his act of handing the cup to the disciples, and 
asking them to drink of it, was an invitation 
to them to become partakers of his sufferings, 
or, as Paul expresses it, to "fill up that which 
is behind of the afflictions of Christ." (Col. 1:24.) 
It was the offer to us that if we, after 
being justified by faith, voluntarily partake of 
the sufferings of Christ, by espousing his cause, 
it will be reckoned to us as though we had part 
in his sacrifice. "The cup of blessing, for 
which we bless God, is it not a participation 
of the blood [shed blood— death] of the 
Anointed one?" (1 Cor. 10:16.-Diaglott.) 
Would that we all might realize the value of 
the "cup," and could bless God for an opportunity 
of sharing with Christ his "cup" of 
sufferings and shame: all such may be assured 
that they will also be glorified together with 
him.-Rom. 8:17. 

Our Lord also attached this significance to 
the "cup," indicating that it signified our 
participation in his dishonor, our share in his 
sacrifice— the death of our humanity. For instance, 
when asked by two of his disciples for 
a promise of future glory in his throne, he answered 
them: "Ye know not what ye ask; are 
ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink 
of?" On their hearty avowal he answered, 
"Ye shall indeed drink of my cup." The 
juice of the grape not only speaks of the crushing 
of the grape till blood comes forth, but 
it also speaks of an after refreshment; and so 
we who now share the "sufferings of Christ" 
shall shortly share also his glories, honors and 



immortality— when we drink the new wine 
with him in the Kingdom. 

Let us then, dearly beloved, as we on the 
evening of the 19th inst. commemorate our 
Lord's death, call to mind the meaning of 
what we do; and being invigorated with his 
life, and strengthened by the living bread, let 
us drink with him into his death, and go forth 
more determined than ever to be broken with 
him for the feeding of others. "For if we be 
dead with him we shall live with him; if we 
suffer we shall also reign with him."— 
2 Tim. 2:11,12. 

WHO MAY PARTAKE. 



It is left open for each to decide for himself 
whether he has or has not the right to partake 
of this bread and this cup. If he professes to 
be a disciple, trusting in the blood of the New 
Covenant, for forgiveness of sins, and consecrated 
to the Lord's service, his fellow disciples 
may not judge his heart. God alone can read 
that with positiveness. 

Because of their symbolism of the death of 
Christ, therefore let all beware of partaking of 
these emblems ignorantly, unworthily, improperly 
—not recognizing in them "the Lord's 
body" as our ransom, for in such a case the 
partaker would be as one of those who murdered 
the Lord and would, in symbol, "be 
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord." 
1 Cor. 11:27. 

"But let a man examine himself:" let him 
see to it that in partaking of the emblems he 
realizes them as the ransom-price of his life 
and privileges, and furthermore that he by partaking 
of them is pledging himself to share in 
the sufferings of Christ and be broken for others; 
otherwise, his act of commemoration will 

R1637 : page 101 

be a condemnation to his daily life before his 
own conscience— "condemnation to himself." 
-ICor. 11:28,29. 

Through lack of proper appreciation of this 
remembrancer, which symbolizes not only our 
justification, but also our consecration, to share 
in the sufferings and death of Christ, the Apostle 
says, "Many are weak and sickly among 
you, and many sleep." (1 Cor. 11:30.) The 
truth of this remark is evident: a failure to 
appreciate and a losing sight of the truths represented 



in this Supper are the cause of the 
weak, sickly and sleepy condition of the 
church nominal. Nothing so fully awakens 
and strengthens the saints as a clear appreciation 
of the ransom sacrifice and of their share 
with their Lord in his sufferings and sacrifice 
for the world. "Let a man examine himself, 
and so let him eat of that bread and drink of 
that cup." 



R1637 :page 101 
FEET WASHING. 



SOME feel that the feet- washing mentioned 
in John 13:4-17, is as important as the 
Memorial Supper; and hence we will here consider 
the subject: although only one of the 
Evangelists remembered to even mention it. 

In Eastern countries, where sandals were 
worn, and the feet thus exposed to sand and 
dust, feet-washing was a regular custom, and 
an actual necessity. This service was considered 
very menial, and the humblest servants 
or slaves performed it for the family and guests. 

Our Lord had noticed among his disciples 
a spirit of selfishness; he had overheard them 
disputing which of them should be greatest in 
authority and dignity in the Kingdom he had 
promised to share with them; and, foreseeing 
that this spirit would injure them in proportion 
as it grew and strengthened, he had rebuked 
them for their lack of humility. So indeed 
it did, in the fourth to the sixth centuries, 
blossom and yield bitter fruit, in the organization 
of Papacy, and the train of evils and errors 
which still flow from that impure fountain. 

To illustrate the proper spirit which should 
characterize all who would be his disciples, 
he took a little child and set him in the midst, 
and said, Except ye become (artless and simple) 
as a little child, you are not fit for the 
Kingdom for which I am calling you. Ye 
know how the Gentiles lord it over one another, 
and recognize caste and station, but it 
must not be so with you. Ye have but one 
Master, and all ye are brethren; and he that 
would be chief, let him become chief servant. 
(Mark 10:35-43.) They who serve you most, 
you must mark as your chief ones. I am the 
chief servant myself; for the Son of man came 
not to be served by others, and honored thus, 



but he came to serve others, even to the extent 
of giving his life in their service. As 
therefore my greatest service toward you renders 
me your chief, so shall it be among you. 
Esteem and honor one another in proportion 
as you find in each other unselfish sacrificing 
love and service. Esteem such very highly for 
their works' sake.— 1 Thes. 5:13. 

But for all this, the spirit of pride and a desire 
to "lord it" over others, and be reverenced 
as chief, was there, even after three 
years and a half spent with the Master, and 
under his example; and as he was about to 
leave them, Jesus sought, even on the last 
evening with them, to impress this lesson indelibly 
upon their hearts. So, after the Passover 
Supper, he arose from the table and 
performed for his disciples the most menial 
service, in washing their feet. They probably 
had not even thought of performing such a 
service for each other or for him, and even 
had consideration enough to object to his thus 
serving them in so humble a manner. 

When Jesus had finished, he said to them, 
"Know ye what I have done to you? Ye call 
me Master and Lord, and ye say well; for so 
I am. If I then, your Lord and Master, have 
washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one 
another's feet. For I have given you an example, 
that ye should do as I have done to 
you. Verily, verily, I say unto you, The servant 
is not greater than his lord; neither is he 
that is sent greater than he that sent him. If 
ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do 

R1637 : page 102 

them." If you understand and appreciate the 
lesson I have given you, and will practice it, 
you will be blessed thereby, helped in my service, 
and prepared for the Kingdom in which I 
have promised you a share.— John 13:4-17. 

That the lesson had its designed effect we 
can scarcely doubt, as we look at the course 
of several of the apostles, and see how, with 
much self denial, they served the body of 
Christ, of which they were fellow-members, 
following the example of the Head, who was 
chief servant of all. 

The question arises, What did the Lord 
mean when he said, "I have given you an example, 
that ye should do as I have done?" 
Was the example in the principle, in the lesson 
of service one toward another? Or was the example 
in the method of service, in the ceremony 
of feet-washing? To suppose the latter 



would be to hide the real lesson under a form. 
And if the example were in the form, then 
every item of the form should be observed: 
an upper room; a supper; sandals should be 
worn; the same kind of garments; the towel 
girdle; etc. But no: the "example" which 
we should follow lay in the humble serving of 
the disciples by the Master, regardless of form. 
His example of serving the fellow-members in 
even the most menial manner is what we should 
follow— and blessed will we be, in proportion 
as we do follow it. In that proportion we 
shall be prepared for the everlasting Kingdom 
and service of God. 

Those now living in Eastern countries, where 
sandals are still worn, may find an opportunity 
now to follow the example, the same form 
which the Master used, as well as other forms; 
and those differently circumstanced may follow 
the "example" in a thousand forms. Some 
of the fellow-disciples probably live in your 
city and in mine. How can we serve them? 
How can we refresh them? How can we show 
them our love and sympathy according to the 
Lord's "example?" Not in this climate by 
washing their feet— this would be an inconvenience, 
the very reverse of a pleasure and 
service to them, and therefore contrary to the 
"example." But we can serve the "body" 
otherwise, and truly follow the example. We 
can improve our various opportunities to serve 
them in matters temporal as well as spiritual. 
We can be on the lookout, and when we see 
sadness or discouragement, we can lend a helping 
hand to lift our brother's burdens, or our 
sister's sorrows, and we can let them see by 
deeds, as well as words, our anxiety to serve 
them— figuratively speaking, to wash their feet. 

Do not wait until they request your assistance; 
for in proportion as they are developed 
disciples, they will not ask your aid. Do 
not wait until they tell you of their burdens 
and trials, but watch to anticipate; for in proportion 
as they partake of the Master's spirit, 
they will not be complainers, but will live 
"always rejoicing"— rejoicing even in 
tribulations. 

Be not ashamed of such service of the "body," 
but seek it and rejoice in it— "ye do serve 
the Lord, Christ." But still more important 
than temporal service is our service one of another 
as "new creatures." 

The washing of the body with the truth— 
the sanctifying and cleansing of it with the 
word— is in progress now. (Eph. 5:26,27.) 
What are you doing to cleanse and purify the 



faith and lives of your fellow members? Do 
you approach them humbly with the truth, 
sincerely anxious to serve them, to bless and 
comfort and refresh them therewith? If so, 
go on; grand is your service; the Master served 
thus; this is his example; follow on. The 
more you can thus serve, and at the greater 
cost of time, and effort, and convenience, and 
self-interest, the greater will you be in the 
eyes of the Master, and the more honored and 
beloved of the body when they shall come to 
see and know you, as the Lord sees and knows 
your love and service. 

Follow closely, then, the noble "example" 
of Jesus: wash and be washed one of another, 
cleanse and purge away the defilements with 
which each comes daily in contact in the 
world, that ye may be clean, "through the 
word spoken unto you." Purge out the old 
leaven of hypocrisy, and envy, and self-exaltation, 
even as ye have already been justified 
from all things and reckoned pure and holy 
by the merit of the precious blood which the 
chief servant and Lord of all gave for all. — 
2 Tim. 2:20,21. 



R1637 :page 103 
BEAR UP THE FEET. 



"Judge this, rather, that no man put a stumbling-block, or 
an occasion to fall, in his brother's way." "He shall 
give his angels [messengers, servants] charge over thee; 
...they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest 
thou dash thy foot against a stone." 
--Rom. 14:13; Psa. 91:11,12. 

EVERY gathering of the saints, even of two 

or three, is an assembling of the members 

of the body of Christ. So that the entire number 

of saints in the world to-day, or in any day, 

represents the one body; and yet the entire 

body is but one. Looked at still another way, 

we see the head first, and the succeeding members 

following in order, leaving those members 

of Christ who are alive and remain unto the 

presence of the Lord to represent the last members 

—the feet. 

It is to these that the prophet refers above: 
not to the literal feet of Jesus, but the feet 
members of his body. (Many improperly accept 
Satan's interpretation of this passage, notwithstanding 



Jesus' rejection of it— Matt. 4:6,7.) 
The prophet makes the statement that the 
Lord will make special provision for the help 
and support of the "feet," just after giving a 
description of the evil day which the "feet" 
class will experience— the dark day, when the 
arrows of error will fly thick and fast; when 
the pestilence of Infidelity will stalk abroad; 
when all, except the "feet" class, shall fall- 
thousands on every hand. The question will 
no longer be, Who will fall? but, "Who shall 
be able to stand?" These, the real feet members, 
shall not fall; these shall have special 
help; God will send them messengers, whom 
he will specially instruct or charge that his 
will shall be accomplished, and the true overcomers 
be upheld, and neither stumble nor fall. 

Blessed assurance! cause for trust and confidence, 
that if we abide under the protection 
with which he has covered us, we shall be safe 
and come off conquerors, and more than conquerors, 
through him who loved us and washed 
us in his own precious blood. But the thought 
specially in mind is this: Not only are those 
who scatter the pestilence, and shoot out the 
arrows of error, and cast stumbling-blocks in 
the way, men in the flesh, but those messengers 
whom God will use to bear up the "feet," 
and keep them from falling, are also human 
agents. Both classes are servants— serving 
some cause, either of truth or error; serving 
some master— the God of truth, or Satan, the 
father of lies and errors. No matter whose 
uniform we wear, his servants we are to whom 
we render service. If Satan can get into the 
service of error those who profess to serve the 
Lord, he is the more pleased, and the more 
successful in reaching others of the same class. 
As the Apostle advised us, so we find it in this 
evil day— the ministers or messengers or servants 
of error will appear as messengers of 
light, and their influence will thereby be the 
greater; and all not fixed upon the rock foundation 
of Christian hope will be sure to fall. 
All not protected by the armor which God's 
Word supplies are sure to fall pierced with the 
arrows of error. 

Of two things then be assured:— We each 
must serve one side or the other in this battle 
of the great day of God Almighty, which has 
to the Church a different phase from that in 
which it will present itself to the world. Our 
strife is with spiritual adversaries, a battle between 
truth and error on religious subjects, 
while there is a conflict also between right and 
wrong, truth and error, as relates to political 



and temporal affairs. On which side are you 
serving? Are you scattering error by words of 
your own, or reading matter, or in other ways 
doing that which will smite down and stumble 
your fellow pilgrims? or are you giving the 
more earnest heed to the special "charge" 
God has given us regarding the dangers and 
pitfalls of this day? and are you thus "bearing 
up" the fellow members of the body— the feet? 
Are you earnest in rightly dividing the word 
of truth? and are you careful to put before 
others only that which you have thoroughly 
examined and proved to the extent of your 
ability by the Word of God? Are you one of 
Satan's messengers, being used of him to overthrow 
the faith of some, and to remove "the 
feet" from the grand rock of faith— the ransom? 
or are you rendering yourselves as servants 
of righteousness and messengers of God, 

R1637 : page 104 

serving and blessing the feet? If the one, you 
are stumbling and defiling the "feet;" if the 
other, you are bearing up and "washing" the 
"feet." 

True, the errors will test the armor of each, 
whether you shoot any of them or not; and it 
is also true that the "feet" shall be borne up 
and not dashed, whether you assist or not; but 
the question is none the less important to each 
of us, and will demonstrate our own faithfulness 
or unfaithfulness, our own worthiness or 
unworthiness to be members of the feet class 
of the body. 

Blessed shall be that servant whom the Lord 
shall find giving meat in due season, to the 
household of faith. (Matt. 24:45,46.) Such, 
as messengers of God, are serving, strengthening 
and bearing up the "feet" of Christ. 
The same thought is beautifully expressed in 
Rev. 19:7. The bride makes herself "ready" 
for the Bridegroom: each member assisting the 
others results in the preparation of all. Not 
that we could make ourselves ready of ourselves, 
but that we aid each other in the cultivation of 
those traits of character which the Lord has 
stipulated shall distinguish all who become 
his joint-heirs.— Rom. 8:29. 

Judge— examine yourselves— that none of 
you "put a stumbling-block, or an occasion 
to fall, in his brother's way."— Rom. 14:13. 



R1637 : page 104 



"LEST YE ENTER INTO TEMPTATION." 



"Watch and pray, lest ye enter 
into temptation. "-Mark 14:38. 

IT seems peculiar that there should be greater 

liability of falling into sin at one season 

than at another; but nevertheless we have noticed 

for several years and have before called 

to the attention of others the peculiar force of 

temptations at the time of the Passover, every 

Spring. Year after year at this season we have 

noticed special liability of many or all to 

stumble or be offended. Let us, therefore, take 

earnest heed to our Lord's words, and earnestly 

watch and pray for others and for ourselves; 

and let each one be on his guard not to cast 

a stumbling-block before his brother.— Rom. 14: 13; 

Heb. 2:1. 

It was at the Passover season that our Lord 
said, "I am the living bread which came down 
from heaven: if any man eat of this bread he 
shall live forever; and the bread that I will 
give is my flesh, which I will give for the life 
of the world." Then many of his friends and 
followers said, "This is a hard saying; who can 
hear it?. ..and walked no more with him. 
Then said Jesus unto the twelve, Will ye also 
go away?"— John 6:4,51,60,66,67. 

It was at the Passover season that Judas 
bargained for the betrayal of our Lord,— and 
a little later on accomplished it. 

It was about the Passover season that our 
Lord said, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, 
even unto death." (Matt. 26:38.) "I have a 
baptism [death] to be baptized with, and how 
am I straitened until it be accomplished!" 
-Luke 12:50. 

It was about the Passover season that our 
Lord took the disciples and began to explain 
unto them that the Son of Man must be delivered 
into the hands of the chief priests and 
scribes and be put to death (Matt. 16:21); and 
then Peter was tempted to forget that he was 
the disciple, and took the Lord and began to 
rebuke him, saying, "Be it far from thee, Lord. 
This shall not be unto thee." Thus also he 
tempted our Lord to repudiate his sacrifice, 
and brought upon himself the rebuke— "Get 
thee behind me, Satan: thou art an offence 
unto me: for thou savorest not the things that 
be of God, but those that be of men."— 
Verses 22,23. 



It was while met to eat the Passover that the 
twelve got into a dispute as to which of them 
should be greatest in the Kingdom. They 
thus brought upon themselves our Lord's just 
rebuke, and induced the illustration of humility 
on his part by the washing of their feet. 

It was when they had sung a hymn and gone 
out from the Passover that our Lord used to 
them the words at the head of this article, 
"Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation;" 
while he himself was in an agonizing 
battle, and with bloody sweat submitting his 

R1637 : page 105 

will to the will of God; and, praying earnestly, 
was strengthened.— Luke 22:39-46. 

It was but a little later that the emissaries 
of the High Priest came upon them and the 
eleven all forsook the Lord and fled (Mark 14:50): 
the temptation, the fear, they could not 
resist. 

It was but a little later that Peter and John, 
bolder than the others, went with the crowd 
into Pilate's court to see what would befall the 
Master; and Peter, being recognized as one of 
Christ's disciples, was tempted to deny the 
Lord with cursing.-Mark 14:68,70,71. 

It was at the same time that our Lord was 
tempted before Pilate, but victoriously "witnessed 
a good confession."— 1 Tim. 6:13. 

The temptations of our Lord followed rapidly. 
When his foes spat upon him, and 
crowned him with thorns, and reviled him, 
saying, "Let him save himself, if he be Christ, 
the chosen of God," he could have smitten them 
with disease or death; but, as a sheep before 
her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his 
mouth. He overcame, and prayed for those 
who despitefully used him.— Luke 23:33-37. 

He might even have concluded that he would 
not be the Redeemer of such thankless beings; 
but, while realizing that he could even then 
ask of the Father and receive the assistance of 
twelve legions of angels and overcome his enemies, 
he resisted the temptation. He gave 
himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due 
time. 

The death of our Lord was a great trial of 
faith to all the disciples, who straightway were 
tempted to go again to their old fishing business, 
and neglect the fishing for men.— 
John 21:3-17. 

Paul and the other apostles subsequently had 
special trials at this special season also. See 
Acts 20:16; 21:10,1 1,27-36. 



In view of all this in the past, as well as in 
view of our own experience since the present 
harvest began in 1 874, we feel specially solicitous 
for the Lord's sheep every Spring; and this 
Spring is no exception. What may be the 
character of the temptations, we may not clearly 
discern until they are upon us; for if we 
knew all about them in advance they would be 
but slight temptations. Watch, therefore, and 
pray always; for the only safe way is to be 
prepared; because your adversary, the devil, 
is seeking whom he may devour. He knows 
your weak points, and is ready to take advantage 
of them. We will each need the graces 
of the spirit in our hearts, as well as the Lord's 
"grace to help in time of need" if we would 
overcome. "Watch and pray, lest ye enter 
into temptation!" 

"My soul, be on thy guard, 
Ten thousand foes arise; 

The hosts of sin are pressing hard 
To draw thee from the prize." 



R1637 : page 105 

THE WORK IN ENGLAND. 



AFTER an expenditure of considerable by 
the Tract Fund to get the Colporteur work 
started in Gt. Britain (books, etc., to the retail 
value of $965.67), we have to announce that 
Brother Rogers, who went there for the purpose 
of starting it, has left the colporteur service. 
He assures us, however, that he has not 
left the Truth, and that he will still circulate 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, as he may have opportunity, 
in his new line of work. 

His new plan of labor we cannot approve for 
several reasons. He describes it as a work of 
faith. Instead of accepting and using the sale 
of the DAWNS, as God's provided means for 
the support of the laborers in the present "harvest," 
he proposes to rely largely upon collections 
and donations from the friends. He explained 
to us that he proposes to work as follows: 
On going to a city, he will seek for any 
who are already interested, and expect them 
to hire a suitable place for preaching and to 
attend to his financial matters and "see that he 
lacks nothing," while he preaches orally. Between 
meetings he will call upon Christian 
people and talk with them privately about the 



Truth. If any of them inquire for reading 
matter on the subject, he proposes to take them 
the MILLENNIAL DAWN, the profit on the sale 
of which will go toward defraying his expenses. 
Brother Rogers became so infatuated with his 

R1637 : page 106 

idea, that without even trying the method or 
writing one word about it he crossed the Atlantic 
to urge, nay almost to force upon us, the 
general adoption of this plan, instead of the 
present Colporteur method, which, together 
with the Tract work and WATCH TOWER, has 
been so greatly blessed of the Lord to so many 
of our readers. He expresses a dislike for the 
term Colporteur, preferring to be called a minister 
or preacher. We fear that he is getting 
ashamed of the method which God seems specially 
to have used and blessed in the preaching 
(making known) of present "harvest" truth. 

Our objections to the proposed method are 
as follows: 

(1) We are opposed to all forms of begging 
—whether by word, by insinuation, by suggestive 
hint, by collections, or by going into a 
Brother's home and sitting down on him until 

he is forced to say, Move on. 

(2) Experience, which is much better than 
theory, convinces us that the majority of Christian 

R1638 : page 106 

people are prejudiced against any religious 
meeting held in a hall, unless they have 
some knowledge of its character in advance. 
Consequently, a gathering of representative 
Christians can not be had in that way. Indeed, 
we find that Christians who seldom attend 
Church services of any kind, being prevented 
by family cares, and some by skepticism, are 
more often reached by the colporteurs and 
deeply interested. 

(3) It is an expensive method, wasteful of 
time and money which could be much better 
spent for the service of the Truth and the 
praise of the Lord in the colporteur work and 
Tract circulation. The time spent in seeking 

a suitable hall and in preparing and delivering 
discourses, could all be used in colporteuring, 
and the expense of hall-rent, etc., be saved 
besides. 

(4) The effects of public discourse, soon 
wear away, because the Scripture proofs are 
not so well appreciated as from reading, when 
the quotations, being marked and cited, can be 



referred to and re-read until fully understood. 

(5) In a town with a population often 
thousand, properly colporteured, two or three 
weeks' effort should dispose of at least four or 
five hundred DAWNS, and bring it to the attention 
of all; whereas the proposed plan would 

bring the Truth to the attention of only a 

few, probably circulate not above fifty DAWNS, 

and require much more time and expense. 

Experience shows that while some of the 

books sold may awaken no immediate interest, 

many of them bring forth good fruitage years 

after. Besides, as Brother Rogers himself has 

previously remarked, it seems as though the 

Lord is circulating the reading matter, to select 

and arm at once the overcoming class now, 

and the remainder of it to do a similar work 

for another class to be developed under, and 

out of, the great tribulation approaching. (Rev. 7:14.) 

See Brother Rogers' clear statement on 

this subject in our issue of July '93, page 194. 

(6) The method proposed would debar 
from the privilege of the "harvest" work the 
majority of those now engaged in it as DAWN 
colporteurs; for about one-half of the number 
are sisters, and of the brethren very few have 
the gift of oratory or any of the qualifications 
for attracting, interesting and profiting the 
public by preaching-meetings. 

Indeed, Brother Rogers agrees with us and 
many others of his best friends, that he lacks 
the talent of a public speaker; but he claims 
that the less ability he has, the more the Lord 
will use him in that way. He states that for 
this reason he never even attempts to prepare 
a discourse. And a similar course he urges 
upon others. We, on the contrary, hold that 
each of the Lord's servants should seek to use 
the talent which God has given him, as directed 
in Rom. 12:6-8; 1 Cor. 12:8-11; and that 
each should study how best to use his talents 
for the edification of his hearers.— 2 Tim. 2:15; 
ICor. 14:19. 

Upon going to London, Brother Rogers 
started a three months' course of discourses, 
announcing subjects. Being from America 
and coming to them as a representative colporteur 
and instructor of colporteurs, of several 
years experience, commended to them by us, 
the WATCH TOWER readers there naturally inferred 
that his oratorical preaching was part 
of our arranged program; and when they went 
to hear him some were greatly disappointed, 

R1638 : page 107 



and wrote us accordingly. One only recently 

interested TOWER reader, was quite provoked 

indeed, and wrote that we must have a very 

low estimate of the intelligence of our English 

readers when we sent Brother Rogers as a representative 

to instruct them; and intimated 

that not one of his audience could have made 

a poorer effort as a public speaker. Another 

wrote, Surely if our dear Brother Rogers has 

been used of the Lord for the blessing of others, 

it is not because of eloquence of speech, etc. 

We replied privately to these brethren, telling 
them that they should not judge of Brother 
Rogers as a servant of the Lord by his ability 
as a speaker. We assured them that his talent 
consists in his ability as a colporteur and an 
instructor and starter of other colporteurs; and 
that thus his efforts had been greatly used of 
the Lord to the blessing of many. We assured 
them that we had not sent him to England 
as a representative orator of the truth, but as 
an efficient colporteur, and one, too, who we 
had every reason to believe held clear views 
of truth and who was firmly fixed upon the 
foundation-doctrine of the ransom. We asked 
that with this explanation they receive and 
honor Brother Rogers for his colporteur-work's 
sake (1 Thes. 5:13), and that they encourage 
his use of the talent he possesses while discouraging 
his attempt to use a talent which he 
does not possess so far as his best friends can 
discern. 

Feeling it to be our duty to Brother Rogers, 
as well as toward the truth, we wrote to him 
as kind and brotherly a letter as possible, explaining 
the situation, urging him to specially 
use his great gift of preaching by the circulation 
of the printed page, and advising that he 
turn the remainder of the announced London 
meetings into Bible Study Meetings and lead 
them, instead of preaching; and we enclosed 
some of the correspondence received. We 
closed the letter with an exhortation that he 
consider our love for him and our interest in 
and our appreciation of his service, and referred 
him to Psa. 141:5. 

But the effect was the reverse of what we designed. 
Whether from a lack of humility or 
whatever the reason, Brother Rogers concluded 
that all who did not appreciate his preaching 
were devoid of spirituality. As he considered 
the question, he reached the conclusion that he 
had a mission from God to change the whole 
program of harvest work: that he should come 
to Allegheny, and if Brother Russell were not 
humble enough to accept the Lord's message 



from him, then he should do all that he could 
do to stop the other colporteurs from present 
successful methods and get them started in his 
untried, theoretical and mendicant method. 

He came to Allegheny and stopped with us 
for ten days, during which time we gave him 
twenty-four full hours of valuable time, listening 
to his scheme, and endeavoring to point 
out its impracticability, telling him we had 
tried the plan in a general way before the publication 
of DAWN and TOWER-except that instead 
of depending upon others to pay the expenses, 
the Editor paid them himself. 

Brother Rogers urged that the Lord had 
sent forth the early disciples without purse or 
scrip and had provided for their necessities, 
and that without books or tracts to sell, and 
that they lacked nothing. We answered, that 
God had sent out this "harvest" truth similarly 
from house to house, and had none the 
less PROVIDED for the necessities of all who 
went forth,— although in a different manner. 

Brother Rogers urged that it did people 
good to give; that the WATCH TOWER had 
failed of its duty in not urging people to give; 
that the priests of the Jewish age lived upon 
the charity of the people— their tithes— and referred 
us to the Apostle Paul's reference to the 
Law upon the subject in 1 Cor. 9:7-11. 

We agreed that people who give most to the 
Lord's service are most blest, provided they 
give it of a grateful willing heart; but we pointed 
out the Apostle's words in the same connection 
—"Nevertheless, we have not used this power 
[to demand support] ; but [on the contrary] 
suffer all things, lest we should hinder the 
gospel of Christ." "I have used none of these 
things: neither have I written these things that 
it should be so done unto me." I "make the 
gospel without charge, that I abuse not my 
power in the gospel." ( 1 Cor. 9: 12, 15, 1 8.) 
We also showed that the priests were not permitted 

R1638 : page 108 

to squeeze the tithes from the people, 

that the people were free to do as they pleased, 

although the tenth of all increase was demanded 

by the Law. All of the consecrated are of 

the antitypical "royal priesthood" for whom 

God will provide, and who are to engage somehow 

in self-sacrifice in God's service. The 

saints are, therefore, typified by the tithe-takers 

and not by the tithe-payers; and besides, 

among them are not many great or rich 

—chiefly they are of the poor, rich in faith 



only. We assured him that we believed that 

we had done our full duty in placing before 

the consecrated an opportunity to share in the 

Lord's work through the general fund of the 

WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY, used for publishing 

and circulating tracts by the million, to 

forward the translating of DAWN and Tracts in 

other languages, and to assist in colporteuring 

the DAWNS and Tracts. Those who are of a 

willing mind need no prodding and, so far as 

we know, are doing all that they can do in this 

way. We have even returned money to some 

we had reason to believe from their own letters 

were giving beyond their ability. We assured 

him that our commission from the Lord 

was not to beg, or even to "make a poor 

mouth" to thus excite pity and draw money, 

but merely to preach the gospel and leave to 

the Lord to provide (in his own way) the 

things needful for ourselves and for his work. 

But Brother Rogers was so infatuated with 
the delusion that God had given him the message 
for us that he declared that we were resisting 
God in the matter, and that he was not 
sure but that the Apostle Paul made a similar 
mistake in the method he used, as expressed in 
the verses to which we referred. 

Finding argument of no avail, we proposed 
to set aside some city, large or small, in 
which he could make a trial of his method- 
provided he would make a complete demonstration 
and not leave the city until he had 
done all the work that he thought should 
be done there. We believed that the experiment 
would prove a refutation of his theory, 
and that thus he might be convinced that it 
was not of the Lord. But he would not agree 
to this and told us that we should live by faith. 
We replied that "our sufficiency is of God," 
that the Apostle also said, "Hast thou faith? 
have it to thyself!"— that we are not to have 

R1639 : page 108 

faith in other people's generosity and endeavor 
to squeeze money from them, but to have faith 
in God and to use the means which he puts 
into our hands,— as he (Brother Rogers) had 
been doing for six years in preaching the gospel 
by the sale of DAWN. 

We bade Brother Rogers Good-bye, assuring 
him that so long as he continues in the Truth, 
trusting in the ransom, we will have a deep interest 
in his welfare, even though he take what 
seem to us less advantageous methods of work; 
that we would put not a straw in his way to hinder 



his service of the Lord in such a manner as 

his conscience would approve; and that if, when 

tried, his method shall seem in any degree to 

have divine approval we shall be glad to adopt 

any part that may seem to us compatible with 

the Lord's Word and spirit. But, meantime, 

we must demand the same liberty for our conscience 

that we accord to his. Brother Rogers 

assured us that he is still in perfect harmony respecting 

the Truth as presented in the volumes 

of DAWN, and that he will still be glad to use 

them in whatever way he may hereafter work. 

We assured him that we were glad to know this 

and that we would be pleased to supply him 

what DAWNS he might desire, at the usual low 

rate at which we supply all TOWER readers. 

We regret, however, that when he saw that 
his mission and theory did not move us from 
the method which God has so far blessed, he 
seemed somewhat bitter in spirit, and left us 
expressing his intention to see and influence 
as many as possible of the colporteurs. Hence 
the propriety of so full a resume of this matter 
for the benefit, not only of the colporteurs, but 
also of the English friends, to whom Brother 
Rogers hopes soon to return;— although no 
longer as a representative of the Tract Society, 
nor at its charges. 

"As the body is one, and hath many members, 
and all the members of that one body, being 
many, are one body: so also is Christ.... 
But now hath God set the members every one 
of them in the body, as it hath pleased him." 
See 1 Cor. 12:12-18-25-29. 



page 109 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1639 : page 109 

JOSEPH SOLD INTO EGYPT. 



II. QUAR., LESSON III., APR. 15, GEN. 37:23-36. 

Golden Text— "Ye thought evil against me, but God 
meant it unto good."— Gen. 50:20. 

In tracing the overruling providence of 
God in the lives of some of his chosen people 
of the past we find a great stimulus to 
our faith; and in the noble examples of the 
ancient worthies we should indeed find 
spurs to our zeal for God and our faithfulness 
in his service. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, 
Joseph— how beautifully they walked with 
God! how simple and childlike their trust 
in the dark as well as in the light! and how 
earnest and sincere their devotion! 

In our last lesson, Joseph, the favorite son 
of Jacob's old age, was brought to our attention 
(a dutiful and promising boy of 
seventeen), and his prophetic dreams and 
the envy of his brethren toward him. In 
this lesson we see how that envy and hatred 
brought forth their fruits. With the exception 
of two of the brethren— Reuben and 
Judah— all were desirous of taking his life; 
but the two did not dare to openly oppose 
the rest, so they suggested other measures. 
Reuben had him cast into a pit from whence 
he intended secretly to rescue him, but where 
the others were agreeable to letting him 
die of starvation. But before Reuben could 
accomplish his purpose of rescue Judah had 
proposed his sale to a company of traveling 
merchants going down to Egypt; and to 
this they had agreed, and had disposed of 
their young brother and divided the price 
among themselves. Of this transaction 
Reuben evidently was not informed, and he 
shared his father's grief at the supposed 
death of Joseph. 

Judah's motive was apparently a double 
one— first, to ease his conscience by choosing 
the lesser of the two evils, avoiding to 
incur the guilt of his brother's blood, and 
yet desirous to accomplish the purpose of 
getting rid of him, and that at a slight profit 
to themselves. Then, in common with the 
other eight, he was willing to lie to his father 
and to make believe that Joseph was dead. 
Judah's choice of the lesser of two evils he 
may have regarded as a species of virtue, 
as the suggestion from, "Let us slay our 
brother," to "Let us sell our brother," presents 
a strong contrast. Thus men are 
often deceived by comparing a great with 
a lesser evil, or themselves one with another, 



and especially with those of meaner 
disposition, instead of with the perfect standards 
of virtue and true holiness set forth in 
the Scriptures. 

This supposed loss of a beloved son was 
another severe trial for Jacob. Evidently 
Joseph was the one in whose line of descent 
he looked for the fulfilment of the divine 
covenant. He was the eldest son of his beloved 
Rachel, and a son after his own heart, 
in whom was the reverence of God and the 
love of righteousness. The coat of many 
colors seems to have been his expression of 
this hope, which he did not seek to conceal 
from his family, being desirous and hopeful 
probably that they also would share his 
sentiments. And in Reuben's favor it may 
be remarked that of all the brethren he had 
more reason to be envious of Joseph, since 
he was the eldest son of Leah, the first wife. 
For twenty-three long years Jacob suffered 
the loss of this beloved son before he received 
the glad tidings— "Joseph is yet 
alive." Yet he faithfully held to the promises 
of God and waited for the consolation 
of Israel, and humbly developed the graces 
of meekness and patience which, in God's 
sight, are of great value. 

In the case of Joseph the trial was one of 
great severity. From being a beloved and 
favorite son, tenderly reared in his father's 
house, he was suddenly transported to the 
position of a slave in a foreign and heathen 
land. Added to this, too, were the bitter 
experience of the murderous hatred and 
cold-hearted cruelty of his brothers and the 
thought of his father's grief and loneliness, 
and that without any apparent prospect of 
ever seeing his face again, or of even hearing 
a word from him, as no railroads or telegraphs 
or mailing arrangements then facilitated 
communication between foreign nations, 
and Joseph was a servant having no 
command of time or money. 

This was surely a bitter experience for a 
young man of seventeen; but as he left 

R1639:page 110 

the scenes of his childhood and all that he 
held dear on earth, and that under such 
painful circumstances, like his father when 
he fled from Esau, bereft of every thing else, 
he took with him the staff of the divine 
promises and the principles of truth and 
righteousness under whose influence he had 



been reared, and he resolved to be loyal and 
faithful to God and to maintain his integrity 
under whatever circumstances he should 
be placed. Alas! how few young men in 
these days— nor did they in those days- 
make such resolutions, even under the most 
favorable circumstances. This is the age 
when they generally think they should be 
sowing their wild oats, of which they generally 
forget they must afterward reap the 
bitter harvest. 

While God could have prevented and 
might have interfered at any step of these 
distressing circumstances, we see that he 
did not, but that he allowed each one to 
freely manifest his disposition for good or 
for evil; yet above them all we see his overruling 
providence in turning these very 
circumstances to account in a most marvelous 
way for the furtherance of his benevolent 
designs and to the special blessing of 
his faithful servants. Thus, for instance, 
Joseph being thrown more upon his own 
resources and in contact with a new, and 
at the time the most advanced, civilization 
of the world, received a new and valuable 
education which otherwise he could not 
have received, and a discipline that developed 
manly strength, courage, tact, and firmness 
of character; while his isolation from 
all the old home associations led him to closer 
communion with God and reliance upon his 
power. 

Then, too, in the providence of God, Joseph 
was the forerunner of all Israel in the 
land of Egypt, where God proposed to give 
that entire nation a needed and valuable 
experience for four hundred years, in contact 
with the highest civilization of that 
day, yet under the humiliating circumstances 
of servitude which would tend to humble 
them, and also to teach them reliance upon 
God. Here, too, their race would be kept 
pure and distinct from others, since, as 
slaves, they could not intermarry with the 
Egyptians. And through Israel in the land 
of Egypt, not only the Egyptians, but other 
nations through them, were to learn something 
of the power and character of the true 
God. 

A very special lesson of importance to us, 
in considering the course of divine providence 
with these ancient worthies, may be 
gathered from the fact that the value of 
their experience in developing character and 
in shaping circumstances for future good is 



so manifest to us from the standpoint of the 
ends attained, while to them, as they passed 
through those experiences, they had to walk 
by faith trusting the guiding hand of God, 
where they could not trace his loving purposes. 

Abraham could not know that God would 
provide himself a lamb other than Isaac; 
and therefore it was his part to obey the 
divine command, even to the raising of the 
knife to slay his son. Jacob could not 
know how Esau would meet him in peace 
and permit him to enjoy the good of the 
land; but it was his part to arise and take 
all his house and all his goods and go to 
meet Esau when the Lord commanded. Joseph 
could not know just how all the painful 
circumstances that befell him after he 
left his father's house in search of his brethren 
were to work together for such great 
good for himself and for all his father's 
house, and for all Egypt as well; but it was 
his part to carry with him into Egypt the 
principles of divine truth and righteousness 

R1640:page 110 

and the noble example of a godly character, 
and as a servant to Potiphar to faithfully 
perform his service to the best of his ability. 
And while, like his father Jacob, he thus 
walked in the path of faith and duty, God 
could add his blessing; and we, at this end 
of the line, see the blessed results of their 
faithfulness, trust and humility. 

Just so, in the light of eternity, the past 
experiences of our lives will appear if, like 
them, we prove faithful under all circumstances 
—in the dark as well as in the light, 
in the storm as well as in the calm. As 
children of God we must all have the discipline 
of experience: let us see to it, therefore, 
that we patiently and meekly submit 
ourselves to God, taking courage from the 
noble examples of the ancient worthies, and 
from the manifestations of God's love and 
care and wisdom in making all things work 
together for good to them as he has promised 
to do for us also. 

"Leave to his sovereign sway 
To choose and to command: 

So shalt thou gladly own his way, 
How wise, how strong his hand!" 

R1640:page 111 

JOSEPH RULER IN EGYPT. 



II. QUAR., LESSON IV., APR. 22, GEN. 41:38-48. 

Golden Text— "Them that honor me I will honor."- 
1 Sam. 2:30. 

In Egypt we find Joseph making the best 
of his new and trying circumstances. Having 
resolved to look upon the brightest side 
of things and to act upon the right side, he 
trusted in God and was cheerful and faithful 
in all his duties, whether they were 
agreeable duties or not. He acted thus, not 
from policy, but from principle— because he 
loved righteousness and desired the approval 
of a righteous God. 

His faithfulness soon won his master's 
confidence; "and his master saw that the 
Lord was with him, and that the Lord made 
all that he did to prosper in his hand;... 
And he made him overseer over his house, 
and all that he had he put into his hand." 
And when, after some ten years of faithful 
service here, he was falsely accused and cast 
into prison, "and he was laid in iron and 
his feet were hurt with fetters" (Psa. 105:17,18), 
with a clear conscience and a sense 
of the divine approval he determined to 
make the best of that situation also; and 
there too "the Lord was with him and 
showed him mercy, and gave him favor in 
the sight of the keeper of the prison;" and 
there, without any prospect of release, he 
remained faithful to God and duty for three 
years, when suddenly, the purposes of this 
discipline and proving having been served, 
God set before him an open door. He did 
not take him out of prison, but in pursuance 
of the pathway of benevolent helpfulness 
to others he led him out. 

Wherever Joseph was, and no matter 
what were the circumstances, he did what 
was right and made the best use of the situation; 
and his faithfulness in all the little 
things prepared him for larger and wider 
fields of usefulness. He was rightly exercised 
by the experiences of life. He was 
kind both to the thankful and to the unthankful, 
generous to the mean as well as 
the noble, not allowing the injustice and 
harsh treatment which he received from 
others to harden his heart. And in all his 
course we see no signs of distrust in God 
or of complaining. In his trials he simply 



clung closer to God and took comfort in 
the manifestations of his favor, while he 
trusted where he could not trace him. 

When God showed to Joseph the interpretation 
of the dreams of the butler and 
baker in prison, he recognized the favor as 
from God and thought he saw in the circumstance 
an open door to liberty once 
more. But the ungrateful butler forgot his 
benefactor, and for two years more he remained 
a prisoner. Then the door was 
swung open— this time, not only to freedom, 
but to honor and advancement, and Joseph 
was prepared to enter. His suggestion to 
Pharaoh of a wise course in view of the predicted 
famine was an evidence not only of 
his faith in God but also of a keen, active, 
business turn of mind. He thus taught that 
men should act upon their faith promptly 
and without wavering; and when he was 
chosen to pilot the nation through the 
threatening dangers of their future, he showed 
his great executive ability and his faithfulness 
there also. In this he was partly 
favored by inheritance from his father; but 
much was added to that by his own energy 
and force of character. All the open doors 
to usefulness and honor are of no avail if 
we lack the energy and force of character 
to enter them and to carry forward successfully 
the enterprises to which they lead. 
Faithfulness, purity of character, nobility of 
purpose, energy, courage, acquired skill, 
piety and self-discipline are all necessary 
to a successful life from God's standpoint. 

Joseph's exaltation to the throne of Egypt, 
where he was second only to the king, may 
be regarded by some as the full reward of 
his faithfulness. But evidently Joseph did 
not so regard it. He still had respect to 
the promises of God: he did not lose his 
head and become puffed up with pride on 
being elevated from the position of a slave 
and a prisoner to a royal throne, but with 
the same steady dignity that characterizes 
a true man, he quietly went about the business 
of his new office with the same energy, 
competency, and faithfulness that had characterized 
him as a slave and as a son and 
brother in his father's house. His long acquaintance 
with God, especially under the 
discipline of adversity, had made him humble, 
and the graces of character grew beautifully 
in his prepared heart. But the throne 
of Egypt had never been the goal of his 
ambition; for, like Abraham and Isaac and 



Jacob, he looked for the heavenly city, the 
Kingdom of God. There was his treasure 
and there was his heart, and from thence 
he drew the inspiration of his noble life; 
and the court of Egypt was esteemed only 
for its privileges of helpfulness to others. 



R1640:page 112 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



page 112 



DEAR TRACT SOCIETY:-Enclosed please find 
$5.00, which is to be applied on my "Good 
Hopes." It is more than I thought I would be 
able to send, and I am truly glad of it. I only 
wish it were many times more. I have thoroughly 
tested all the Tract Society publications, 
and never feared to place them in any one's 
hands; for they stand on the true foundation, 
and besides are easily comprehended. I have 
been an advocate of these publications for 
nearly thirteen years, and I like Brother R's 
method. He has never yet bewildered or mystified 
my mind, and I feel satisfied with his 
exegesis on Bible subjects. I believe MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and ZION'S WATCH TOWER to be 
God's agents for disseminating the truth; and 
may the Father's blessing go with both the 
Editors and the publications. Yours in love 
of the truth, MRS . B . F. MILLER. 



R1640:page 112 

DEAR SIR:— I send you a brief sketch of the 
life of Mrs. Lucretia Mead, who was an earnest 
Christian, a great reader and a deep thinker. 
She died last August at the ripe age of ninety. 
All her life she studied to find justice combined 
with mercy in the old orthodox theologies, 
but failed utterly. And consequently she was 
unhappy. About ten or twelve years ago a 
copy of the TOWER was sent to the postoffice 
of which my father was postmaster. He took 
the liberty to send the paper to her. She read 
and reread it, and then sent for the paper for 
a year; and we have taken it ever since. 

If you could have seen her study your books 
and papers, and compare them with the Bible, 



and heard her exclaim, "It is truth! It is 
truth;" and then, raising her eyes to heaven, 
as it were, praise God for sending her those 
truths, as I have seen and heard her do, you 
would praise God, too, for being the means 
of so much happiness. Then to see and hear 
that aged mother teach her children (gray-headed 
men and women) and grand-children 
and great-grand-children was a sight or rather 
an experience few families have witnessed. 
She used to wonder why God let her live so 
long. I told her I firmly believed God intended 
her to live in order that four generations 
at least should be made acquainted with 
these truths through her. 

And so she died, every faculty clear to the 
last; and we all bless God for your teachings, 
through Christ, brought to us through grandmother. 

Yours sincerely, MRS. E. M. YOUNG. 



DEAR FRIEND AND BROTHER:~Again I intrude 
on your valuable time, not to ask questions 
or to make complaints, but to tell you 
the joy I feel, and the hope that daily grows 
stronger within me. I have at last been able 
to do something for Him, in his blessed cause. 
I have been the means in his hands of supplying 
"meat" to some truth-hungry souls, and 
feel that I have His approval in so doing. True 
it is, that I have accomplished little; but that 
little gives me great encouragement and stimulates 
me to press onward in the good work. 

Until lately, I have been more or less in 
darkness; that is, trying to see through the 
gloom in which I was enveloped, knowing that 
something better lay beyond, yet failing continually. 
Now I am commencing to see more 
clearly. I was an idle laborer in the vineyard; 
now I trust I am becoming a worker. True, 
my work is small, but who knows, but our dear 
Lord, how far it may extend. If one can bring 
the Truth to four, what may those four do. As 
to myself, I am daily putting the old self under. 
The work is slow, but is progressive, evil is continually 
with me and sometimes gets the better 
of me, but it is dying slowly and surely. What 
used to be severe trials are now almost nothings. 
I look to Him and put my trust in Him, 
knowing he is working all things together for 
good. All I regret is lack of opportunity to 
do more in His service. The time, I know, is 
short; hence my impatience. With love to all 
your workers and yourself and helpmate, I remain, 
Yours in hope, W. F. POTTER. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--The last TOWER 
has reached me, and oh! it is fine! My heart 
goes out to you and yours in the work you are 
doing in spreading real good news, and when 
I think of the multitudinous vexations which 
must continually harass you. 

In reference to your appointment of a committee 
to examine MS. sent in for publication, 
for my own part I hope it will soon have to be 
dispensed with because of lack of work. In 
reference to others publishing, I always feel if 
the same means, time and energy were put forth 
in circulating already published articles from 
the TOWER office (which are certainly published 
at a much lower rate), how much more good 
would be done! This is still my feeling; and 
I do not feel one whit able to write (much less 
publish and circulate) anything to exceed what 
comes out from time to time. Accept much love. 

Yours in our Lord, F. B. UTLEY. 



page 114 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 



December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1641 :page 114 

"WATCH WITH ME ONE HOUR!" 

--MATT. 26:40.-- 

Little did we suppose, when writing for our 
last issue the article, "Watch and Pray, Lest 
Ye Enter into Temptation," that the admonition 
was so greatly needed by you all, and 
especially by the Editor and his faithful co-workers 
in the service here. Suffice it here to 
say that the Adversary has been busy concocting 
a dark conspiracy in the hearts of some 
who should be "true yoke-fellows," but who 
are proving themselves to be "false brethren," 
similar to some mentioned by the Apostle in 
2 Thes. 3. 

Brethren and Sisters, watch and pray yet 
more earnestly for yourselves and for us; for 
assuredly the Adversary opposes us all, more 
and more, at every step. In all probability 
the Church's path will grow narrower and more 
difficult as the Master's did, until, like his, it 
shall reach a Gethsemane and a Golgotha. 
The same thought is illustrated in the career 
of John the Baptist-pointed out in M. DAWN, 
VOL. II., pp. 260-262. 

The severest feature of the present trial is 
that it is the work of "false brethren." It enables 
us to appreciate our Lord's "contradiction 
of sinners against himself"; and we are 
not weary nor faint in our minds. We have 
not yet resisted unto blood— death. We are 
looking away to Jesus, the author of our faith, 
who in due time, we trust, shall be the finisher 
ofit.-Heb. 12:2-4. 

A JEWISH VIEW OF JESUS. 



It is becoming quite popular with all sorts 
of people— religious and irreligious— to point 
to Jesus of Nazareth, our Redeemer and Lord, 
as a great and wonderful teacher; and therefore 
it need not surprise us to find that a similar 
sentiment is springing up amongst the Jews. It 
will prepare the way for their ultimate acceptance 
of him— when the Kingdom is his, and he 
is the governor among the nations.— Psa. 22:28. 

The following extract from The Overland 



Monthly is by a Jew— Jacob Voorsanger— and 
gives evidence in the direction named. He 
says:— 

"Shorn of all theological attributes, divested 
of his Greek garments, disrobed and appearing 
in the strong light of history, the majestic 
character and figure of the Nazarene are 
intelligible enough to a Hebrew. A son of 
his people, his heart aflame with great intents, 
his ambition wholly to restore the law, his 
dream that of the prophets, to bring the kingdom 
of heaven to the children of earth, he 
preached a Millennium to men engaged in 
quarrels and contentions. If he failed, if his 
life paid the forfeit, it was the sorrowful consequence 
of troubled times. But his teachings, as 
they appear upon the face of his book (not as 
they are interpreted by metaphysicians), are the 
genuine echoes of the holy things propounded 
by old prophets. A life led in harmony with 
such teachings, the same teachings given to 
Israel in the law and the prophets, must needs 
be pure and holy. This much we understand. 
Why cannot all the world thus read these 
teachings, and thus, to quote the great words 
of Sir Moses Montefiore, 'remove the title page 
between the Old and New Testaments.'" 

page 114 

PAPER-BOUND DAWNS. 



These are supplied to TOWER subscribers at 
25 cents per copy or, when taken in packs of 
five, ten or twenty of any one volume, at the 
Colporteur rate, 15 cents each;— this to facilitate 
loaning and giving, so greatly enjoyed by 
those who receive the truth in the love of it. 
On account of extra postage the foreign rate 
will be five copies for $1.00. 



R1641 :page 115 

VOL. XV. APRIL 15, 1894. NO. 8. 

IMMORTALITY. 



WHAT IS IT? HOW AND WHEN OBTAINABLE? TO WHOM PROMISED? 
"Our Savior Jesus Christ. ..hath abolished death, 



and hath brought life and immortality to light 
through the gospel. "--2 Tim. 1:10. 

THE doctrine of the endless torment of the 

wicked is built upon the theory that they 

and all men are immortal creatures;— that 

somehow and somewhere all men became possessed 

of a power to live always;— that they 

cannot rid themselves of life, even should they 

so prefer; and that even God, their Creator, 

has done a work in creating them that he 

could not undo if he so desired. 

This hypothesis, if conceded— and it is very 
generally accepted— becomes the basis for a 
certain sort of logical reasoning. We are assured 
that since all men are immortal they 
must all live somewhere and under some conditions; 
and that since God has promised a 
reward to the obedient and a punishment to 
the disobedient, the immortality of the righteous 
will be spent in bliss and the immortality 
of the sinners in misery. 

Our first question should be, Is the above 
hypothesis, the foundation of this view, correct? 
Is it true that God who has the power 
to create has not the power to undo his work, 
and destroy man? Reasoning on the subject, 
before going to God's Word to see what he 
says about the matter, we should say that there 
must be some mistake about this hypothesis— 
that it is less difficult to destroy than to create 
a being; and that he who created all things 
must be "able to destroy both soul and body" 
should he so desire, as also saith the Scriptures. 
-See Matt. 10:28; Jas. 4:12. 

Our reasoning further would be that, since 
God's character is both just and kind, if he 
had not had ability to destroy his creatures 
if unsatisfactory (if when once created they 
must live on regardless of their own well-being 
or the well-being of others, and 
must therefore spend an eternity of misery, 
in separation from the holy and in confinement 
with others of their own miserable and 
sinful disposition), then God would have been 
much more careful as to who got life at all, 
and as to the circumstances and conditions of 
birth and parentage. We hold it would be 
discreditable to God's justice, wisdom, love 
and power to assume that he would permit ignorant 
and depraved parents to bring forth ad 
libitum a depraved offspring, mentally, morally 
and physically degraded and weak, if those 
creatures must spend an eternity somewhere, 
and if the chances were, as is generally supposed, 
a thousand to one against their everlasting 



happiness. 

But we do not wish to rest our faith upon 
human reasonings,—either our own or those 
of others— while we have the Bible, God's inspired 
revelation, to give us positive information 
on this important subject. In it, and in 
it alone, God has revealed his character, his 
plan and his power to execute it. 

Before going to the Scriptures, however, it 
will be well for us to make sure that we have 
the correct conception of the meaning of the 

R1641 :page 116 

words immortal and immortality. Although 
these are English words, we believe that the 
majority of English speaking people do not 
realize their full import. They suppose them to 
mean merely everlasting life. This, however, 
is a great mistake; for, according to the Scriptures, 
some will have everlasting life who will 
never have immortality;--nay, they expressly 
tell us that many, "a great company," will 
enjoy an everlasting existence, while but few, 
"a little flock," will be made immortal. 

The term Everlasting Life simply describes 
an existence which will never cease. It may 
be supported by food and drink and other 
necessary conditions, but it simply means that 
life will continue forever. This everlasting 
life may belong to both mortal and immortal 
beings, the only difference being that to the 
former it is granted through certain conditions 
upon which it depends for support, as for instance, 
light, heat, air, food and drink, while 
in the latter it inheres independent of all 
conditions. 

The term Immortality describes an existence 
which, therefore, cannot cease, being proof 
against death. It is an indestructible existence, 
not dependent upon food and drink or conditions 
of any kind. It describes an existence 
which needs no refreshment or supply— possessed 
of inherent life. 

If these definitions be accepted as correct 
(and they cannot be successfully disputed), 
then all opposition to the Scriptural teaching, 
that Immortality is not an inherent and natural 
possession of humanity, but a prize offered 
to a special class of overcomers, should cease; 
because opposition generally springs from the 
supposition that the denial of natural human 
immortality means a denial of any future life, 
and implies that a man and a brute are alike 
in death— without hope of a future existence. 
We are glad that we are able to thus remove 



at once the prejudice which hinders so many 
from a candid examination of the Scriptural 
teaching upon the subject. 

Having carefully studied all that the Bible 
has to say upon this topic, we will first assert 
what its teachings are, and afterward give the 
proof. 

The Scriptures assert that this very high order 
of existence (which we men cannot fully comprehend), 
this life without food or other means 
of supply—inherent life, Immortality— was originally 
possessed by the Heavenly Father only. 
He alone has it without derivation from another 
as a gift or reward. All others, therefore, 
who ever will attain to this highest order 
or degree of existence, will obtain it as a reward 
or gift, and will then possess the divine 
nature, in which nature, alone, Immortality 
inheres. 

Angels no more possess immortality than do 
men; for, although they possess the divine image 
and likeness (as do all of God's intelligent 
creatures), they are not partakers of the divine 

R1642:page 116 

nature;— theirs is angelic nature, as man's is 
human nature. True, there is no dying among 
the angels as there is among men, but neither 
would men die if it were not for the penalty 
of sin, under which all men came by father 
Adam's disobedience, and from which all of 
them, who will accept the terms of the New 
Covenant, will shortly be set free. (Isa. 61:1.) 
But that angels could be destroyed, as man 
has been, is fully substantiated by God's dealing 
with Satan, who, before he sinned, was an 
angel of light, a son of the morning— one of 
the earliest creation. (Isa. 14:12.) Both in 
literal and symbolic language the Bible declares 
that Satan is to be destroyed;— which 
proves conclusively that he and other angels 
do not possess that exclusively divine attribute 
of inherent life, Immortality. 

And the Scriptures assure us that even our 
great Redeemer, who was the very first and 
chief of God's creatures, "the beginning of 
the creation" of God, and by whom angels 
and men and all other created things were 
made (Rev. 3:14; John 1:3; Col. 1:15-17; 
Heb. 1:2; Eph. 3:9), and who consequently 
was next to the Father in honor and glory and 
power,— even he did not possess this wonderful 
kind of life, this essentially divine quality, 
until after his resurrection from the dead, after 
he had given himself as man's great sin-offering, 



once for all and forever. Then, as a reward 
for his perfect obedience to the Father's will and 
plan, even unto death, he was highly exalted 

R1642:page 117 

and given a name above every other name. 
His obedience to the divine will proved him 
an overcomer of evil in the highest degree, and 
he was honored with a seat with the Father 
in the throne or dominion of the Universe. 
Among the other favors conferred upon our 
great Redeemer after his sacrifice and at his 
resurrection was this divine quality of having 
"life in himself," not dependent on supplies 
of food, etc., the gift of Immortality. 

Indeed, if our Redeemer had possessed this 
kind of life before, he could not have been our 
Redeemer; for he could not have died for us. 
To any one possessing immortality, suffering 
and death are impossible. Thanks be to God 
that Christ died for our sins— once for all. 
But he will never die again: he is now immortal 
and cannot die. "Christ being raised 
from the dead dieth no more: death hath no 
more dominion over him. "—Rom. 6:9. 

With these views of the exclusiveness of this 
quality of being called Immortality, and seeing 
that it is essentially a quality of the divine 
nature only, it may well cause us surprise to find 
it promised or offered to any creature— angel 
or man. Yet we do find it not only given to 
our resurrected Lord Jesus, but offered also to 
a particular class of men, within a special period 
of time, under certain conditions and for a 
special purpose in the divine plan. 

God's purpose is clearly stated in connection 
with the text at the head of this article, 
thus: "God. ..hath saved us, and CALLED 
US WITH A HOLY CALLING; not according to our 
works [or past evidence of worthiness], but 
ACCORDING TO HIS OWN PURPOSE and favor, 
which was given us in Christ Jesus before the 
world began, but is now made manifest by the 
appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who hath 
abolished death and brought LIFE and IMMORTALITY 
to light through the gospel."— 
2 Tim. 1:8-10. 

God's purpose was to make a "new creation," 
of his own nature— the divine nature— of which 
new creation his Beloved Son, our Lord, was to 
be the chief or head, next to himself. God's purpose 
was that this new order of beings should be 
selected from among the human order; not that 
the human family had specially pleased God in 
works, or in any other manner had merited 



this honorable preference; but of his favor he 

purposed it so. And it is in the carrying out 

of this purpose that our Lord Jesus has already 

been manifested, and that by his obedience 

he has not only secured to himself the 

Father's favor and his own exaltation to the 

divine nature and glory and honor, but by the 

same act of obedience, even unto death, he 

has opened the way to two things; viz., life and 

immortality. Life, everlasting life, is opened 

up to the world in general; and each member 

of the race may secure it by conformity to the 

terms of the New Covenant: and immortality 

is brought to light for the special class, the foreordained 

Church, which, according to God's 

purpose and wonderful favor, is now being 

called, and tested, and selected, for participation 

in the divine nature and association in the 

divine plan, as heirs of God and joint-heirs 

with Jesus Christ, their Lord and Redeemer. 

Observation and reflection teach us what the 
Scriptures expressly declare; namely, that the 
requirements of character for that high position 
are exacting, the way to that great exaltation 
narrow, difficult, and that few of the many 
called will win the prize, make their calling 
and selection sure (by full and hearty obedience 
of mind) and become partakers of the divine 
nature. The overcomers who will sit with 
Christ in his throne, as he overcame and was 
associated with the Father in his dominion, 
will be but "few," a "little flock." Not 
many great, mighty or noble, according to the 
reckoning of this world, will be chosen; but 
the humble and meek, rich in faith.— 1 Cor. 1:26; 
Jas. 2:5. 

Some of the Scriptures upon which the foregoing 
statements are based are the following: 
Showing that God is the only original possessor 
of Immortality, 1 Tim. 6:15,16. Showing 
that to Christ has been given this quality of 
having "life IN HIMSELF," not needing further 
supply, John 5:26. Showing that each one 
of the faithful, overcoming Church, Christ's 
bride and joint-heir, is to share the same gift, 
a well-spring of life in himself, springing up 
everlastingly, John 4: 14. But each must run 
a race and win it as a prize, as did their 

R1642:page 118 

Master and Captain, the Lord Jesus. (Rom. 2:7; 

1 Tim. 4:10; 1 Cor. 9:25; 2 Pet. 1:4-7,8,10.) 

And such shall have part in the same 

kind of a resurrection that Christ experienced, 

Phil. 3:10,1 1. His was the first or chief resurrection, 



to the highest station; and, as his 

"body," they will share with him that first or 

chief resurrection to glory, honor and immortality, 

and over them consequently the second 

death will have "no power," Rev. 20:6. That 

this class will obtain this inherent quality of the 

divine nature (immortality), and be like their 

Lord, is clearly stated by the Apostle in his 

description of their resurrection, the "first resurrection," 

"the resurrection of the dead," 

1 Cor. 15:42-44,50-54. (The word incorruptible, 

when applied to being, existence, is of 

similar significance to immortal). The exceeding, 

great and precious promises of God, by 

which these are called or begotten, are incorruptible 

seed, and wherever retained and 

nourished will develop into being of the divine 

nature, 1 Pet. 1:23 and 2 Pet. 1:4. These citations 

include all the uses of these words, immortal, 

immortality, incorruptible and incorruption 

in the Bible;— in the original as well as in 

the English language. 

THE ORIGIN OF THE BELIEF IN HUMAN IMMORTALITY. 
ITS EARLIEST TEACHER. 



Whence then came the popular notion that 
all human beings possess immortality, innately, 
inherently? Evidently it came not from 
the Bible; for, as we have seen, the Bible 
teaches the reverse, that God alone had it as 
an inherent quality, and that he has offered it 
as a gift to but a small and very select class. 
Nay, more, the Bible distinctly declares that 
man is mortal, that death is possible to him. 
(Job 4:17; Deut. 30:15; Rom. 6:12; 8:11; 
1 Cor. 15:53; 2 Cor. 4:1 1); and more, that 
he has passed under its sentence (Rom. 5:12); 
that his only hope is in a resurrection, 
a re- vitalizing or re-creation from the dead; 
and that an everlasting continuance of life may 
be had only upon the condition of full obedience 
to the divine requirements.— 1 Cor. 15:17,18,20,21; 
Rom. 5:18,19; Acts 4:2; 17:18; 
24:15. 

Scanning the pages of history, we find that, 
although the doctrine of human immortality 
is not taught by God's inspired witnesses, it is 
the very essence of all heathen religions. Savage 
tribes in every quarter of the earth believe 
the doctrine, and from their tribal traditions 
have held it from time immemorial. It is not 
true, therefore, that Socrates and Plato were 
the first to teach the doctrine: it had an earlier 



teacher than either of them, and a yet more 
able one. They, however, polished the doctrine, 
as long held by the Greeks, and made a 
philosophy out of it, and thus made it the more 
seductive and acceptable to the cultured class 
of their day and since. 

The first record of this false teaching is 
found in the oldest history known to man— 
the Bible. The false teacher was Satan. "He 
was a liar from the beginning [not from his 
beginning, but from the beginning of man's 
experience— from Eden] and abode not in 
the truth." He used this false doctrine in 
tempting mother Eve to wilfully and knowingly 
disobey God's command. God had said 
to Adam and Eve that the penalty of disobedience 
would be death. Satan's denial of this, 
saying, "Ye shall not surely die!" was practically 
saying that God could not destroy 
them after having created them. It was practically, 
therefore, the first affirmation of the 
doctrine of inherent, human immortality. And 
this is the teacher who has blinded and confused 
all nations and peoples upon this subject. 
Himself and his agents and coadjutors, the 
fallen "angels who kept not their first estate" 
(Jude 6), have taught the world this lie, in the 
same manner that they attempted to teach 
Israel,— by dreams and by necromancy,— by 
personating their dead friends, through "spirit-mediums" 
of modern times. 

During the Jewish age God guarded his typical 
people against those delusions and lying 
spirits of devils, assuring them that "the dead 
know not any thing"; that "his sons come 
to honor and he knoweth it not, and to dishonor 
and he perceiveth it not of them"; for 
"there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, 

R1643:page 118 

nor wisdom, in the grave whither thou goest." 
-Job 14:21; Eccl. 9:5,10. 

R1643:page 119 

The following references will show clearly 
the Lord's attitude on this subject during the 
period of typical Israel's favor; viz., Deut. 18:10-12; 
Lev. 19:31; 20:6; 2 Kings 21:6; 23:24; 
Isa. 8:19; 19:3; 29:4; 1 Cor. 10:20; Jas. 3:15; 
2 Tim. 3:8. In God's dealing with the 
Gospel Church, as we have already seen, he 
guarded them against the error by setting before 
them the true and only hope of everlasting 
life and of immortality; bringing BOTH to 



light in the gospel; showing that life everlasting 
would be given only to faithful, obedient 
men as a reward at the resurrection, and that 
immortality would be bestowed as a favor upon 
a little flock, the special "overcomers" of 
this Gospel age. 

DOCTRINES OF DEVILS. 



These "seducing spirits and doctrines of 
devils," so successful over the entire world in 
all past time, the Lord advises his people, will 
be specially active and specially seductive in 
form in the close or "harvest" of this Gospel 
age. "Now the spirit speaketh expressly that 
in the latter times some shall depart from the 
faith, [through] giving heed to seducing spirits, 
and doctrines of devils speaking lies in 
hypocrisy." (1 Tim. 4:1.) We are also forewarned 
that this "hypocrisy" consists in personating 
messengers of light ("angels of light" 
—2 Cor. 11:13,14), and affecting to bring in 
"new light." 

Among the barbarians, steeped in ignorance, 
there is no need of new light— they are left 
asleep. But amongst the enlightened and civilized 
(despite his blinding influences, 2 Cor. 4:4), 
thought and investigation are being 
aroused; and there Satan is kept busy. Among 
such necromancy and incantations will not do; 
their intellects are too alert to be much or 
long hoodwinked by these. Even the finer 
deceptions of Spiritism (with its manifestations 
of superhuman powers through rapping, tipping, 
writing and speaking and impersonating 
mediums with familiar spirits, which it claims 
are for the purpose of proving human immortality), 
are too gross and senseless to deceive 
and captivate God's consecrated ones, the very 
class Satan is most anxious to stumble. Consequently 
there are changes in progress,— new 
garments of "new light" are assumed continually, 
and every feature of present truth sent 
by God to "the household of faith," as meat 
in due season, is promptly counterfeited, in 
order "to deceive if it were possible the very 
elect." 

But it is not possible to deceive those whose 
faith in God is fixed in Christ— who are trusting 
in the merit of Christ's great redeeming 
sacrifice and whose hearts are wholly consecrated 
to the Lord's service. Such "shall never 
fall"; but all others are to be separated from 
the true, and God permits, yea, using Satan's 



wrath to work out his own plans, he may be 
and is said to send the strong delusions which 
are now perplexing all whose faith is not 
founded upon the rock Christ Jesus, and who 
have not already put on the whole armor of 
God, supplied in his Word. All who have 
failed to receive the truth in the love of it, but 
take pleasure rather in the error and serve 
error, God wills shall be deceived by these 
"doctrines of devils," that thus their condemnation, 
as unfit for a share in the Kingdom, 
may be manifested.— See 2 Thes. 2:10,1 1; 
and WATCH TOWER, April '91. 

CHRISTIAN SCIENCE, THEOSOPHY, ETC. 



Among the popular and more refined devices 
of the great Adversary are Christian Science 
in its various schools and with slight differences 
and Theosophy. These on the outside, 
together with the evolutionary and anti-Biblical 
theories inside the nominal churches, 
called Higher Criticism, advanced thought, 
etc., are rapidly tearing to fragments all of 
truth that the poor nominal churches ever held. 
These all bear the distinctive marks of the 
"father of lies." They all with one consent 
declare man to be immortal. 

The assumedly wise "Higher Critics," who 
claim that the writers of the Bible were less 
learned, less wise and less inspired than themselves, 
and hence that their writings should be 
regarded only as well-meant "old wives fables," 
claim that man is "falling upward"-- 
evolving from a state or condition of low degradation, 
perhaps from a monkey or even a 

R1643 : page 120 

tadpole state, up to the divine nature, by virtue 
of inherent immortality. 

Christian Science is wholly a misnomer; for 
it is devoid of scientific elements, and merely 
prefixes the name Christian to destroy and deceive 
God's people; for to them Christ was 
not a Savior, nor was a savior needed: he was 
merely a good man, a Christian Scientist who 
but imperfectly understood the new science 
which he introduced, but which in these 
latter times has been perfected and fully set 
forth by Mrs. Doctor Eddy of Boston, Mass. 
As expounded by its various schools it teaches 
the immortality of all things, and has for its 
trade-mark, so to speak, the expression, "All 



is life, there is no death!" Thus they speak 
Satan's falsehood, "Ye shall not surely die." 

The various shades of Universalism unite in 
the same conclusion. Some hold that man 
evolved from a tadpole or ape, some that he 
was poorly made and a very bad likeness and 
not at all the image of God, and declare that 
he was like "a half-baked cake;" but all unite 
in the belief that all men are being evolved to 
perfection and the divine nature, and assure 
all in Satan's very language, "Ye shall not 
surely die." 

And, finally, we have Theosophy— the latest 
nonsense to appeal to the cultured and aesthetic, 
but really blind and naked and hungry in 
the nominal churches. (Rev. 3:17.) It comes 
forward as the newest and most polished form 
of religious thought; but those versed in ancient 
and medieval history know that it is, in 
its very essence, a revival of the central thought 
of Hindooism, and in many particulars the delusion 
of the so-called German Mystics. Theosophy 
holds that "all things are of God" in 
the absolute and ridiculous sense. It holds that 
all finite existences were effluxed or thrown 
off from one Infinite Being; that these effluxed 
beings— angels, men, beasts and birds and 
devils— being portions of deity are immortal 
and (as Satan has always taught) "shall not 
surely die." Following the philosophy of Socrates 
and Plato (while denying these as the 
authors or even the burnishers of their doctrine, 
and claiming that Socrates and Plato got the 
information as they now get it direct from 
God, by communion and intuition), it claims 
that man not only will live forever future, but 
that he has lived forever past. It appeals 
to the weak-minded with the question, "Have 
you never seen places that seemed strangely 
familiar the first time you visited them? Those 
were places you had seen before your present 
existence began." And, as of old, Satan may 
sometimes assist a sluggish imagination with a 
dream. It holds that death is not death, 
but a new birth, and that each individual will 
be reborn again and again until he has developed 
sufficiently the divine nature, and then 
he will be reabsorbed into God for eternity. 

It professes to be based upon neither theology 
nor philosophy. The word Theosophy is 
defined by its advocates to mean the Religion 
of Wisdom. It claims that its wisdom is divine, 
resulting from direct intuition and communion 
with God. Consequently, it rejects 
philosophical reasoning, and revelation such 
as the Scriptures, as hindrances to true wisdom. 



Instead of accepting and using the revelation 

which God has provided— the Bible— and therefrom 

learning of the character and will of God 

and bringing their wills and actions into harmony 

with the spirit of its teachings, these 

have rejected the wisdom of God (Rom. 1:18-21; 

1 Cor. 1:18-21; 2:9-16) and substituted 

the vain imaginings of their own imperfect 

minds— holy meditations. "Professing to be 

wise, they become fools" was written, by divine 

authority, of a similar class.— Rom. 1:21,22. 

Claiming to reject all revealed religion, and 
ignoring doctrines entirely, Theosophy professes 
to be the religion of cause and effect- 
that sooner or later wrong doing will react 
upon the wrong doer, bringing its penalty; 
and right doing bringing its reward. Like the 
recent World's Parliament of Religions, it 
places Christ and Moses on a parity with Confucius, 
Plato and Socrates— as world-teachers. 
It is ready to quote from the Bible or from the 
Koran any fragment which can be turned to 
account in its own support, but it does not 
regard any book or man as specially inspired 
authority. It professes to be the patron of 
every noble trait and every benevolent design, 
and is willing to class as Theosophists all 

R1643 : page 121 

popular people. It favors alms-giving and 
good deeds, so done as to be seen of men. 

Theosophy is, therefore, as it claims, preeminently 
suited to the sentiments of the majority 
of the wise children of this world who 
do not appreciate either their own imperfection 
or the Lord's mercy in Christ. They 
say, "I want no one to pay my debts for me. 
I expect to pay for myself the penalty of my 
sins— if I commit any." All such are just ripe 
for Theosophy. Indeed, the entire "Christian 
world" is ready to leave its former confused 
creed-mooring and to set sail, with Theosophy 
for pilot and good works for motive power, 
to reach a haven of rest and happiness, if 
there be such a haven;— for many of them 
doubt it. Alas! how the ignorance of God's 
Word and plan and the present confusion of 
the nominal churches paves the way for this 
great falling away from the cross of Christ to 
"another gospel"— which is really no gospel. 
-Gal. 1:6,7. 

Of course none of these delusions have any 
use for the doctrine of the cross of Christ— 
the "ransom for all"— or its testimony in due 
time, now or hereafter. No; the Bible doctrine, 



of a ransom past and of a future restitution 
as a consequence, finds no place in any of 
these theories. Those who hold with Satan, 
"Ye shall not surely die," of course can see 

R1644: page 121 

no more sense in giving a ransom for a creature 
who is "falling upward" or being evolved 
from lower to higher conditions, than they 
could feel sympathy with a restitution which 
would bring them back to their "former 
estate," since according to their false theories 
this would mean the undoing of all the progress 
of six thousand years of evolution.— Compare 
Acts 3:19-21; Ezek. 16:53-55. 

These are some of the foretold "strong delusions" 
of our day. They are not actually 
strong or powerful— on the contrary they are 
very weak— but they have great power to delude 
many, because few are "weaned from the 
milk" (Isa. 28:9); few in the nominal church 
are mentally or spiritually out of their swaddling 
clothes; few have even used the milk of 
God's Word and grown thereby to the use and 
appreciation of the strong meat of present 
truth which is for the developed men in Christ. 
(Heb. 5: 13,14.) It is not surprising to us, therefore, 
that those whom Spiritism and Swedenborgianism 
did not affect are now being gathered 
into Christian Science and Theosophy, 
the later developments of Satan's cunning. 

The strength of these delusions lies in the 
errors mixed with the truths held by Christian 
people; and among these errors none is more 
injurious or better calculated to open the 
heart and mind to these delusive and destructive 
errors than the general belief of the first 
lie— "Ye shall not surely die"— a failure to 
understand the Bible doctrine concerning life 
and immortality brought to light by our Lord 
Jesus, through his gospel of salvation from sin 
by his ransom sacrifice. Every error held obscures 
and hinders some truth; and we have 
come to a place where every child of God 
needs all the panoply of truth— the armor of 
God. He who has not on the whole armor of 
God is almost sure to fall into error in this 
evil day. Who shall be able to stand? None, 
except those who are building up their most 
holy faith with the precious promises and doctrines 
of God's Word. 

The advocates of these doctrines are surprisingly 
alert everywhere— especially in this 
country where thought is most active and 
where liberty often means license,— and hundreds 



and thousands are embracing these errors 
as new light. The extent of their success 
is not yet apparent to very many; for their 
success lies in making a still hunt for their 
prey. They are to be found in almost every 
congregation of every denomination— especially 
the more cultured; and the "angel of 
light" feature is seldom neglected. The nominal 
church is already permeated, leavened, with 
these false doctrines; and they are spreading 
so rapidly that the Scriptural prophecy, that 
a thousand shall fall from the faith to one who 
will stand faithful, will soon be fulfilled and 
demonstrable. (Psa. 91:7.) The doctrine of 
the ransom, the cross of Christ, is the test. 
Already a large proportion of the nominal 
church disbelieves in Christ's death as their 
ransom or corresponding price, and have taken 
what is rapidly coming to be considered the 

R1644:page 122 

advanced position, that Jesus was merely AN 
EXAMPLE for us to follow, not also our redeemer. 

From the Scripture teaching upon the subject 
we cannot doubt that these deceptions 
will grow stronger and that even greater demonstrations 
of superhuman power will be permitted 
them— that all except the very elect 
may be stumbled. (Matt. 24:24; 2 Pet. 1:10.) 
The doing of wonderful things is an old trick 
with Satan. And if disease and death are to 
a considerable extent under his control (See 
Job 1:12; Heb. 2:14), why might he not in 
an emergency reverse the method and do some 
healing of diseases, thereby to re-establish his 
errors, and re-blind some whose eyes of understanding 
have been gradually opening, under 
the light of the Millennial day dawn? We 
believe that he is adopting this policy, and 
that he will do so yet more. And we believe 
that our Lord's suggestive inquiry was prophetic 
of this, when he said, "If Satan cast 
out Satan, he is divided against himself: how 
then shall his kingdom stand?" (Matt. 12:26.) 
So now when Satan's Kingdom is about to 
fall, it will be his effort to support it by many 
wonderful works done by his unknowing as 
well as by his wilful agents, falsely and in the 
name of Christ. 

THE ONLY FOUNDATION DISCARDED. 



Theosophists introduce their views with the 



true suggestion that,— "The various Christian 
religions have no prospect of converting the 
world to Christ through their creeds, which 
antagonize each other, and what the world 
needs is a religion of deeds, not of creeds." 
It proposes, as the only creed of life, unselfishness. 
This is captivating to some who, like 
Theosophists, delight to talk about doing good 
and being unselfish, but who perhaps do as 
little as or less than the majority of others, 
without substantial returns. 

Nevertheless, the jangle of creeds and the 
well-founded doubts of nominal Christians 
make them an easy prey to such delusions. 
Hence many are ceasing to believe in or even 
to think of creed, except to doubt them all and 
in every particular, and are grasping as a relief 
the single idea— "An unselfish life, now, 
will certainly secure for me the best there is 
hereafter." Thus Christ, and his great sacrifice 
for sins, are being buried under the mass 
of confused tradition known as the creeds of 
"Christendom." And the very fundamental 
error, which caused all the confusion of those 
creeds, survives them, takes a new form and 
announces itself, in Theosophy, an agent of reform 
and new light; and that fundamental 
error is the false view of death, that when a 
man dies he is not dead, but more than ever 
alive. This error is Satan's first lie: "Ye shall 
not surely die,"— all are immortal by nature, 
and even God cannot destroy you. 

Let all who would stand in this time of 
general falling away from the Bible, from 
Christ, from the cross which is the center of 
the divine plan of salvation, look well to this 
matter and get their heads as well as their 
hearts right and in harmony with God's revelation 
—the Scriptures. Only in Christ are life 
and immortality brought to light, truly. Other 
lights on these subjects are false lights, the 
surmisings of imperfect brains, misled by the 
great deceiver. 

True, these various errors are about to gather 
out of God's Kingdom ALL that offend, and 
those that do iniquity (and these constitute 
the great mass), while the faithful, who will 
receive the Kingdom and be joint-heirs of it 
with Christ, alone will "stand." (Eph. 6:11-13; 
Psa. 91 : 1,4.) But soon after the separation 
thus, of "wheat" from "tares," the fire of the 
great day of trouble (Zeph. 3:8) will make 
general havoc of present arrangements— social, 
political and financial— as well as of false 
religious doctrines and systems. Then shall 
the little flock, having received immortality 



and the Kingdom, shine forth as the Sun of 
Righteousness, and cause all the families of the 
earth to be blessed.-Matt. 13:43; Acts 3:19-21; 
Mai. 4:2. 

Then let all who know the Truth be active 
in its spread. If you cannot preach orally 
perhaps you can preach privately, to your 
friends or neighbors,— by printed page or pen 
or word, as well as by your consistent daily 
conduct. Those about you need whatever help 
you can give, and if they do not get it many 
of them surely will drift into these latter-day 
delusions of Satan. 



R1644 : page 123 

JONATHAN EDWARDS MUCH BLINDED. 



AS an illustration of Calvinism as it was 
preached in by-gone days, but which the 
intelligence both of hearers and preachers prohibits 
in this day of greater light, we quote the 
following from the New York Journal's review 
of a new biography of Jonathan Edwards recently 
published:— 

"Now let us see what impression was produced 
by the preaching of the doctrines of the 
immutable election of the few and the inevitable 
damnation of the many which Edwards 
with remorseless logic reared on his conception 
of the human will. The contemporary 
records and surviving traditions on the subject 
are brought together by Dr. Allen on pages 
126-129 of this volume. 'One man has recorded 
that as he listened to Edwards, when discoursing 
of the day of judgment, he fully anticipated 
that the dreadful day would begin, 
when the sermon should come to an end.' 
Then follows the memorable account left by 
an ear and eye witness of the effect of the sermon 
preached at Enfield, Conn., in July, 1741 
—a sermon which, in the words of the biographer, 
'If New England has forgiven, it has 
never been able to forget.' The title was, 
'Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God;' and 
the impression made by it was 'as if some 
supernatural apparition had frightened the 
people beyond control. They were convulsed 
in tears of distress and agony. Amid their 
sobs and outcries the preacher pauses, bidding 
them to be quiet in order that he might be 
heard.' The discourse was one constant stream 



of imprecation against sinful humanity, and 
it ended with these words: 'If we knew that 
there was one person, and but one, in the 
whole congregation that was to be the subject 
of this misery, what an awful thing it would 
be to think of! If we knew who it was, what 
an awful sight would it be to see such a person! 
How might all the rest of the congregation 
lift up a lamentable and bitter cry over him! 
But, alas! instead of one, how many, it is 
likely, will remember this discourse in hell! 
And it would be a wonder if some that are now 
present should not be in hell in a very short 
time, before this year is out. And it would be 
no wonder if some persons who now sit here 
in some seats of this meeting house, in health, 
and quiet and secure, should be there before 
the morrow morning." 
If it be true that 
"Satan trembles when he sees 

The weakest saint upon his knees," 

R1645 : page 123 

it must frequently cause him to chuckle and 
laugh to see how completely he succeeds in 
getting good men, wearing the livery of the 
royal priests, to blaspheme the character of the 
great Jehovah by such false statements. 

The cunning of the great adversary in hoodwinking 
and leading captive to his service the 
professed servants of God, through false doctrines, 
is wonderful, marvelous. He is the successful 
prince of this age. As "the god [mighty 
one] of this world," he has been wonderfully 
successful in blinding the minds of them which 
believe not simply and implicitly in God's 
Word, but manufacture and use theories of 
their own and the traditions of other men to 
accomplish their own plans and to bring quick 
and popular results; so that they come really 
to love the darkness of error, of Satan-designed 
human theory, rather than the light of 
truth and reason which God's Word supplies. 
And so blinded are they, that even when 
brought in contact with the light of truth, the 
light of the glorious gospel of Christ, they fear 
and dread it and cling to the darkness of which 
really they are often ashamed.— 2 Cor. 4:4. 

O Lord, we are waiting, hoping, praying 
for that brighter, better day, when the reign 
of evil shall have finished its work of testing 
and proving the Church, the Bride; when Satan 
shall be bound and deceive the nations no 
more and blind thy children no longer with 
misrepresentations of thy Word, thy character 



and thy plan; when the Sun of Righteousness 
(the glorified Church— Head and body) shall 
shine forth, the true light which shall enlighten 
every man that ever came into being (John 1:9); 
when the knowledge of the Lord shall 
fill the whole earth as the waters cover the 
sea. For this, O Lord, we wait; and, as thou 
hast bidden us, we labor on and trust and 
pray— "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done 
on earth as it is done in heaven." Yea, even 
now we discern the dawning of that better day 
which shall emancipate thy Church, the whole 
creation, from the bondage of sin and Satan 
and death, and open the way for all who will 
to come as the Lord's sheep into his great fold 
with its bountiful provision of life everlasting. 



page 124 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1645 : page 124 

JOSEPH FORGIVING HIS BRETHREN. 



II. QUAR., LESSON V., APR. 29, GEN. 45:1-15. 

Golden Text— "If thy brother trespass against thee, 
rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him."— Luke 17:3. 

Again the wisdom and noble character 
of Joseph shine out brilliantly in his treatment 
of his erring brethren. When the widespread 
famine had brought them down to 
Egypt to buy corn, he knew them, though, 
under the changed circumstances of his 
new position, they did not recognize him. 
He had left them a beardless boy of seventeen, 
sold into slavery: they now saw him a 
man of forty, arrayed in the vestments of 
royalty and speaking a foreign language 
which they did not understand. 

Had he been of a revengeful spirit, here 



was his opportunity for retaliation. Now 
he was in power, and they were at his mercy. 
Or if, on the other hand, his generosity 
had overcome his judgment, he might have 
received into his favor a host of enemies to 
further menace the peace and usefulness of 
his life and to stimulate and foster their 
own evil dispositions. But Joseph was a 
well-balanced man, and so went to neither 
the one extreme nor the other. His course 
showed that he had a forgiving as well as a 
cautious spirit, and that under proper circumstances 
he was ready to exercise forgiveness. 

He therefore wisely dealt with them 
roughly at first, that he might prove their 
present disposition and ascertain whether 
the experience of years had wrought any 
change in them, and also that he might 
learn something with reference to his father 
and his younger and only full brother, Benjamin. 
He soon learned that his father and 
Benjamin still lived (42:13); but by concealing 
his identity and dealing roughly 
with them he improved the opportunity to 
test their present disposition, both toward 
their aged father and Benjamin and toward 
each other; and when they were tested he 
gladly recognized the fact that a great 
change had taken place in them, as witnessed 
by their solicitude for their father's 
feelings about Benjamin, in view of his loss 
of Joseph, and of their tenderness toward 
Benjamin who was now the father's favorite 
in the place of Joseph, thus showing 
that they had overcome the bitter envy and 
hatred of their younger days. 

He heard them confess, too, in their own 
language, their guilt one to another with 
reference to their former treatment of himself, 
and learned also of Reuben's remonstrance 
at that time. (42:21,22.) Then 
the circumstances drew forth the pathetic 
prayer of Judah for the restoration of Benjamin 
to his father, and his offer of himself 
as a substitute, as a bondman to Joseph 
(44:18-34); and this, too, was accompanied 
by a humble confession of their former sins 
and the recognition of present calamity as 
a deserved punishment from God for them. 
The whole account of the conference with 
Jacob their father and with Joseph proved 
their contrition and change of heart. 

This was enough for Joseph: penitence 
and a true change of heart were all he desired, 
and having proved this effectually and 
wisely, he could no longer refrain himself 



(45:1): his truly forgiving heart now overflowed 
with benevolence, and he wept aloud 
and embraced and kissed his brethren, and 
lavished upon them the wealth of his favor, 
praying them also to forgive themselves 
and to strive to forget their former sins 
now so freely and fully forgiven. But Benjamin, 
his beloved own brother, and the one 
who had had no share in the guilt of the 
others, must have some special tokens of 
grace: nor did this seem to elicit the least 
jealousy on the part of the now reformed 
brethren. They must have returned to their 
home, not only to tell the good news, but 
also to confess to Jacob their sin against 
Joseph as the necessities of the case 
demanded. 

The remainder of the story is of thrilling 
interest— the breaking of the good news to 
Jacob, who at first thought it too good to 
believe, until he saw the tokens of Joseph's 
favor, the wagons from Egypt, and then 
said, "It is enough: Joseph my son is yet 
alive, I will go and see him before I die." 
Then the long journey, undertaken and 
cheered by the special direction of God, saying 
to him in the visions of the night— "I 
am God, the God of thy father. Fear not 
to go down into Egypt, for I will there make 
of thee a great nation. I will go down 

R1645 : page 125 

with thee into Egypt, and I will surely 
bring thee up again, and Joseph shall put 
his hand upon thine eyes." Then the joyful 
meeting and the realization of Joseph's 
glory and power, and better than all, of his 
still surviving filial and fraternal love; then 
the meeting and favor of Pharaoh and the 
settling in the land of Egypt under the 
fostering care of Joseph and Pharaoh, where 
Jacob enjoyed the evening of life in the 
midst of his family for seventeen years until 
his death. 

In this beautiful story of the course of 
divine providence in the life of one of the beloved 
of the Lord, while we see and gather 
from it precious lessons of confidence in God 
and faithfulness and zeal in his service, the 
thoughtful reader can scarcely fail to observe 
its typical foreshadowing of Christ, the 
Savior of his people and of the world also. 

Joseph was another illustration, like that 
of his father, of the chief blessing coming 
specially upon a younger son, as the chief 



divine blessing is also to come upon the 
Christ, Head and body, the Gospel Church, 
not the elder Jewish church. While all of 
Jacob's sons were elect in respect to inheriting 
in common a share in the Abrahamic 
blessing, Joseph was specially chosen as a 
type of Christ— Head and body— the one 
through whom blessings will come upon 
the natural seed of Abraham, that they in 
turn may bless all the families of the earth. 

Hated of his brethren, the fleshly Israelites, 
sold as a slave (thirty pieces of silver 
being the price of slaves, or twenty pieces 
for those under twenty years), he was thus 
prefiguring the hatred and sale of Christ by 
his enemies— his brethren of the Jewish nation, 
unto whom he came, as did Joseph, 
and they received him not. Joseph's three 
years' imprisonment seem to represent the 
three years of our Lord's ministry, the years 
after his baptism, when he was dying daily, 
giving up his life for others, or they were 
parallel also with his three days' imprisonment 
in the tomb, from whence, like Joseph, 
he came forth and was highly exalted, next 
to the King— to the right hand of the 
Majesty on high, all power in the Kingdom 
being given unto him. 

Joseph was given full charge and used 
his power to bless others, storing up food 
for all. So Christ has been given full 
charge: he is Lord of all and lays up for all 
sufficient grace to give everlasting life to 
all. Nor is Christ ashamed to own as his 
brethren those who have nothing to commend 
them to his favor but humble contrite 
hearts. He will not be ashamed to own 
them before his Father and all the holy 
angels. This also was beautifully prefigured 
in Joseph's treatment of his father and 
brethren. He was not ashamed to present 
them before the king, although he knew 
that shepherds were an abomination to the 
Egyptians. Then, in the period of famine, 
Joseph used the grain (life) to purchase for 
Pharaoh the land, the people, and all that 
they had.-Gen. 47:14-25. 

This scheme of statesmanship, which thus 
secured all the land, so that one-fifth of the 
annual produce should go to the support of 
the central government (47:23-26), thus 
breaking up the petty influence of the nobles 
and consolidating the state into a strong 
nation, gave also a striking type of Christ's 
work. During the Millennial age Christ 
will give the bread of everlasting life (himself, 



his merit) to all who desire it, but all 
must give their all in exchange to Jehovah, 
whom Pharaoh typified in this affair. Thus 

R1646 : page 125 

as Joseph, Pharaoh's exalted servant and 
representative, gave life to, or saved the 
lives of many, so Christ, as Jehovah's Prime 
Minister, has provided life for all, and offers 
it to all on the same conditions of faith and 
obedience to the King. 

Then again mark how beautifully Joseph's 
noble and benevolent treatment of his erring 
brethren prefigures the foretold course of 
our exalted Lord Jesus with his former enemies. 
Charity, always a noble quality, is 
specially admirable when seen in such a 
setting as this. Joseph did not even suggest 
what he might justly have done to his 
brethren as punishment for their sin against 
himself twenty-three years before. After 
testing his brethren and finding them 
changed in heart and penitent, he reveals 
himself a true, loving, forgiving friend and 
brother. He makes no boast of his own 
wisdom or virtue as the causes of his exaltation, 
but ascribes all the honor to God's 
overruling providence. He does not even 
remind them of his prophetic dream, which 
they had all just fulfilled in prostrating 
themselves before him. 

He simply forgave them and gave all the 
glory of the present deliverance from famine 
to God, saying, "Now, therefore, be not 
grieved, nor angry with yourselves that ye 
sold me hither, for God did send me before 
you to preserve life. God sent me before 

R1646 : page 126 

you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, 
and to save your lives by a great deliverance. 
So now it was not you that sent me 
hither, but God," etc. How simple, and 
how beautiful! Just so will Christ forgive 
his penitent enemies. He did not say, however, 
that God caused them to do the wrong. 
No, he told them plainly of sin, saying, "As 
for you, ye thought evil against me, but 
God meant it [overruled it] unto good, to 
bring to pass as it is this day, to save much 
people alive. Now, therefore, fear ye not, 
I will nourish you and your little ones. And 
he comforted them and spake kindly unto 
them."-Gen. 50:20,21. 



Thus it is declared of Christ that he will 
set men's sins in order before them, and 
that they must freely confess their sins and 
bear their shame (Psa. 50:21,22; Ezek. 16:61-63; 
1 John 1:9), as did Joseph's brethren. 
But, nevertheless, in the joys of his 
forgiving love and the blessing of his favor, 
the sting of shame will be taken away and 
the fruits of righteous and trustworthy 
character will reinstate the dignity and nobility 
of true manhood. 

In Joseph's case was emphasized God's 
promise to all his people— "All things shall 
work together for good to them that love 
God, to the called according to his purpose." 
(Rom. 8:28; Psa. 1:1-3,6.) And 
such as realize this providential supervision 
are not only kept the more humble and 
trustful, but are not vexed and soured by 
the vicissitudes of life and the misconduct 
of others as are those who are guiding 
themselves and fighting their own battles 
in life. Virtue in character, faith and consecration 
to God, appreciation of God's 
care and direction in all of life's affairs, and 
charity toward those through whose errors 
our trials and experiences come, is the proper 
attitude for every sincere child of God. 

R1646 : page 126 

JOSEPH'S LAST DAYS. 



II. QUAR., LESSON VI., MAY 6, GEN. 50:14-26. 

Golden Text— "The path of the just is as the shining 
light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day. 
-Prov. 4:18. 

The evening of Joseph's life reveals to us 
a true nobility of character, which had stood 
the test of many a fiery ordeal, and displayed 
many of the blessed fruits of righteousness. 
The close of his life was like the sinking 
of the sun to rest after the shining of an 
eventful day. He had been a faithful servant, 
a loyal friend, a merciful and sympathetic 
brother, a dutiful and loving son, and 
finally a modest and moderate prince. 

To Joseph, as to most of the patriarchs, 
the severest trials and discipline came in 
early and middle life, and were rewarded 
with a serene old age; while to many others 
such as the Apostle enumerates in Heb. 11, 



the last days were tragic, and they filled the 
martyr's grave. The Lord's discipline and 
testing of his children in the furnace of 
affliction are regarded by many as evidences 
of his disfavor, while their temporal 
prosperity is regarded as a sure sign of his 
favor. But this is a great mistake; for experiences 
of both kinds are parts of the trial 
and testing. We are tested on one side of 
our nature by the storms of adversity, and 
on the other by the calms of temporal prosperity; 
and blessed is the man who neither 
faints under the former, nor is beguiled by 
the latter. Such well rounded, symmetrical 
and strong characters are indeed precious 
in the sight of the Lord. 

Such a man was Joseph: he was schooled 
and proved in adversity in earlier life and, 
in his later years, the topmost waves of 
temporal prosperity never seemed to move 
him to vanity, nor in any degree to unman 
him. He still looked beyond these temporal 
things to "the city that hath foundations, 
whose builder and maker is God." His confidence 
in God and his trust that the promise 
made to Abraham should be fulfilled, 
never forsook him. Even when surrounded 
by wealth and comfort he remembered that 
Egypt was not the promised land; and when 
he was dying, he, like his father Jacob, indicated 
his hope in a resurrection and the 
subsequent fulfilment of the divine promise, 
by commanding that his body should be 
buried in the land of Canaan. "By faith, 
Joseph, when he died, made mention of the 
departing of the children of Israel [verses 24,25], 
and gave commandment concerning 
his bones."— Heb. 1 1:22. 

It is probable that as Joseph proved so 
valuable a servant to the Pharaoh who exalted 
him, he was continued in office by his 
successor on the throne, perhaps to the end 
of his life. The benefits he had conferred 
upon Egypt were of great value, and seem 
to have been very gratefully received and 
remembered. 

The path of the just of the Golden Text 
is not an individual path, but one path in 
which all the just ones walk: it is the path 
of righteousness (Psa. 23:3), the path marked 

R1646 : page 127 

out by the Word of the Lord as one of 
meekness, patience, faith, love, etc.; and those 
who keep in this path are led of God into 



all truth in its due season. And this pathway 

becomes more and more radiant with 

the glorious light of divine truth as it nears 

"the perfect day" when the sun of righteousness 

shall have risen and the knowledge 

of the Lord shall fill the earth as the waters 

cover the sea— the Millennial day of Christ's 

reign on earth. 

All the patriarchs and prophets and saints 
of the past have walked in this path, and on 
all of them the light of God shone as it became 
due; but upon none did it ever shine so clearly 
as it shines to-day; for we are even now 
in the dawning of the glorious day of Christ, 
and soon this light will shine upon all. 



R1646 : page 127 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT." 



page 127 

DEAR SIRS:— Last spring a colporteur 
called upon me and induced me to buy the 
MILLENNIAL DAWN series. I read them, 
and since then have ordered six sets. Four 
sets are sold, and the others I am loaning. 
The light that shines into my mind and 
heart, through the inspired Word, impels 
me to lead others therein; and this I am 
endeavoring to do as I have opportunity. 
May the Lord bless you, and me, and all 
who love his appearing! 

Yours in Christ, F. H. RUSS. 



R1646 : page 127 

GENTLEMEN:-Enclosed herewith please 
find Exchange on New York for the sum of 
$6.00, for which please send me ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER one year and copies of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

By way of explanation for ordering this 
amount of books, I desire to say that, about 
two months ago, two young ladies came into 
my office selling those books. I was very 
busy when they presented their card; and, 
seeing that they were ladies selling books, 
I bought the three volumes, thinking that 
by so doing I was helping them out. I have 



since concluded that these ladies brought 
to me "glad tidings of great joy." I took 
the books home, and thought little of them, 
until a few weeks ago, when I had some 
spare time, I began reading the first volume, 
and it was so very interesting that I could 
not stop. The result is, my dear wife and 
myself have read these books with the keenest 
interest, and we consider it a God-send 
and a great blessing that we have had the 
opportunity of coming in contact with them. 
They are indeed a "helping hand" to the 
study of the Bible. The great truths revealed 
in the study of this series have simply 
reversed our earthly aspirations; and realizing 
to some extent, at least, the great opportunity 
for doing something for Christ, 
we intend to take advantage of this opportunity 
in distributing these books, first, 
among our nearest relatives and friends, 
and then among the poor who desire to read 
them and are unable to purchase; and for 
that reason we desire these extra copies. 
As soon as these are exhausted, we will 
order more, and try to do what we can in 
this way, be it ever so little. 
Yours, etc., J. F. RUTHERFORD. 



page 127 



BROTHER RUSSELL:-Please continue my 
WATCH TOWER. Enclosed find One Dollar 
for the same. Am fully committed to 
the new light. Have read all the DAWNS 
three or four times. Shall make them my 
theology in the future. Pray the Lord to 
show me how to use my entire ability to 
the best advantage. Please omit the title 
"Rev." from my name. 

God bless you and yours in the glorious 
work! B.J.WISE. 



R1646 : page 127 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am getting 
free from my inherited and traditional 
Babylonish ideas. Some things I have 
learned but crudely as yet, with regard to 
the great plan, but I have begun to read 
MILLENNIAL DAWN consecutively, as I 
had never done before. It is most wonderful, 
how many earnest, well-meaning souls 



are deluded. I am now, so far as I know, 
where I want to be enlightened on the 
Word of God, whatever it may cost to me 
of personal crucifixion. 

I am glad, dear Brother, that I never got 
any deeper into the inside workings of 
Babylon than I did. A little over nine 
months I served as a pastor, when God, our 
heavenly Father, showed me where I was. 
Now I want only to know our Father's will 

R1647 : page 127 

that I may do it. Only very recently have 
I begun to see my deserved place before 
God. I see such a wonderful privilege in 
the election of grace. I see now that God 

R1647 : page 128 

has not been obliged to give me a place 
among the "elect few," who "shall be partakers 
of the divine nature," but, that he 
calls whomsoever he will, and they must 
make their calling and election sure. "For, 
by grace are ye saved through faith, and 
that not of yourselves." Much light comes 
to me through MILLENNIAL DAWN; also on 
other matters through the WATCH TOWER. 

May the blessing of our Father be upon 
you and yours, and may he use you to 
"lighten the Gentiles" and his people Israel 
(in the flesh as well as in the Spirit). 

In love of the truth, JAS. D. WRIGHT. 



page 128 



DEAR SIR:— I have for the past four years 
been reading your MILLENNIAL DAWN. 
I am situated so that I cannot read it consecutively 
as the subject requires, but have 
read it with great pleasure and profit. I 
am thoroughly infatuated with the book. 
Your ideas have given me a higher conception 
of God and his dealings with the 
children of men than any other book of a 
kindred nature. Your ideas of the "Judgment 
Day," "Natures Distinct," "Restitution," 
are so plain and simple and logical 
that it seems strange I had not long ago 
arrived at such conclusions. If you have 
published a paper, send me a copy. I want 
to know more about this doctrine which 
removes so many of the stumbling blocks 



from the way. 
I am yours respectfully, E. M. CARR. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--The second 
volume of the DAWN series come to hand, 
also samples of WATCH TOWER. The study 
of the first two volumes of this work has 
done me so much good that I am constrained 
to send for the third and last volume. 

I cannot praise the dear Lord enough for 
the good that I have received through these 
two volumes. I had back-slidden and almost 
drifted into skepticism, when your first volume 
was handed me. But after reading it 
I was so convinced of the truths of God's 
Word and his glorious plan for blessing 
the world, that I besought him for forgiveness 
for my past sins and shortcomings, 
and again started to serve him. Its further 
study caused me to send for the second volume; 
and it has so blessed me by leading me 
into the deep truths of the Bible that I cannot 
thank God enough. How sweet is the 
meat furnished in due season to the household 
of faith! I am willing to be led by the 
Lord and to work in any department of his 
vineyard in which he may see fit to place 
me, praise his name! 

May the good Master bless you in your 
work, and continually guide you by his 
Spirit, is my prayer. 

Yours in Christ, H. H. CHEESEMAN. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:- 

As I have told you before, I have been 
converted entirely by the spirit of God, in 
reading Plan of the Ages. The presentation 
of the truth is, to me, satisfying and 
convincing,— wonderful, wonderful. I can 
lift up my heart and rejoice, knowing that 
our redemption draweth nigh. What joy 
unspeakable! 

You do not know how I long for fellowship 
with others who can see the real truth 
of God's Word. Remember me when you 
observe the Lord's Supper. I shall be with 
you in the spirit as you partake of the 
emblems of the sacrifice— the Lamb that 
was slain for the sin of the whole world. 

Yours in Christ, W. B. LINDSLEY. 



R1647 : page 128 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--I have been 
thinking of writing to you for some time. 
I want to thank you as the instrument in 
God's hands for leading me into the light. 
I have been a truth-seeker for years; and 
crying, Oh, that I knew where I might find 
him! I have often prayed to God in secret 
to show me his glory. I need not now say 
that I am feasting mentally on the riches of 
his grace. The Lord sent me a set of the 
DAWNS about three months ago; and I 
have not only read them, but I constantly 
read, mark, learn and inwardly digest them. 
They have become a burning fire shut up 
within my bones, and I cannot forbear to 
tell the glad tidings of great joy which shall 
be to all people. 

I was once a Methodist preacher; for 
eight years I have been a Baptist preacher, 
but, thank God, I am now only a preacher 
of the Lord. I have left Babylon forever. 
Oh, that I may be faithful to the end, that 
I may be accounted worthy to escape those 
things that are coming on the earth, and to 
stand before the Son of Man! 

I have sold twelve sets of the DAWNS, and 
I am devoting all the time I can afford to 
preaching and getting people to read. I 
have much opposition, but faithful is he 
who promised, 

Your brother in Christ, L. T. MEARS. 



EXTHA EDITION 



VOU XV., NO. 8 




J 

ion s 




a£@h ^o%D©f 




AND 



^EpaLtt) OF CfipiST'S ^PpESEjMCE 

APRIL 25, I894 



C, T, RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



" The distifit if not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lard. It 
is exmtgkf&r th* ditcifU that h* he as his Master < % and tit* servant as hit 
Lord, tf they have called th* Master of th* house Bethebitb* haw much mere 
shall they call them of his household? 

"Fear them not, therefore; for there is nothing covered thai shall not be 
revealed; and hid that shall not he known.— Matt. 70:94-16.*' 



TOWER PUBLISHING CO. 

ALLEGHENY, PA. 

U, S. A. 

Entered a* Second Claw Mail Matter at the P. O., Allegheny, Pa. 



"No weapon that is formed against thee shall 
prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against 
thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. 

" This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord 
and their righteous reward from me, saiih the 
Lord" — fsa. 54:17. 






" No "weapon that is formed against thee, shall 
prosper, and every tongue thai shall rise against 
thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. 

" This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord 
and their righteous reward from tnc, saith the 
lord.'—fsa. 54:17. 



. ' : s^M 



-• ' 



R CONSPIRACY EXPOSED. 



" B/esred are ye when meit that! rtvite v», Bad 

persecute you, and shall say all tmmner of evil ttgaiust 

you fatiely, for my sake."—-AIalf. J : 11. 

LITTLE did the Editor fhink,when penning words of 
caution to watch and pray, printed in our issueof April 
i, under the caption, " Lest Ye Enter into Temptation," 
that they were so soon to prove so necessary and timely as 
they have since proved. 

The story we here relate is a sad one; but it seems duty 
to tell it in detait, because those most concerned were in- 
troduced to our readers and frequently mentioned in these 
columns in warmest terras of brotherly regard. It is proper 
now, therefore, that you should know of their deflection. 
This painful story we have published separate from our 
regular issues, that if possible only the elder, and it is to be 
hoped steadfast, readers of the Watch Tower may know 
of it h lest others — " babes " — might be " stumbled." 

Those who have been readers of the Watch Tower for 
several years, well know that on the strength of the words 
of our Lord and the Prophets and Apostles ( Dan. ia no; 
Psa. 91:7; 1 Cor. 3:13; Matt. 13:41) we have l>ccn ex- 
pecting "siftings" and "stumblings" and the " falling" of 
many in this "evil day." Such, therefore, like ourselves, 
will not be- so greatly surprised at the facts, although like 
ourselves they may well be surprised, each time, to know 
who stumbles and over what Unsuspicious hearts arc al- 
ways surprised; and the best and purest hearts are general- 
ly unsuspicious. 



■ 









,- ' 



■ 



- 
- 



. . -fZ v<-->vj— - J w --*-V'- - 



, *- ■••»-••:(*,.,■.. ,jv..«< 



-»*..j|.r, i .w( , B w,. M u, ■ m iii im i Bi w unii iii > M |-ir 



readers and frequently mentioned in these columns in warmest 
terms of brotherly regard. It is proper now, therefore, that you 
should know of their deflection. This painful story we have 
published separate from our regular issues, that if possible only 
the elder, and it is to be hoped steadfast, readers of the Watch 
Tower may know of it, lest others-"babes"-might be stumbled. 

Those who have been readers of the Watch Tower for several 
years, well know that on the strength of the words of our Lord 
and the Prophets and Apostles (Dan. 12:10; Psa. 91:7; 1 Cor. 
3:13; Matt. 13:41) we have been expecting "sittings" and 
"stumblings" and the "falling" of many in this "evil day." Such, 
therefore, like ourselves, will not be so greatly surprised at the 
facts, although like ourselves they may well be surprised, each 
time, to know who stumbles and over what. Unsuspicious 
hearts are always surprised; and the best and purest hearts are 
generally unsuspicious. 

To prepare the reader for what follows, it is proper to state that 
the conspiracy of which it is our unpleasant task to tell you, and 
of which the Editor was made the subject, resembled more the 
betrayal of our dear Master (as some of the friends here 
remarked) than anything else to which we can compare it. We 
had no suspicion of it whatever, until five days before, and only 
since have learned that it had been gradually forming for the past 
two years; that it had been expected to "explode" the matter like 
"a bomb, and blow [dear?] Brother Russell and this work sky- 
high" at the Spring Meeting a year ago, and by thus breaking his 
influence to get free from what they call "bondage to Brother 
Russell," and force open to their own uses and abuses the 
columns of ZION'S Watch Tower, which they claim a 

3H115 

right to command;-because it is Zion's Watch Tower, and they 
are members of Zion. 

They were greatly disappointed, it appears, when that meeting 
was abandoned in favor of the Chicago Convention later, but 
declared that the "bomb" would "explode in less than eighteen 
months"-referring doubtless to the expected Memorial meeting 
this Spring. But Providence again foiled the scheme by leading 
us unwittingly to decide not to call such a meeting this year. We 
knew at the time that they were greatly disappointed, for they 
said so; but we had no idea that they had such murderous plans 
and hearts. We use the word "murderous" advisedly, because we 
esteem that to kill the character and influence of a man is a baser 
murder than to kill his body merely, and that the murder of the 
character of one the least of God's children is worse in the sight 
of God than the physical murder of a worldly man. (See Matt. 
18:6; 1 John 3:15.) Perhaps few realize this matter so; but we 
submit that it is the correct view, as shown by the foregoing 
Scriptures. If all could get this true view of the matter, they 



would see the importance of the Apostle's words-Let all evil 
speaking, backbiting, slander, malice, envy, strife, be put away 
from you, as becometh saints.-Eph. 4:31; Col. 3:8-10. 

About January '93, when they still expected the Spring Meeting 
to be held that year, they began preparing for it, by hints and 
suggestions, privately given, that there was something grievously 
wrong with Brother Russell's business character and methods. 
This was expected to undermine the confidence of the flock here 
and to prepare them to believe the "bomb," when exploded at the 
time of the Convention, when representatives of the truth from 
all over the country would be here. Of course this was done with 
many protestations of deep sorrow for "poor Brother Russel"- 
nothing being stated positively, but everything bad being hinted. 
My friends would have brought the matter to my attention at 
once, but of course were diffident about inquiring into my 
personal affairs and business,-especially as they knew nothing 
definitely to inquire about. At last, however, I got some idea that 
"some ugly rumors" were afloat, and at once called together 
about forty of the principle brethren and sisters of the 
congregation here, including those whose names seemed to be 
associated with the "ugly rumors,"-which were some of these 
who, we now find, were even then conspirators. We stated the 
case, and requested and urged that any and every thing known be 
told to us all, so that if any misunderstanding had occurred it 
could be set straight at once; for I assured them that there could 
be no real foundation to any rumors, my business career, like my 
religious course, being straightforward and based on principles 
of justice and truth. All denied any knowledge of anything 
derogatory to my character, and went away satisfied, except the 
conspirators, one of whom, (Mrs. Zech) I now learn, while 
speaking fairly to my face and seemingly joining with the others, 
remarked privately, afterward, "/ could have turned the entire 
course of that meeting if I had chosen, "- referring evidently to 
the "bomb" which it had been decided should be kept,-to be 
exploded at the expected Memorial Convention of '94. 

At the said meeting at my home, I gave a little resume of my 
business affairs, protesting, however, that I did so only for their 
and the truth's sake, and that my business affairs had as much 
right to privacy as those of any one else; and so I here protest 
again, but, later on, will go into details,-only for the sake of 
hindering God's "little ones" from being "stumbled" by the false 
statements which have already been circulated privately, by 
letter, and at the Chicago Convention last Summer, and now, 
within the past few days, in print (the oral "bomb" project having 
failed). The venomous circular recently issued by O. von Zech, 
E. Bryan, J. B. Adamson and S. D. Rogers is now to be the 
"bomb" designed to destroy confidence in Brother Russell 
(whom Providence has made to some extent an under-shepherd 



to the Lord's sheep), and thus to shatter the work-in order that 
the conspirators may gather some of the wreckage; for already 
they have a new paper under way. 

So much for the conspiracy, of which we were in ignorance until 
a few days ago. Meanwhile, the conspirators were fair to my face 
and spoke endearing words, as will be shown later on in this case 
by some of their letters to myself and wife, written during the 
very time they were concocting their scheme and keeping their 
"bomb." Meanwhile, we were their sincere friends, and all but 
one of them has shared the hospitality of our home within the 
last three months. Yes, at the very time that they were preparing 
the circular, designed to assassinate my character, one of them, 
in the presence of a dozen brethren, offered me his hand, as 
Judas kissed the Master. But by that time, although I knew much 
less than I now do of his perfidy, I knew him to be my slanderer 
and refused his hand, telling him that the right hand of 
fellowship meant something to me, and that I had no desire to 
give it to those who stealthily and murderously stabbed my 
character behind my back. 

But now for the details of the matter:- 

To give a connected view of the things which have transpired 
here lately, we must recall to the TOWER readers the facts stated 
in our issue of April 1, under the caption-'The Work in 
England." (And we assure you that every word of it is strictly 
correct; and that the figures given, as showing the funds of the 
Tract Society supplied in books for Brother Rogers' expenses, 
are net after deducting all money received from him and all 
books transferred to other colporteurs in England and all books 
now stored there. These figures, however, include books 
supplied to Bro. Rogers in the U. S. before he started for 
England, from the proceeds of which his expenses there were to 
be paid. It should be noted, too, that we state in the TOWER the 
amount of money Bro. Rogers would have received for the 
books at "retail." We thus particularize because he, in an 
ambiguous manner, denies the statement.) 

We heard Bro. Rogers' proposed mendicant plan in the presence 
of our office assistants (who with ourselves constitute our 
household), until Bro. Rogers said that he had told us all about it 
and "could think of nothing more to explain." As before stated, 
we assured him that we could not think of adopting his plan and 
discarding the successful one now in operation, but urged him to 
try it himself if he felt sure that it was the Lord's will concerning 
him. He replied that we were "rejecting the Lord's message" 
etc. (We learn since that he no longer relies for leading upon the 
Word of the Lord and his providences in Answer —to prayer, but 
that, instead, he sits down and thinks by the hour — as 



3H116 

he did during his stay at our home-and believes that the Lord 
thus reveals things to him. Alas! how many have been misled by 
this and similar misapprehensions, and to the neglect of the 
Word of God, which is "able to make wise unto salvation," and 
through which the man of God may be thoroughly furnished unto 
every good work. (2 Tim. 3:15-17) Just what bad condition of 
heart lies at the bottom of such a course we may not be able to 
discern, but it seems generally to be spiritual vanity.) This was 
Monday evening; the next two days he visited considerably with 
Bro. Zech. We know not what passed between them except that 
by Wednesday night their causes were one; Bro. Zech evidently 
appreciating the idea of "taking the money from the fish's 
mouth." If Bro. Zech thus embraced Bro. Rogers cause it was but 
natural that Bro. Rogers should fall in with Bro. Zech's 
"grievances," and they strengthened each other's hands and 
hearts in evil. We since learn that on the Saturday evening 
previous one of Bro. Zech's family, Paul Koetitz visited Bro. 
Erlenmyer (whom he had previously tried to poison against me) 
and in great glee said, We have Bryan and Adamson and now 
here is Rogers all the way from England. It seems as if the Lord 
sent him at this time. That makes four, and there are a lot more. 
Just wait, something terrible is going to happen. And Bro. and 
Sister Zech and Paul Koetitz were at his house a week previous 
and stayed until midnight talking about Bro. Russell and a 
coming catastrophe. They gave Bro. Russell a black character, 
and Bro. Zech said he was going to tell all to the Congregation, 
soon. Bro. E. said, Why not talk the matter over with Bro. 
Russell? He replied, It is no use, he would explain everything 
away;-the congregation ought to know these rotten things. Bro. 
E. was much distressed and waited in fear for the "boiling pot" 
to "boil over." 

To start the matter, Bro. Rogers, Bro. and Sister Zech and Bro. 
Paul Koetitz attended one of the six Wednesday Evening Prayer 
and Testimony Meetings, held for nearly a year in this vicinity. 
There, in the absence of Bro. Russell, those meetings were 
denounced, and Bro. Russell, for his connection with their 
institution, was denounced as a "pope," etc. The leader of the 
meeting in vain called for order and told them that the meeting 
was for the purpose of divine worship and praise, and for mutual 
assistance in spiritual development. Mrs. Russell was present and 
reproved both the interruption and the unkind spirit manifested. 
She pointed out that while the meetings were suggested and 
recommended by me, the matter was left to the congregation, 
nearly all of which had taken up with the suggestion and voted to 
have the meetings-not for doctrinal discussions, etc., but solely 
and only for worship and spiritual upbuilding. 

She pointed out, also, that none were in any sense forced to 
attend; and that those who did not care for prayer and conference 



in harmony with the object of the meetings should stay away and 
give to the others who did so desire, proper liberty to worship 
God as they pleased. She pointed out, too, that there are many 
meetings at which doctrinal subjects, etc., are considered. She 
showed plainly that while Bro. Russell's course contained 
nothing like a popish disregard of the wishes of others, the 
course of Bro. Rogers, in coming from England to force his ideas 
upon Bro. Russell, and now the course of all these in interrupting 
the worship of others, was decidedly popish, if indeed it were not 
worse than popish. Finally the discontents withdrew; Bro. 
Rogers staying that night at Bro. Zech's. 

But I was unsuspicious all the while and lost the morning of that 
very day from the Lord's work (DAWN, VOL. IV.) to collect 
money to make good my check of $700, given to Bro. Zech the 
afternoon before to keep his note from going to protest. The next 
day Bro. Rogers returned to our house for another conference (at 
which the entire family was present and which occupied the 
whole morning), and remained for dinner. After dinner he said 
he was going to Zech's but would be back for tea; but we told 
him that as he had been ten days at our home interrupting 
important work, and as Bro. Zech with whom he was more in 
harmony had made him welcome, we would not invite him to 
stop longer in our home. He then went to Bro. Zech's house, 
where, evidently, it was decided that now would be the most 
favorable time to explode the "bomb" that had been kept for 
some eighteen months. So Bro. Rogers was sent west, arranged 
with Bro. Bryan, who was to manipulate an assorted lot of 
grievances and damaging charges against Bro. Russell, and got 
Bro. Adamson into line;-who, it seems, had some previous 
knowledge of the conspiracy. Brother Adamson had a grievance 
relative to his tract, as will be explained further on; and being 
one of the older colporteurs, it was hoped that his name would 
add to the destructive force of the coming "explosion." They had 
seen Bro. Russell pass through trying experiences with "false 
brethren" before, for God and truth were on his side; but never 
before had they seen such a combination against him; and they 
encouraged themselves that now Bro. Russell would be 
humbled in the dust, and they would profit thereby. 

THE CONSPIRACY CULMINATES 

Accordingly, they-Rogers, Adamson and Bryan-gathered at 
Bro. Zech's home, and with him and his family, sent out, on 
Wednesday, April 4, special letters to the Church at Allegheny, 
inviting them to gather at Bro. Zech's house the next evening to 
hear matters of importance, etc., -meaning the "bomb" and 
smaller fire works. 

About forty or fifty of the congregation attended, all of whom 
except one, so far as we are aware, received special invitations to 



be present. As we were not present, we submit the report of Bro. 
E. C. Henninges, the Secretary of that meeting, well known to 
many of our readers. It is as follows:- 

THE SECRETARY'S REPORT 

"In response to invitations sent out, signed E. Bryan, S. D. 
Rogers, J. B. Adamson and O. von Zech, requesting attendance 
at Bro. Zech's house on April 5, at 7:30 P. M., to hear "things 
concerning our highest welfare,' about forty of the Church at 
Allegheny attended. Finding on arrival that it was to be a 
congregational meeting at which some kind of charges were to 
be preferred against Bro. Russell, a Chairman and Secretary 
were called for by those in attendance, that whatever was done 
might be "done decently and in order;' besides which, if seemed 
proper that if the Congregation were to "hear' the complaints, it 
implied that 

3H117 

they were to render their judgment or verdict, and all this 
required proper order and a congregational head or chairman to 
the meeting and an authorized record. And further, some present 
who had knowledge of Bro. Russell's past experiences with 
Bros. Zech, Bryan and Rogers, foresaw that it would be most 
unjust to have the self-constituted impeaching committee appoint 
one of their own number to manage the trial, as they insisted on 
doing, and at the same time call it a congregational meeting. 
After nearly an hour had been spent in trying to get the 
congregation to sit quietly and hear their best friend traduced, 
without any power to properly inquire into facts, etc., the four 
complainants were overruled by the congregation, and Bro. H. 
C. Wolf was chosen Chairman, and myself Secretary, of the 
meeting. 

"Bro. Bryan was first introduced, but became, under some 
interruption, so excited, disorderly and rebellious that he 
grievously insulted the congregation by saying, "I refuse to 
recognize the authority of the Chair. ' It was promptly moved 
and seconded that we hear Bro. Bryan no further; but an 
amendment, giving him the alternative of apology or dismissal 
was carried. On his declaration that he had "no thought of 
apology, ' he was dropped, after having occupied the floor for 
about fifteen minutes. 

"Bro. Rogers had the next opportunity, and spoke for nearly two 
hours. He gave a resume of his plan, which several of us had 
heard before at Bro. Russell's house, a report of which was given 
in ZION'S WATCH TOWER of April 1, '94, under the heading, 
"The Work in England. ' At Bro. Russell's he said he had not yet 
tried his new method. At Bro. Zech's he declared that he "had 
tried this method largely in London,' and it was "very successful. 
' He stated, as grievances, four ways in which he claimed Bro. 
Russell had injured him. (1) By pointing out that the printed page 



is the best way to preach the Gospel. (2) On account of this he 
got the feeling that he must sell so many books per day to pay 
expenses, and this kept him from trusting the Lord. These two 
things kept him in a great bondage which he had felt, but the 
cause of which he and only lately realized. (3) By telling him 
that he had v NO talent' for public speaking. (4) By advising him 
to change his London meeting to one in Bible-class style. This 
last he regards as an "assumption of control of my privileges. ' 

"Bro. Zech spoke at odd times against Bro. Russell in general 
terms, to the effect that Bro. Russell had too much authority and 
lack of love for the brethren; also v Bro. Russell does great sins; 
and, if you do not want to hear it, you are partaker of his sins. ' 
Twelve o'clock, midnight, came without Bro. Adamson having 
had his say except in the opening prayer, in which he thanked 
God for having the privilege of sharing in v this great reform 
movement' for liberty and equality amongst the brethren. 

"Upon motion, the meeting adjourned, while Bro. Bryan shouted 
that they would be heard from fully in a few days-that a hall 
would be rented where they [the four] could have matters all 
their own way, and that it would not be called as a 
congregational meeting and that " this thing will not down; 

we will print it and publish it to all the world, ' etc. 

"Respectfully submitted, E. C. Henninges." 

After the meeting had dismissed, a few were invited to stay 
longer, and did stay until four o'clock A. M. Then were detailed 
the other matters, and through some who were there we finally 
got to know about the "bombs," etc. When asked if they had 
gone to Brother Russell and asked whether he could or would 
give them an explanation, they replied that some of the minor 
charges had been presented and that "he had explained them 
away; " but they had never mentioned the two leading items 
(the "bombs" which they had been keeping for eighteen months). 
When asked why they had not presented those leading matters to 
Bro. Russell they replied,-We knew before-hand that Bro. 
Russell could Answer—them, and explain them all away. "And 
so" said the inquirer, "you thus confess that you did not want an 
explanation, but wanted to slander Bro. Russell." 

THE CONSPIRACY EXPOSED 

The next Sunday afternoon, after the discourse, strangers were 
dismissed during the singing of a hymn and the regular 
congregation was requested to tarry. To those who remained we 
gave a full history of the matter, in substance as we now present 
it below:- 

The conspiracy which reached a head on Thursday evening April 
5, at the residence of Bro. and Sister Zech was a surprise to us 
all; and although we now find that it had been forming for nearly 
two years, yet, so far as we can learn, Bros. Adamson and 



Rogers had nothing to do with it until the past few weeks, 
although the former had considerable information respecting it. 
But their readiness to become participants therein speaks for 
their hearts much of the same "gall of bitterness" which has for a 
longer period been the power of Satan working in the others;-for 
we cannot but believe that Satan has been the moving and 
inspiring conspirator-moving to envy, jealousy, etc., and now, 
finally, to an attempt to assassinate my character and thus to 
greatly injure the cause which, under God's providence, I 
represent to a considerable degree. 

When I shall now relate to you in detail the charges brought 
against me, you will indeed be surprised that "brethren" could be 
so confused by Satan as to become his tools and to attempt to 
make charges and "bombs" OUT OF NOTHING. I am 

not surprised at Satan; for I well know that he has long sought 
occasion against me, because of my activity against him and his 
works and in the service of the Lord. He has repeatedly set for 
me pitfalls and snares, but by the grace of God I escaped them. I 
am not surprised, therefore, that after besetting me for years and 
finding no real charges to bring against me, the great Accuser of 
the Brethren finally endeavors to misconstrue virtues and make 
them appear to be vices. 

Born in this city of Allegheny, which, with the exception of 
about three years, has always been my home, I should be, and 
am, well known here. My religious views, of course, make me a 
mark, a target; and on this account if anything were known 
derogatory to my character, either in morals or in my business 
dealings, surely there are thousands of tongues in Pittsburg and 
Allegheny that would not hesitate to make abundant use of them 
to oppose my religious teachings. Can any one doubt that if such 
things could be produced, Satan would have found willing agents 
to publish them to the world long ago, to counteract the religious 
truths I publish, which they oppose, yet cannot gainsay nor 
contradict? 

3H118 

But what even the godless world would not do, because too 
honest, Satan now succeeds in getting some "brethren '" to 
attempt. We do not claim that they realize what they are doing;- 
no, we trust that they do not fully realize the atrocity of their 
crime. For, if they have pursued their course for eighteen months 
with a full appreciation of its atrocity there would surely be little 
hope for them. We trust, therefore, that of them as of some of old 
it is true,-"they know not what they do," the god of this world 
having so thoroughly blinded their moral sight. 

Yet while hoping that sometime they may get free from their 
captor, Satan, we cannot think that they have gotten into their 
present dreadful condition inadvertently, or merely by error of 
judgment. If their hearts were right God would not have 



permitted their poor judgment to get them into their present 
plight. We fear, from the bad fruits which they are bearing, that 
ambition and envy have for some time been "roots of bitterness" 
which only recently blossomed, and are quickly yielding the 
fruitage denounced in God's Word as works of the flesh and of 
the devil,-malice, hatred, contentions, envy, strife, back-bitings, 
slanders and every evil work. 

Those whose hearts could treasure up supposed "bombs" for 
eighteen months to explode in the midst of the Church and ruin 
the character of a brother, who meantime did more than a 
brother's part to them (as will be shown later), and who all this 
time called him "dear Brother Russell" and wrote him letters 
expressive of their love and esteem—these have a depth of 
wickedness and deceit which would shock a noble-minded 
worldly man not a professing Christian, and ignorant of the 
great light of present truth. Blasphemous unbeliever as he is, we 
believe that Mr. Robert Ingersoll would have no sympathy with 
such ungodly works of darkness;— he has enough of manhood to 
keep him out of such a snare of the devil. 

BROTHER ROGER'S GRIEVANCES 

We will examine these charges separately. We have already 
referred to Satan as the chief conspirator and it is not difficult to 
judge of his motives. We have also mentioned Bro. Roger's 
grievances-that he was not allowed to overthrow the present 
Colporteur work and substitute his new preference. 

We never forbade Bro. Rogers or others to preach Christ in any 
and every way they can. Quite to the contrary, as many can 
testify, we have always urged upon all the necessity for watching 
for the hearing ears, and that where such are found they do all 
they can to supplement the influence of the DAWNS. But we 
have advised, and do still advise, that it is useless to get into a 
wrangle and dispute and waste time at every house. Far better 
leave the majority of people to fight with DAWN and the 
BIBLE, than for the average colporteur, or indeed any one, to 
attempt it. Stir up the curiosity and interest of the purchaser, so 
that he will surely read, and then endeavor to water and to 
harrow before going to the next field of labor,-has been our 
advise to all colporteurs. And on their Report-blanks we have a 
space left, in which we request that they mention the number of 
persons with whom they have had special talks, and another 
blank in which we request them to state how many they have 
found who seem to be true wheat. Does this look as though we 
endeavored merely to see how many DAWNS could be sold, 
regardless of any work upon the heart? 

Furthermore, several of the Brethren who seemed to have some 
ability for public speaking, have been supplied without charge 
with large charts similar to the one in DAWN, VOL. 1. (which 
cost us eight dollars each, in quantities), to enable them to preach 



when opportunity offers. Bro. Adamson, one of the conspirators, 
has such a chart. Indeed, about two months ago, we contracted 
with a painter in Pittsburg to prepare one hundred cloth charts, 
five feet long, on rollers, suitable for parlor-meetings. These will 
soon be ready and will be supplied to TOWER readers at about 
one-third what they would cost to get them up singly. Thus 
different little groups can edify and instruct each other, as well as 
their neighbors. Already there are two, and I am now making 
arrangements for two more, who seem "apt to teach," to go from 
place to place and hold meetings, public and private, chiefly the 
latter. Do these things look like objections on my part to oral 
teaching? Surely not; and Bro. Rogers knows that he 
misrepresents me, whatever may be his object in so doing. 

We do learn, however, since the publication of the article,-"The 
work in England," — that Bro. Rogers had a very poor plan for 
colporteuring. Brother Utley, to whom Bro. Rogers gave some 
lessons, writes that he could not conscientiously adopt the plan, 
which, while successful as to sales, really did not make any 
opening for the reception of the truth. He describes the method 
thus: Rogers rings bell — servants appears — Rogers says, Please 
tell the lady that a minister wishes to see her. Servant leaves him 
in the hallway and he pushes on into the parlor. The lady enters, 
somewhat indignant at the intrusion, but is awed by the words, "I 
am a minister of the gospel," and readily consents to her name 
being entered for the three books to help on some good work. 

Sister Burroughs writes on the subject as follows: 

"A sister here asked me if I did not think it would be well to let 
Bro. Russell know how much harm had been done here by Mr. 
Rogers in his very disagreeable manner of insulting those who 
refused to buy V DAWN; ' but I thought he was in England and 
beyond giving further offense here, so we would not trouble you, 
but took him to the Lord in prayer-that he might be humbled and 
given a better spirit." 

We can assure Bro. Rogers and others that the trouble is not with 
the colporteur work, but with his methods of doing it. Others are 
still greatly blessed in it, and are a great blessing to the Lord's 
hungry sheep, preaching so much of the plan as the people have 
ears to hear and leaving the books to preach to them many things 
which they would not hear orally. 

Another grievance was that when he came here from England I 
did not show him special attention more than to others, by 
inviting him onto the platform, and to speak to the congregation, 
and to lead a Wednesday meeting. 

Such a complaint surprised me greatly, but gave evidence of a 
root of pride as well as of bitterness. I fear that I have already 
pushed him forward too much, and to his injury. 



Recognizing all of the consecrated as Royal Priests, it has been 
my custom to ignore distinctions, and when 

3H119 

another speaks I myself take a seat with the congregation. Our 
congregation almost every Sunday has from two to five ex- 
ministers of various denominations who at times have addressed 
the congregation,-in my absence. 

BROTHER ADAMSON'S GRIEVANCES 

Bro. Adamson's grievances may be summed up as follows: He 
has for some four years held some views upon some of the 
parables, which I consider incorrect and misleading expositions. 
These he brought forward at the Spring Convention of 1892, in 
connection with a little talk to the colporteurs after the close of 
the meeting proper. Seeing that those who heard him had not 
generally caught the drift of his thoughts, my remarks following 
his were few, because I had no desire to hold up his views to 
ridicule-for some of them were too childish to treat in any other 
manner. I merely remarked that Bro. A's views of these parables, 
they would notice, differed a little from my own view, which I 
stated in a few words. But, said I, since the Lord expounded only 
a few of his parables, and since we know that they do not mean 
what they say, but are figurative, it would not be in order for any 
one to be dogmatic in interpreting them: it is well also to 
remember that no doctrines should be built upon parables; at 
most they may be used to illustrate doctrines made plain by non- 
symbolic scriptures. Thus, kindly, did I push aside,rather than 
crush, what then seemed to me harmless, nonessential 
differences. 

But, alas! how great a flame a little spark may kindle. Had I 
realized, then, how an insignificant difference may be used by 
the Adversary for evil, how gladly I would have spent several 
hours in pointing out what seemed to me to be Bro. A's errors of 
interpretation. But I was busy, and said to myself-"In 
nonessentials charity and liberty." 

I now learn that Brother Adamson, like many others, has been 
under the influence of the Allegheny conspirators for more than 
a year. I noticed a change in his letters and manner, and in his 
zeal for the work, but could not account for it, until I learned of 
the "bombs" conspiracy, a few days ago. 

About a month ago several brethren wrote to me saying that Bro. 
Adamson was preparing and intending to publish a tract, that he 
was writing to them for money to publish it, and that he had 
requested that the matter be kept secret from me, which request 
they felt it a duty to the Lord and his truth to disregard. In some 



of these letters Bro. A. explained that the coming tract would 
contain some of his views on some of the parables, and at least 
one or two parables as treated by Bro. Russell, and some other 
extracts from Bro. Russell's writings. 

Bro. Weber received one of Bro. A's appeals for aid. He 
answered it kindly saying that he hoped to see him soon. Shortly 
after, he came from Maryland to Allegheny at Bro. Bryan's 
request to meet him on very important business, which business 
he found after his arrival was to sit in judgment upon and 
condemn Bro. Russell. After this interview, seeing the evil 
disposition manifested by Bro. Bryan, and his threatening 
attitude (which will be explained later), and knowing that in 
some way he was already influencing Bro. Adamson, and that he 
was about to visit Bro. A., Bro. Weber thought it would be well 
if he and I should visit Bro. Adamson at once, and if possible 
shield him from the subtle and evil influence of Bro. Bryan, who 
had stated his intention of leaving the city for Chicago the next 
day to see Bro. A. We therefore started that evening. 

Our talk with Brother and Sister A. was a kindly one, in which I 
pointed out what I consider to be his errors of interpretation of 
some of the parables, particularly one of them (Matt. 5:25,26), 
which seemed to convey the idea that the world during the 
Millennial age would each man pay the penalty of his own sins 
to the "uttermost farthing"; and I showed that with such a view 
in mind some might draw the conclusion, even if not meant, that 
the death of Christ was not necessary as a ransom price for all. 
We then told him of the unhappy change that had come over 
Bro. Bryan and of his strange and unwarrantable attitude toward 
myself and the work in general, that he might know something of 
the spirit which was prompting a new trial of his faith. 

But Bro. A's manner was not as formerly, and premonitions of 
his present condition of heart and mind were distinctly felt. I 
further stated that his proposition to place his tract in the hands 
of the Dawn Colporteurs for sale (of which he had not informed 
me, but which I learned through others) would be contrary to our 
arrangements with them-that those who handle DAWN should 
do so to the exclusion of everything else. This is a general rule 
among those who employ agents in any business, the object 
being to concentrate the entire effort on the one thing-'This one 
thing I do." and it is largely due to this regulation that the work 
has been so successful thus far. Therefore I had to assure Bro. A. 
that we could not institute any precedent in favor of his tract. 

Bro. A. makes a great mistake in saying, "Bro. Russell's 
spokesman offered me twenty dollars not to print the tract." His 
reference evidently is to Bro. Weber, who was not my 
spokesman. Whatever Bro. W. said he said for himself entirely, 
and he says that what he did was to offer twenty dollars to cover 
certain expenses already incurred if Bro. A. desired to 
discontinue the preparation of the tract, and give his energies as 



formerly in the direction of his special talent-the Colporteur 
work. 

Brother A's grievances are two: (1) We were informed about his 
tract before he got it out. (2) We found that he had on the face of 
his tract the words Old Theology Tracts and Tower Bible and 
Tract Society, Bible House, Allegheny, which deceptions we 
would not permit. After two notifications that we considered 
those references unjust and deceptive, and that he had no legal or 
moral right to so misuse our names to gain credence for his tract, 
he still persisted, and had many of them printed thus, Bro. Zech 
upholding him in it and doing the work. Finally, however, 
threatened Bro. Zech's partner (who although not interested in 
the truth, seemed to have better ideas of moral honesty) with 
damages if they let the tracts go out in that form, and they thus 
were forced to remove the deceptive title pages. 

Seeing him thus out of all harmony with the Tract Society, and 
as he had gotten into debt to the Tower Publishing Co. (not to the 
Tract Society) $218.00, during the time he spent in preparing his 
tract, we offered to credit on his TOWER PUB. CO. account all 
that he ever donated to the Tract Fund — $ 1 39 — if he so desired 
and 

3H120 

would resign the Directorship in the Tract Society, — to which, 
being continually absent from the city, he could not and did not 
give the least attention. This he refused to do; and, from what he 
says, he intends to owe the Tower Pub. Co. its $218.00 balance 
as long as he lives. 

He states that he spent hundreds of dollars and traveled about 
without salary, circulating pamphlets at Camp-meetings, etc. It is 
true that the Tract Fund paid him no stated salary, but the way in 
which he states the matter is calculated to give a false 
impression. The fact is, that money was furnished him for all his 
expenses; and so far as we have any knowledge, he used it for 
all his expenses. Of the $218 now owing to the TOWER PUB. 
CO. (not to the Tract Society) $35 was sent him in cash about 
one month ago to help him make a payment due on some real 
estate in Chicago, purchased last year. 

Bro. Adamson tries his hand at evil surmisings and says, "I 
believe that much more than I owe was expended in attempting 
to thwart Bro. Rogers' work in England." I reply, Aside from my 
time and stationary, I spent only twenty cents for four stamps, 
and this was not charged to the Tract Fund. Two of these stamps 
carried to Bro. Rogers the kindly put suggestions that his talent 
lay not in the direction of public speaking, as mentioned in the 
article "The Work in England;"-the third stamp carried a reply to 
Mr. Elliot Stock, of London, who had complained that Bro. 
Rogers was collecting money under false representations, from 
people who supposed that they were donating funds to the 



British and Foreign Bible Society, but who were finding out, 
from the tracts left them, that they were mistaken. I replied, that 
surely some mistake had occurred, for I knew that Bro. Rogers 
would make no misrepresentations, and that none of our 
colporteurs were authorized to solicit money, directly or 
indirectly, and that I would request Bro. Rogers to call 
personally and explain. The fourth stamp was used to advise Bro. 
Rogers of this, and to caution him that he be very careful that the 
truth be not evil spoken of, and to ask him to see Mr. Stock and 
explain matters, as I felt sure he could do; for his letters stated 
that he represented himself as the agent of our Society. 

This is a dispassionate statement of the injury Bro. A. has 
received at my hands. For all this he and the others reach the 
conclusion that Bro. Russell can only be completely 
overwhelmed by calling him,- "The Man of Sin. " 

Now we come to the consideration of the grievances of the chief 
conspirators-Bro. and Sister Zech whom we shall treat as one, 
including their household, and Bro. Bryan. 

BROTHER ZECH'S GRIEVANCES 

Here, as it relates to this case, it is necessary to give a little 
resume of my business history from '81 onward. I was then 
engaged in mercantile business and had a large store on the 
principle street of Pittsburg, and three branch stores. These were 
chiefly controlled by clerks and merely had my supervision; the 
most of my time being occupied in the publishing of the 
WATCH TOWER, Food for Thinking Christians, etc., which 
was circulated in large quantities. As the literary work increased 
it became necessary to dispose of these stores; and as I found it 
much easier to spend money than to earn it, I concluded that the 
capital formerly invested in the stores should not all be lavishly 
spent even in the good work of circulating the tidings of great 
joy: that the Lord would be better served if it were invested so 
that my time could go to his service, than if all were spent at once 
in his service and I then were obliged to give my entire time to 
business; for my determination has always been that I would 
never beg, either for ourselves or for the Lord's cause; but that 
the same Lord who blessed Peter's fishing and Paul's tent- 
making (Matt. 17:27; Acts 18:3; 1 Thess. 2:9; 2 Thess. 3:8) 
could bless, according to his wisdom, my business talents. 

My money-capital being limited, I saw that it would never do to 
invest the funds in mortgages or in a bank, because the interest 
on the sum would be inadequate to the demands of ourselves and 
the work. Under what seemed to be a providential leading, I 
decided to invest with others in some oil property-oil wells. I 
chose this business because it seemed to be profitable, and 
because it would require little or no time and personal attention; 
for others, interested in looking out for their own interests, 
necessarily looked out for mine also. And this judgment has, on 



the whole, proved correct-several coins have been taken from 
this fish's mouth for our support and for the Lord's cause.-Matt. 
17:27. 

When Bro. Zech received the truth and left the Lutheran church, 
he owned a good property which, aside from being a home free 
of rent, paid his taxes and left him a net income of about ten 
dollars per month. Full of zeal for the newly-found truth, he 
engaged with me to translate articles from the WATCH TOWER 
into German, which I published in great quantities. He also 
proposed to translate M. DAWN, VOL. I., and to do the type- 
setting on same if I would pay for the electro-plates, supply the 
paper, printing and binding, and that we be share-owners in the 
work when completed. 

We agreed to this, and it was begun. But watching the results of 
the circulation of the German TOWERS, and seeing them to be 
very meager, I foresaw that the publication of the German 
translation of DAWN would be very unprofitable, and so pointed 
out to Bro. Zech, urging that his income and the needs of his 
family would not justify him in doing all that his zeal had 
prompted him to propose. At that time he had translated about 
two hundred and fifty pages and had set in type about one 
hundred pages, and my suggestion was: Now, Bro. Zech, 
suppose we reckon that the time already spent by you on this 
volume represents the translation of the whole of it and suppose 
that this be your donation to the German cause, and I will 
proceed with the publishing, paying all of the expenses-what I 
shall pay you for your time in translating the remainder of the 
volume being reckoned as pay for the type-setting already done 
by you. This was mutually agreed to. 

Meanwhile, my early suggestion, that Bro. Zech get at some sort 
of "fishing" or "tent-making," forced itself upon my attention. 
Various occupations were thought of, but none seemed so 
favorable to him as type-setting, and he requested that he be 
permitted to learn English type-setting and have the job of 
preparing the WATCH TOWER every month. I foresaw 
difficulties from his lack of a knowledge of the trade, as well as 
from his lack of knowledge of English, and urged that he choose 
something else. But, as 

3H121 

nothing else so favorable offered, and, as he urged that he would 
see that his blunders should cost me nothing-that the work 
should cost me no more than I was then paying to a Pittsburg 
firm — I consented. Under these arrangements I paid him thirty- 
five dollars a month for a time; afterward when he became more 
expert, and when we began to set up M. DAWN, VOL. II., I 
increased the pay to forty dollars per month, and later, when he 
requested that he be paid by measure for the type-setting, and 
told me that he thought he could earn more money that way 



because he was getting more expert and would work longer 
hours, I consented; but instead of paying him the Union rates, I 
paid him more; namely forty cents per thousand ems, -because 
he was a Brother. 

Later, when Bro. Zech had inherited something like fifteen to 
eighteen thousand dollars, from his father's estate in Germany, 
he thought that he would like to build somewhere near our home; 
and knowing that I owned some lots opposite it he inquired 
whether I would sell to him. I assured him that I would be 
pleased to have him for a neighbor, and gave him a price on 
eight small lots. I told him that I thought them worth four 
thousand dollars at the rate other lots in that neighborhood were 
selling-for him to inquire and thoroughly inform himself-but 
that as a brother in Christ I would give him a discount of $1000. 
So he bought the eight lots and paid me $3000. But he has since 
"whispered" that he was cheated. 

Seeking an investment for some of his money, and knowing that 
I had some interests in the oil business, he asked my advice as to 
investing in that business. Judging that he would be one greatly 
affected by either a loss or a gain I advised him not to engage in 
the oil business. 

My book-keeper and general business representative at that time, 
Bro. Geo. Rindfuss, was very intimate with Bro. Zech. Bro. 
Rindfuss it seems advised Bro. Zech differently, respecting the 
oil business, and Bro. Zech seemed to misunderstand me and to 
imagine that from jealousy I had advised him against his best 
interests, lest he should prosper greatly;-but nothing could have 
been farther from my thoughts. 

About this time Bro. Rindfuss, as my business representative, 
called attention to the fact that I would soon need considerable 
money and suggested that he try and sell an eighth interest in 
some oil property for which not long before I had paid $3500. I 
consented. In a few days he reported that he could get $3300, 
and urged that I accept it as it was for a friend,-Brother Zech. I 
objected that Bro. Zech was unused to business, and if anything 
should go wrong he might reflect upon me for having helped him 
into it. The reply was that the property was as safe as could be 
found, and that Bro. Zech was not a child and knew what he was 
doing; and that besides Bro. Zech had been to see the property, 
while I had never seen it, having bought it on the explanation of 
Bro. Rindfuss and others, without taking time to visit it. So I 
consented, and as a favor to Bro. Zech sold him a one-eighth 
interest in the property for $200 less than it cost me and less than 
Bro. Rindfuss paid for a similar interest purchased from another 
party. I still, however, owned an eighth interest. 

To the complete surprise of all concerned, the property suddenly 
declined in oil production, and hence also in value, until what I 
had paid $3500 for was not worth $700. As we had feared, Bro. 



Zech's feelings suffered severely by the fall from great 
expectation to such realizations; and, although without cause, he 
proclaimed that I was responsible for his loss. I then felt that it 
would be to the brother's benefit spiritually and to the Lord's 
praise, and at the same time to the assistance of the German 
work, that I should help him out of his difficulty. Accordingly, I 
advised him to have nothing more to do with the oil business, 
and I managed to purchase back the said interest, worth at the 
time $700, and another small interest purchased of Bro. 
Rindfuss, and worth at the time $300, and so pay him for these 
their net cost (adding expenses and deducting oil received by 
him), which amounted to $3386. This sum by arrangement was 
paid him with my notes bearing six per cent interest and running 
for some time. They have since been paid in full with interest-$ 
2386 and interest more than we knew the properties were 
worth,-and they never were worth more afterward. 

Meantime Bro. Zech had urged that I go into the printing 
business with him, as a partner; but I refused, and advised him 
that it was a troublesome business. I never advised him to invest 
time or money in the business. On the contrary, I advised him 
against it. However, when he afterward found an partner and 
desired to do our work I promised him an preference over others, 
prices and work being equal; and this preference he has always 
had. Meantime, also, he had desired to have the full control of 
the German work and we sold him the plates, etc., of the German 
DAWN, VOL. I., at cost,-giving him privilege also to translate 
and publish the series, a condition being that he should supply 
the books at the same prices that we had been supplying them to 
the public and to colporteurs, and the promise made that if at any 
time Bro. Zech could not or would not supply the books at the 
same prices, the privilege of publishing them should revert to the 
TOWER PUB. CO. The restriction as to price was afterward 
modified as respects Vols. II and III., and they are now sold at a 
higher price, yet only about cost, because fewer are sold. And to 
meet Bro. Zech's views I agreed to pay him the full retail prices 
on all German Dawns I have occasion to purchase from him. 

Judge of my surprise when, in January 1893, Bro. Zech told me 
and others that I had treated him shamefully, etc. I said to 
myself, If this be bad treatment, what would be considered good 
treatment? A number of the church friends of all concerned were 
called together to hear the matter and advise. 

Brother and Sister Zech and family urged that I should pay more 
to Bro. Zech's firm for the printing and binding of the Dawms 
than responsible firms would charge for the same work. He 
complained, too, about being limited in the selling price of 
Dawm Vol. I; and declared that I had almost starved them at first 
on $35 and $40 per month, etc. I explained our dealings as above 
to the friends present and that we were paying our brother about 
twice as much as he could have gotten elsewhere-if he could 



have gotten any opportunity or pay when new at the business. I 
explained, as I do now, that it was no more my duty to pay a 
brother more than a worldly firm would charge, than it was his 
duty as a brother to do the work for less. Business should be 
done 

3H122 

on the lines of justice: charity and love can find exercise in other 
ways-as, for instance, in our dealing with Bro. Z. in the oil 
transaction, in which we made him and the German work a clean 
present of $2386 with interest. Bro. Zech complained that we 
gave one lot of DAWNS to another firm to print and bind. I 
showed the friends that Bro. Zech's firm was continually 
complaining that they were losing money on the Dawn work, 
while others were bidding lower, and were anxious to get the 
work. Bro. Zech's firm being full of work we finally gave one lot 
to another firm at a saving of $130 on twenty thousand books. 
And then I gave about one hundred dollars of that saving to the 
German cause, by donating the cost of the electro-plates for the 
third volume of German DAWN. 

It is almost needless to say that the friends after hearing us both 
fully-until daylight of Feb. 5, '93-assured Bro. Zech that Bro. 
Russell's course was not only just, but very generous and 
brotherly toward him. His judgment was so warped, however, 
that he could not see the matter at the time; but a day later he 
expressed himself differently by letter to us and to all. The 
following is a verbatim copy of his letter: 

Allegheny, Pa., Feb. 6, '93 

"Dear Brother Russell :-Thinking the matter over since our long 
conference with the different brethren and sisters in your house 
on February 4th, I find that I have erred in my judgment 
regarding the charges made against you, and I therefore express 
my regret for having done so and for the trouble and anxiety 
resulting from it. May the Lord grant us that no such 
misunderstanding will arise again to injure our mutual brotherly 
feeling and fellowship. And since so many of our friends have 
been witnesses, I would be very pleased to express the above 
sentiment in their hearing, or, if you deem it preferable, to have 
them read this letter. In sincere love and fellowship, Your 
brother in Christ, Otto Von Zech. 

"P. S. So far as Sister Zech is concerned, I must state that she 
never agreed with me concerning the right I thought I had to 
claim, but took, so she says, the position she did from a sense of 
wifely duty. O. V. Z." 



This experience led to the preparation of the article entitled, The 
Relative Claims of Love and Justice, which, that it might not be 
construed as a blow at Bro. Zech, was held back and published in 
the Tower of June 1, '93. 

Below is a copy of a letter presented to Sister Russell and myself 
about a month previous: 

Christmas 1892. 

"Dear Brother Russell:-I embrace the opportunity of this 
celebration of our Redeemer's birth to tell you in writing what I 
could not so well express orally. I want to make you the best 
Christmas present I know of in telling you of our deep and ever 
increasing gratitude and love toward you and Sister Russell for 
your work's sake, and for the kindness and love shown and daily 
bestowed upon us. 

"In reading the other day what the Apostle says, that "we all with 
open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord are 
(being) changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as 
by the Lord's spirit, ' and finding that the Apostle spoke thus not 
of the future but of the present, I could not help thinking, Yes, 
that is so. If we look back these seven years since we came into 
this marvelous light by the grace of God, we have experienced 
an ever increasing and burning love toward those who had been 
God's blessed agents to help us see the truth. 

"And I concluded, dear Brother and Sister, to let you know this 
our sentiment as our best gift we possibly could give, and thus to 
thank you from our hearts for your labor of love which our 
Heavenly Father has so abundantly blessed also toward us, and 
at the same time for the firm stand you take and always took in 
the defense of the central truth in our Father's plan-the ransom 
for or instead of us. 

"May our Lord and Shepherd grant us to stand side by side in 
this battle till it is over. In Him we will remain, Your Brother 
and Sister Zech." It seems strange indeed that people could write 
such letters and yet keep "bombs" ready and waiting for 
convenient "explosion." 

This comprises all of Bro. Zech's grievances, except as relates to 
the Wednesday evening prayer and conference meetings, which 
we will now notice. 

A little more than a year ago, studying the spiritual needs of the 
flock, and remembering that our central prayer meeting had been 
a failure, because the friends here are widely scattered, we 
conceived the plan of having meetings in various parts of these 
two cities, not for Bible study, but for prayer and testimony, for 
the cultivation of the fruits of the spirit and the binding together 
of the body of Christ in love and Christian fellowship. I 
suggested to the Church the advisability of such meetings, urging 
that while doctrines are necessary, the cultivation of the fruits of 



the spirit is the real object of all doctrine. I asked those who 
favored the plan to signify it by rising; and almost all arose, Bro. 
Zech and family being conspicuous as voting against the 
meetings,-which they had a full right to do. I was not surprised 
at the matter, however, as I knew that Sister Zech had frequently 
expressed herself as having no confidence in prayer. 

Next we asked for houses to be volunteered in which the 
meetings could be held, and several promptly offered, the object 
of the meetings being clearly understood by all as not doctrinal, 
but social meetings. 

I then appointed leaders of those meetings-asking Bro. Zech 
first, whether he would serve. He declined. Later he started a 
German meeting at his house for doctrinal disputations, which of 
course, was all right; for the appointment of the social meeting 
did not hinder any who pleased from holding or attending other 
meetings. But because I urged that these meetings, appointed for 
social worship, should be held strictly to their object, Bro. Zech 
and his wife complained that I was a pope, and privately, we 
now learn, endeavored to raise a spirit of opposition in others, 
but without success, as the congregation appreciates the 
meetings greatly. Bro. and Sister Zech, after trying for six 
months to discourage the meetings, began to attend them: and we 
were greatly encouraged for two months,-especially when at a 
general church meeting (Dec. '93) Sister Z. testified before all, 
of the benefit she had derived from those meetings. This 
sympathy and interest ceased, and they at once changed their 
plans, when it was known that there would be no general 
Convention here this Spring. 

3H123 

The charge of "bondage" and "under my thumb," etc. which now 
they make public, I find has been a part of their "whisperings" 
for the past four years. They did what they could to prejudice the 
mind of the Tower office helpers: slanderous falsehoods, called 
"revelations" were made to them, to undermine their confidence 
and poison their minds against me; so that when the time for 
"exploding" the "bombs" should come, I should have no friends. 
Three years ago Sister Ball was invited over to their home to 
spend the evening and then advised, confidentially, that she was 
imposed upon by us, etc., etc., etc. Sister Russell and myself then 
visited them, showed the error of this course and they 
apologized. But within a year it now seems that they began 
again: Bro. Henninges was "talked to" about being in bondage to 
Brother Russell; and it was intimated that he was a fool for 
staying here. Bro. Campbell was made a "confidant" before he 
had been here a month, every endeavor being made to prejudice 
him against me. Bro. Abbott was similarly approached; and 
when questioned as to his salary, replied: "I am not sure that Bro. 
Russell would want his private affairs discussed, but I will tell 
you this much: he is paying me more than I asked for." An 



attempt was even made to alienate my wife, and to make her my 
enemy; but praise God it did not succeed. I can now heartily 
thank the Lord that I have such faithful, proved ones so closely 
associated with me in the work. It is strange how blind I must 
have been, not to have noticed what others all around seem to 
have seen and heard. But I placed too high and estimate upon 
those who bear the, to me, sacred name of "brethren." 

Since Bro. Zech has alluded to the events of Christmas evening 
1892, I must give the facts. Sister Russell and I invited Bro. and 
Sister Zech and a few other friends to a six o'clock Christmas 
dinner. After dinner, while in the parlor, Sister R. interrupted me 
in some trivial matter, and then catching herself asked me to 
proceed. I replied, "No; you tell it-you are the head of the 
house." This I admit was sarcastic; and seeing that it hurt Sister 
Russell's feelings and that she at once disclaimed any wrong 
intent, I excused it, and said that I did not mean it literally, that 
indeed Sister Russell is a very model wife, etc., and thus the 
matter ended. 

But Bro. Bryan (who we will see presently is a most peculiar 
person, who fancies himself able, as he is ever willing, to give 
everybody instruction, and whose idiosyncrasies I had put up 
with for several years, as a member of our family and one of the 
office helpers), fancied that the above incident gave him a 
chance to meddle; and so the next morning at breakfast he took 
occasion to insult me. His remarks were ten times as strong as 
mine of the evening before, and wholly inexcusable. Sister 
Russell remonstrated, that his remarks were out of order, and I at 
once told him that I had borne his insolence and meddlesome 
busy-body disposition entirely too long; and now to go at once 
from the home whose head he had not respected and to whose 
every member he had made himself a disturber. 

He went at once to Bro. Zech's where he was made warmly 
welcome as a co-conspirator against Bro. Russell, but their cause 
would suffer if he left the Tower office before the "explosion;" 
so they got up a letter and with one argument or another got 
those who had been present on Christmas evening to sign it. That 
is the letter which Bro. Zech drags into his statements of his 
grievances. But their real object was to get me to take Bro. 
Bryan back into the TOWER office. Of the circumstances under 
which the signatures were obtained the signers themselves have 
something to say below. Those circumstances exonerate all of 
them except the conspirators, Bro. and Sister Zech and Bro. 
Bryan, whose malicious intent seems now very manifest; but of 
course I knew no difference among them at that time. 

I very humbly consented that these friends should help me mind 
my business: and at the request of that letter invited them all to 
meet me at my house. When they arrived, by way of showing 
them that I considered this an interference in my affairs in a way 
that they would not like to have me interfere in theirs, I 



suggested that perhaps the meeting had best be turned into one 
for the investigation and criticism of the private affairs of all 
present. I suggested that I knew considerable of their private 
matters which it would be quite embarrassing to us all to have 
related, even to a small audience (referring specially to Bro. and 
Sister Zech and Bro. Bryan); but that if it was their duty to 
investigate my private affairs it must be equally my duty to 
investigate theirs. 

The three in question got loud and angry and dared me to say 
what I could. But I assured them that I had no thought of telling 
anything-that I had no such misconception of duty, but merely 
wished to remind them of the propriety of not being busybodies 
in other men's matters. We then proceeded to the consideration 
of Bro. Bryan's offense, and the company united in telling him 
that his course was wrong, and advising him to confess it and 
apologize-which he did do that evening. (Judge then of the 
unfairness of Bro. Zech's statement on this subject.) This led to 
the discussion of the subject, Who is the head of the family? 
Sister Zech, who had gotten some extreme ideas on the subject, 
called up the question, and expressed the opinion that the 
Apostle Paul's expressions on the subject were incorrect. My 
views on the subject appeared in print later,-in the Tower of 
May 1, '93, in the article "The Twelve Apostles, " etc., and in 
July '93-a double number-on "Man and Woman in God's 
Order. " 

The following kind letter has just been received, and we make 
room for it as it bears directly on this subject. 

Alleheny, Pa., April 23, 1894. 

"Dear Bro. Russell :-We, as your friends, whose names are 
appended to the portion of a letter published by Otto von Zech, 
feel a deep sense of regret, not only for your sake, but also for 
our own, at the light in which it makes us appear; for we have no 
sympathy whatever with the spirit and intent of his libelous 
circular. 

"We desire, therefore, to acquaint you with the peculiar 
circumstances attending our signing it, which we have not 
previously explained, because of the completeness with which 
the entire matter was BURIED (so far as you were concerned) 
the same week it occurred. The circumstances are as follows: 

"We with others of the Church of Christ here had prepared some 
New Year presents for you and Sister Russell, and Bro. Zech had 
been appointed to make the presentation speech and had 
proffered his home for the 

3H124 

presentation, because so near to your own that the things we 
proposed to present could be readily transferred, after the 
surprise of New Years' night, 1893. 



"When Bryan left your home and went to Zech's they 
commended his conduct, claimed that a great wrong had been 
done him, and prepared the letter in question. The signatures 
were obtained in this way: Mr. Zech with the letter in hand 
called upon each one and in an excited manner represented that a 
great injustice had been done Bro. Bryan-that he had been 
rudely thrust out of his place in the TOWER office and Bro. 
Russell house, through the tyranny of Bro. Russell. He then 
added that Bro. Russell had too much power and ought to be 
taught a lesson; and that although the presents were at his house 
and the congregation were invited to assemble there, he could 
not make the presentation speech with good grace unless this 
matter of Bryan's were settled and he returned to his former 
position. Now, said he, if you add your signatures to this letter, 
requesting a meeting of us all with Bro. Russell, we can have this 
matter settled and then we will carry out the previous 
arrangements. 

"By such talk he obtained our signatures, but not for the object 
apparent in the letter, the language of the letter passing 
comparatively unnoticed, because our attention was specially 
drawn to Zech's excited words with reference to Bro. Bryan. It 
would now appear that this was intentional on his part, and that 
he kept a copy of the letter for its recent malicious use; and on 
the evening appointed, although Bryan and Zechs continually 
persisted in dragging up the little matter about Sister Russell, 
both she and we protested that that was unnecessary and that that 
was entirely settled between you and her. 

"Although feeling the matter was none of our business, we added 
our signatures because we were so anxious to have everything 
smooth and pleasant before the evening of the presentation, then 
so close at hand, and fearing that if we did not there would be 
some unpleasantness with Bro. Zech before the congregation 
which was to assemble for a purpose so different. The letter 
concluded as follows: v May our dear Lord guide and direct your 
judgment or ours, that it may all be to his glory. Yours in the 
Redeemer. (Signed.). ' The signatures were obtained only with 
this object in view, and on condition that the matter should never 
be mentioned outside of the number present that evening. This 
promise they have entirely failed to keep, and ever since have 
talked of it in private; and now, judge of our surprise and chagrin 
on finding a portion of that confidential letter in print and our 
names heralded as busy-bodies in the affairs of one whom we 
love and esteem as a tried and faithful servant of our dear 
Redeemer and Lord and in whose integrity as a Christian brother 
we have full confidence: and as having part in the present 
infamous conspiracy to overthrow him from the place which he 
holds, and that rightly, in the hearts of many of the Lord's 
people. It is an unwarrantable misuse of our names, against 
which we (as the signers) most earnestly protest. 



"At the meeting which resulted, all (including Zechs) admitted 
the justice of your course toward Bro. Bryan, whom we and they 
urged to apologize for his misjudgment (we did not at the time 
doubt his good intention); and he did so in our presence. Thus 
the matter ended, and a pleasant New Year's evening followed. 

"Otto von Zech's conduct and libelous circular remind us of 
Korah, the v ringleader' of the rebellion against Moses and Aaron 
(Num. 16 and 26:9-11), who, with Dathan, Abiram and On, was 
not content with his honorable post, but v sought' the office of 
Moses. From the above reference we discern that Korah with the 
other three charged Moses (without cause) with the very sin 
which he and his associates themselves committed. We find the 
same ambition, jealousy and pride in the conduct of Ahithophel, 
who, being King David's counsellor and friend, became, through 
this same leaven of sin, the most treacherous enemy of the 
servant of God; but David's heart remained loyal, and his prayer 
to the Lord v turned' Ahithophel's bad-intended course into what 
his name signifies, foolishness; for, said David, v O Lord, I pray 
thee, turn the (treacherous) counsel of Ahithophel into 
foolishness. ' (2 Sam. 15:31.) A like conspiracy we find against 
the Apostle Paul, when they banded themselves together to v kill 
him. ' (Acts 23:12.) And a like conspiracy was kindled against 
our dear Redeemer by certain ones of his time; for they 
^consulted that they might take Jesus by subtlety, and kill him. 
' (Matt. 26:4, 5) And again, it is written, s They hated him 
without a cause. ' (John 15:25) May the dear Lord strengthen 
your mind and heart, so that through you, dear Brother, the 
proclamation of the gospel cause may be fully established. 

"Hoping that this explanation will fully clear us in your eyes 
from any connection with the libelous circular, and desiring that, 
if opportunity present itself, you will make this known to any 
who may have seen the present statement of the conspirators, We 
remain, yours in love and service of the truth, J. A. Weimar, 
Elizabeth K. Weimar, John Cromie, Laura J. Raynor, H. C. 
Wolf, Rose J. Ball. 

"P. S. -Brothers Ohlsson and Winter are not now in the city, and 
hence their signatures have not been obtained; but besides them 
the only other signers, exclusive of ourselves, are the 
conspirators." 

Let me here remark, incidentally, that if there are any of God's 
married children whose interests are more thoroughly one, and 
whose esteem for each other is greater than that which exists 
between Sister Russell and myself, we would be glad for them to 
have it so; but we have no present reason for so believing. Ours, 
we feel, is indeed a union in the Lord, which we believe that 
even death will not sever. 

Is it any wonder that, when I came to know the depth of their 
perfidy, I refused to allow Bro. Zech to preach in the chapel-the 



use of which for years I have furnished free of charge to the 
German friends? Could I, in justice, do less than inform those 
German brethren and sisters (about twelve persons), that while 
they were as welcome as ever to use the chapel every Sunday 
morning, Bro. Zech had proved himself wholly unworthy of my 
confidence, and that I felt that it would be wrong to supply him 
the opportunity to attempt a further defamation of my character, 
by misrepresentations slobbered over with protestations of 
brotherly love? Indeed, I am of the opinion that not one man in a 
thousand, professor or non-professor, would have had so little 
shame as to have attempted further 

3H125 

abuse of my generosity, after having publicly done all he knew 
how to defame me. He claims to have been "under bondage" to 
me. So I at once forced him to become a free-man by refusing 
him longer the privilege hitherto enjoyed of speaking to the 
German friends in the chapel. But even this enforcement of 
liberty is one of his charges against me. 

BROTHER BRYAN'S GRIEVANCES 

Bro. Bryan served the cause in the TOWER office for several 
years-well in many respects. But by heredity he has a very 
violent temper, a vindictive disposition and a penchant for 
minding others people's affairs. It is with deep regret that I thus 
write, and now only because it seems a necessary explanation of 
what follows. When I say he evidently inherited these ungainly 
traits I consider that I am making an apology for him. Time and 
again have I helped to settle differences between him and the 
other office helpers, in which he was uniformly to blame- 
generally trying to mind some one else's business; and time and 
again has he repented and lamented his course and promised to 
turn over a new leaf. But his difficulty seemed to grow upon 
him. He got worse and worse. He at least six times during the 
last three years of his stay urged that he should leave the office 
for the relief of others; and each time I persuaded him to try to 
do better: yet, when at last I concluded to let him go, he seemed 
determined to stay. I could not then judge why, but can now see 
that it was because he had become one of the conspirators and 
was waiting for the time to explode the bombs. It was after his 
conduct finally became unbearable, that I wrote him the 
following letters. 

Allegheny, Pa., Mar. 2, '93. 

"Dear Brother Bryan:-Your note, which I requested last evening, 
saying, if there are other matters v that you say would still be 
difficulties, even if you could determine not to meddle with and 
annoy Sister Ball, ' is before me. In reply I must tell you that this 
note manifests still more of the same wrong spirit of which I 
complain on behalf of Sister Ball. 



"It shows that you not only want to annoy and manage her and 
her work, but that you also want to do the same for me and my 
business, and that of the entire office and home. I have assured 
you repeatedly of my Christian love and my care for your every 
concern, and my desire that you enjoy every comfort and 
pleasure which our home and office afford, but you seem to 
think that every thing should be run according to your ideas, 
which is neither possible nor reasonable. 

"For over two weeks (I might almost say three years) you have 
been worrying the office and home circles, and that without any 
justification. You should be conscientious enough to admit that 
you have no right, human or divine, to interfere with Sister 
Ball's rights or business, nor with mine, nor with those of others. 
If, therefore, this matter can be fixed only by your leaving the 
TOWER office, do not persuade yourself to a false view, in 
supposing that you will be going forth for righteousness' sake, or 
for conscience' sake; for, on the contrary, it will be because you 
are a persistent busybody in other people's affairs-and an 
intentional one, since instead of acknowledging the fault you 
attempt to excuse it, and even argue by the hour that you have a 
right to judge the conduct and even the consciences of others, 
and to give them tongue chastisements and other incivilities until 
they adopt your conscience as instead of their own and repent to 
you, etc. I should tell you also that Sister Ball is not the only one 
who has mentioned your interferences. 

"A month or so ago Bro. Henninges said to me:- v Bro. Russell, 
cannot I do some of the work of the composing room, or in some 
way shift so as not to be so much of an annoyance to Brother 
Bryan? ' I replied that I thought I had a plan for dividing the 
work which would harmonize the difficulties peacefully, and to 
wait and see. 

"Within a week Bro. Page said, v Bro. Russell, I feel that I am the 
seat of Bro. Bryan's trouble, and while I came here, as I believe, 
under the Lord's leading, do not let me stand in the way of the 
smooth running of the Lord's work. At the same time I scarcely 
think that you do your duty toward Bro. Bryan and the others, 
and the work, to permit him to interfere with and snap the head 
off everybody and everything. In a worldly office such conduct 
would not be endured five minutes. ' 

"I explained how I believed the trouble to be in part a heredity 
and that I was trying to have you take the right view of it, and 
that if you could see it fully and clearly I had confidence that you 
would do differently. But why you cannot or will not see so plain 
a matter I cannot understand. 

"You know better than any one else, dear brother, how, with 
great patience, prompted by loving interest for you and for the 
work, I have tried to have you see the error of being a busybody- 
especially so when you knew that those you interfered with are 



fully as conscientious as yourself, -and full more so on the 
subject of respecting the rights and liberties of others. 

"I have exhausted every proper means at my command to have 
you see right and DO RIGHT. But you all the more assume a 
self-righteous air and insist that you have a right to be the judge 
of the rights, liberties and consciences of others. 

"This I can no longer permit. It becomes my duty, therefore, dear 
brother, to say, Stop this wrong-doing and uncharitable judging! 
and if you will not stop it you must cease to occupy the place 
you have occupied for so long in the office. 

"Nevertheless, dear brother, it will be in sorrow and not in anger 
that we will part with you. You have many excellent traits to 
which I cheerfully bear witness, and I shall always feel a deep 
interest in your welfare, and should opportunity ever offer I will 
be glad to prove this in some more substantial way. But if 
disposed to see your error and to manifest a reform of your 
course, not only I, but all the ^family' I am sure will be glad, not 
only to have you stay with us in the work, but to assist you and 
bear with you. Please let me have your decision this evening, on 
the lines laid down in this letter. 

"With deep brotherly love and unceasing interest in your present 
and future welfare, I remain your servant in the Lord, C. T. 
Russell." 

March 3, '93. 

"Dear Brother Bryan:-My letter of yesterday was very 

3H126 

plain. While assuring you of my love and interest, it stated the 
necessity and laid down the conditions upon which you should 
have acted pro or con at once. Matters have run along now for 
nearly two weeks in a very unsatisfactory manner and one very 
disadvantageous to the Lord's work. Others are idle while you 
have and hold onto more than you can do. 

"Forbearance longer would not be a virtue. Your letter or note in 
reply to mine of yesterday is not a reply-merely a delay. What 
can be your object? I must insist, dear brother, either that you 
fully consent to all the reasonable requirements of my letter of 
yesterday, and indicate this in no uncertain words, or else that 
you hand over your keys and place, that some one conscientious 
enough to recognize and respect the rights of others may, with 
those who love and make for peace and right, occupy in your 
stead. 

"After reading this letter and communing with the Lord, 
remembering that my course is the one of duty and that I still 



abound with love for you, save me further annoyance by acting 
at once. You had best re-read my letter of yesterday. May the 
Lord guide you, has been my earnest prayer for several days, but 
a conclusion must be reached now. 

"With continued brotherly love and interest, and the hope that 
you may gain the victory over self-will and other foes, and 
humble yourself to be and do what you see to be the right, I 
remain, 

"Your loving servant in Christ, C. T. Russell. 

"P. S.-If you decide to quit the work and need money let me 
know how much." 

Bro. Bryan finally concluded to go into the colporteur work, and 
we parted seemingly warm friends, as the following extracts 
from a letter received later shows; their "bomb" plot seemingly 
having been abandoned for a time. 

Richmond, Va. March 15, '93. 

"Dear Brother Russell:-I feel like giving you a little report of 
myself and my doings, in addition to what I wrote on recent 
postals. 

"The whole situation here seems as favorable as any that could 
have been chosen. To be with your father's family has been most 
helpful. Then I have made a little beginning in canvassing that is 
not discouraging, though not nearly so good as I wish it were. 
Then, through advice from you, three brethren visited us last 
Sunday. I was very favorably impressed by the appearance of — 
-. If I am not mistaken, he is quite able to be a local teacher and 
leader. And he seems to have a beautiful spirit. Some brethren 
here had been meeting with a little group of Adventists; but quite 
lately the latter withdrew to another room. To our great pleasure, 
these brethren said they had already secured a room and arranged 
to have a regular Sunday meeting. They wished they had known 
earlier of the presence of your father's family in Richmond. I 
anxiously await the meeting next Sunday and will tell you how 
things seem. If I had the address of all Tower readers, could call 
on them and judge whether to notify them of the meeting and 
invite them to it. I have reconnoitered a little, and find good, 
long streets of residences evidently of the class where I will get 
access to the husband or wife, and not to the servant alone. I am 
quite hopeful that my record will grow better, as I get into the 
adjoining territory named. 

"I have been out four days-not putting in very full time some 
days. The s score' is: 5, 6, 8, 9-orders taken. 

"Asking to be remembered also to Sister Russell and all, Yours 
in the faith, Elmer Bryan." 

But a little Christmas token, sent him four months ago, seems to 
have been the innocent instrument by which Satan again got to 



work upon his naturally not too well balanced brain, reviving 
and exaggerating previous "evil surmisings" and enlarging his 
"root of bitterness." 

He then began to write frequently about some trifles connected 
with his office experience. I answered these kindly and fully, and 
explained to him that we understood the matter thoroughly and 
that they were all right. However, about six weeks ago he 
concluded to ask two of the brethren to come with him and hear 
his statement of my sins and to reprove me according to Matt. 
18:15-17. Bros. H. Weber and M. M. Tuttle came with him to 
see me and to hear his charges. When these brethren heard the 
charges, they told Bro. Bryan that they were ridiculous; that so 
far from being to my discredit they were to my credit,-every one 
of them. Here they are:- 

Charge l.-Bro. Russell, having the renting of a house, once put 
my (Bryan's) name on the "To let" notice, without my consent. 

Answer.-Bro. Bryan was in the office constantly and could 
better than any one else Answer— the questions of applicants. I 
preferred not to have my own name on the notice (1) because my 
forenoons are usually spent at home, writing, and (2) because my 
name being necessarily prominent, I modestly preferred to avoid 
any unnecessary notoriety. Bro. Bryan's name would be 
unknown. 

Judgment of the Brethren — Perfectly proper and commendable. 

Charge 2.-Once when I was intending to purchase some clothing 
Bro. Russell gave me a letter to one of the prominent Pittsburg 
clothing stores, assuring me that it would secure for me a ten per 
cent, reduction in the price. It made me feel bad to think that 
Bro. Russell would thus deceive and cheat them, and I could not 
use the order. 

Answer.-The letter was entirely proper. I am personally 
acquainted with the proprietors who grant me a discount, and 
invited me to send over any of those connected with the office, 
and that they should have the same. 

Judgment of the Brethren -Proper and commendable. Bro. 
Russell was endeavoring to extend to you, at the expense of his 
own time in writing the note, a privilege which all the large 
stores are glad to give, to get trade. Nearly every one gets a ten 
per cent, discount upon some score: Prices are so arranged as to 
permit of these discounts to customers. You merely did not 
comprehend the matter and thought evil of what was really a 
kindness. 

Charge 3. -Bro. Russell received for many of the Colporteurs 
clerical half-rate arrangements over one of the railroads, and I 
am sure that he got these by deception and fraud ; for I know 
that the R. R. people would not grant those rates if they 
understood that the colporteurs sell books. 



Answer— by Bro. Weber.-A very unjust and uncharitable thought 
on your part, Bro. Bryan; and a very mistaken one. I, myself, 
arranged the matter you condemn; and I did it in a perfectly 
honorable manner. I am 

3H127 

well acquainted with the gentleman in charge of that business, 
and explained that the colporteurs are preachers, ministers of the 
truth, who give their entire time to this work, but that they do it 
in a different manner from the clergy of the nominal church. I 
explained to him that they explained the Scriptures from house to 
house, and sold books which would continue and elaborate the 
preaching after they were gone. 

Judgment of the Brethren.-Proper and highly commendable to 
all concerned except Bro. Bryan. 

Charge 4.-Bro. Russell violated my idea of the law in the 
mailing of Millennial Dawn Vol. II. 

Answer.-(I gave a detailed explanation of the matter, but it 
would be too tedious to relate here.) 

Judgment of the Brethren.-Entirely proper so far as we can 
understand the matter. Anyway, we feel that the United States 
Government is abundantly able to look out for its own rights, and 
that it is very far from the spirit of Christ for you, Bro. Bryan, to 
be surmising evil against the very one through whose efforts God 
sent the truth to you. We could not think you more conscientious 
than Bro. Russell, and as for ability to interpret law, human or 
divine, we consider him entirely your superior. 

Charge 5. I claim that Bro. Russell cheats the government by 
putting only half enough postage upon the Tower binders. He 
made us stamp them at "book rate," while I claim that they 
should be stamped at "merchandise rates." I wrote to the P. O. 
Department at Washington asking whether a Newspaper binder 
should be stamped as book-matter or as merchandise, and they 
replied-" as merchandise." Here is the letter signed by the third 
assistant P. M. General. 

Answer.-The Tower binders were for some time mailed with 
double the proper postage. When I noticed it I had it changed to 
the proper rate. The binders are merely book-backs, and when 
filled with TOWERS constitute a bound volume. It requires no 
great mind to see that a part of a book cannot be rated at a higher 
charge than a whole book; and book-back or binder should 
therefore be mailed at book rates. However, lest some 
uninformed postmaster might not be able to reason properly 
upon the subject we always put one TOWER into each binder. 
Surely, it is then a book of 16 pages to any one capable of sound 
reasoning. 



The Third Asst. P. M. General has been in office only one year, 
while I have had many year's experience in just such questions. 
It was this same gentleman who ruled out the Old Theology 
Tracts some months ago; but I appealed from his decision, and 
the legal department sustained my understanding of the law. 

Bro. Bryan's decision would be binding on himself, but on no 
one else. The law leaves its interpretation to the common sense 
of the reader, except when called in question by the postmaster, 
and then an appeal may be taken if desired. 

Judgment of the Brethren.-Without doubt a binder containing 
sixteen pages of reading matter is a book, and should be stamped 
at book rates. Bro. Russell should be allowed to mind his own 
business, and those who cannot help him should not hinder him. 
If Bro. Bryan thought differently he discharged his duty when he 
told Bro. Russell how he viewed the matter. The P. O. 
Department it seems was not asked about a Magazine-binder 
with one issue enclosed. That would have been a different 
question. 

Charge 6. -On the missionary envelopes recently isued the last 
paragraph is marked, "S. I. Hickey in Christian Herald" but 
those printed some years ago read, "J. E. Jewett in Christian 
Herald." That was a fraud I believe. I have no doubt that was 
written in the WATCH TOWER office. 

Answer.-This is a totally untrue: I first saw the "notice" in the 
columns of the Christian Herald. It appeared upon a page at 
that time controlled by Mr. Jewett, and since it had no name to it, 
I supposed it was Mr. Jewett' s expression. Later, I learned that 
Bro. Hickey had written the commendation; and hence I changed 
the name on the next lot of envelopes printed. 

Judgment of the Brethren. -Bro. Bryan, as only an impure 
fountain sends forth impure water, so only a wrong condition of 
heart could send forth such uncharitable thoughts, and these 
without any foundation except your "evil surmisings." Do not 
forget that evil surmisings, envy, strife, malice and hatred give 
evidence of a wrong spirit, little like the spirit which "thinketh 
no evil" and much akin to the spirit which "loveth and maketh a 
lie." 

Charge 7.-Bro. Russell violated the U. S. postal laws by 
occasionally putting in amongst the Towers some Pittsburg 
papers for relatives in the South. 

Answer.-Yes; it had been our custom for some time to send 
some of our exchanges and an occasional Pittsburg paper to 
friends; and these all being "second-class matter" were thrown in 
with the TOWERS when being sent to the post office. This 
continued until about six years ago. Somewhere about that time 
the rate of postage on second-class mail matter was reduced from 
two cents per pound to one cent per pound and postmasters were 



notified to be more than ever particular. Our Allegheny 
postmaster notified us that the German Tower could not 
henceforth be mixed with the English Tower, and that no other 
papers must be mixed in along. We called his attention to 
another part of the law in which it is specially stated that news 
agents may send out second-class matter at the same rates as the 
publishers, and showed that news agents do not keep different 
papers separate. The reply was that the post office department at 
Washington had made a ruling on that point, to the effect that 
publishers could send out other papers only when they sent them 
to all of their subscribers, and hence that publishers have less 
liberty than news agents. We accepted this ruling, and have 
never since, to my knowledge, mailed other than our own 
publications at "pound rates." 

Judgment of the brethren.-A most reasonable and consistent 
explanation of a trifle. It is not within the range of reason, Bro. 
Bryan, to suppose that one who is giving his time and energy to 
spread of the truth and the inculcation of righteousness, and 
spending thousands of dollars to that end, as you and we well 
know, would be dishonest for a few penny stamps. But it does 
look to us as though your object in even mentioning such a 
matter can be nothing less than a malicious spirit, a desire to 
injure Bro. Russell in our esteem; but we know him too well for 
that. His Answer—is more than a sufficient exoneration. 

(We since learn that some (at least one) of the slanderous 
circulars sent out by the conspirators went unstamped. Do we 
evilly surmise that this was cheating the government? No, 

3H128 

we thank God that neither our heads nor our hearts are so 
deranged as to get us into such nonsense.) 

Charge 8.-Bro. Russell some six years ago loaned hundreds of 
DAWNS, under the name of Mrs. C. B. Lemuels, which I hold 
was wrong-a deception. 

Answer -No wrong was done to any one by the use of the name; 
but, on the contrary, much good was accomplished. Many 
readers will remember seeing Mrs. C. B. Lemuels' 
advertisements in different newspapers, all over the United 
States, offering to loan free of charge a book that would be very 
helpful to honest skeptics and infidels. Many of you first learned 
of the truth by this means. The book was The Plan of the Ages- 
DAWN, VOL. I, and the name Mrs. Lemuels represented Mrs. 
Russell. I esteemed that the matter would be better received from 
a lady than from a gentleman. I could have arranged for the use 
of Mrs. Russell's name, or the name of some other sister, but 
reflected that a confusion of letters might result and prove 
inconvenient. Besides, I bring my own name as little into 
prominence as possible. This will be noticed in connection with 
everything I have published-the O. T. Tracts, the DAWNS, etc. 



The name Lemuel is from the Hebrew and signifies Son of God. 
The initial letter C. stands for Christ, and B. for before; hence 
the whole name signifies, a son of God, after Christ. I consider 
the using of the name for a good purpose entirely proper and not 
a deception, in the proper meaning of that term; for it could 
make no difference to the party blessed whether the instrument 
of his blessing had the name of Smith, Brown, Lemuels or 
Russell. Indeed, our Lord was known by a variety of names, 
other than the name of Jesus, given by the angel. He is called 
also Immanuel, the Son of Man, the Redeemer, the Good 
Shepherd, Lord of Glory, Prince of Peace, Prince of Life, the 
Word of God, the Lamb of God, the Just One, the King of Israel, 
Living Stone, the True Vine, Wonderful, Counselor, Savior, 
Mediator, the Amen, the Alpha and Omega, the Second Adam, 
the Messiah. Our Lord and the Apostles and the Prophets, did 
not think it a deception to apply these various names and titles, 
nor do I. Had I used the name for a wrong purpose, the entire 
transaction would have been sinful; but as it is conceded that it 
was used for a good purpose the entire transaction is faultless. 
Many eminent writers for the press cover their identity under a 
nom de plume, and justly without reproach. 

Judgment of the Brethren -Legitimate and praise worthy. We 
wish that more of God's children had the same singleness of 
purpose to do good to others and serve God and the truth to the 
disregard of their own name or fame. You, Bro. Bryan might far 
better be spending your time in holding up Bro. Russell's hands, 
than in seeing how you can annoy him with such quibbles and 
disturb the work he is doing. 

Charge 9.-Bro. Russell once advised a man to send addressed 
tract wrappers to the Tower office enclosed in a newspaper; 
whereas they should be sent at letter rates of postage, "two cents 
for each ounce." He also published the wrong rate of postage in 
the TOWER for May 1, '93, page 130. 

Answer.-My reason for advising thus was, that I did not want 
the brother to pay more postage than the law requires. (It 
certainly made not one cent difference to me. ) I know that many 
understand as little about the law as does Bro. Bryan, and 
country postmasters generally ask, Does this contain writing? If 
the Answer —is, Yes, he charges letter rates, two cents for each 
ounce, which in the case of addressed wrappers is contrary to the 
law. The law specifically provides that written addresses may be 
enclosed in newspapers without adding to the rate of postage, 
provided no other writing accompanies. But to add one other 
word such as "Well" or "All are well," would make the postage 
rate the same as on a letter, two cents for one ounce. If one 
address can be so sent so can two or five or ten. Indeed, written 
wrappers sent alone, without a newspaper, are subject to no 
higher rate than printed circulars according to law,-one cent for 
two ounces-Bro. Bryan to the contrary notwithstanding. 



Judgment of the Brethren.-Evidently a case of insufficiency of 
knowledge on your part, Bro. Bryan; and one easily rectified if 
you had been controlled by a proper Christian spirit. 

Charge lO.-Bro. Russell, it seems to me, uses language in a 
"double dealing" manner. When I attempt to show something 
wrong in what he has said, he explains it all away and would 
convince any one it was all right. 

Answer.-If I use ambiguous language it is wholly unknown to 
me; but since much of it is in print some one ought to be able to 
point it out, if this charge has any foundation. 

Judgment of the Brethren.-This charge is in harmony with all the 
others, and shows that for nearly six years Bro. Bryan abused his 
position and the confidence reposed in him by Bro. Russell, that 
he was all the while hunting for a flaw in his words or character, 
and that he was disappointed when his evil surmisings of either 
were corrected. And, because Bro. Russell cleared the matter 
entirely, it is called "double dealing." Shame! There are broad, 
medium and narrow minds and hearts. Bro. Russell's is one of 
the broad and unsuspicious. His poorest judgment, it seems to us, 
was in not seeing long ago the difference between an office- 
helper and an office-hinderer. The Dawn and the Towers are 
witnesses to the fact that he uses language with a directness that 
is seldom equalled except in the Scriptures and in law books. 
The message from his lips, as well as from his pen, has "no 
uncertain sound" to those who really have "ears to hear." 

Charge 1 1 .-I once found some four hundred and fifty dollars 
placed to my credit on the Tract Fund account. I remonstrated 
and it was taken off; but sums credited to other of the office 
helpers, not so conscientious, still stand. This shows that Bro. 
Russell's ideas are peculiar and I should say dishonest. 

Answer.-At the close of each year we generally find that we 
have expended more than the Tract Fund receipts from various 
sources, and we generally balance the account by donating 
whatever the receipts are behind, so as to let the fund begin the 
New Year without back debts. In the case mentioned I thought it 
would be well as an encouragement to the office helpers to share 
with them the credit for this sum and the voting shares which it 
represented. Accordingly the amount was divided with Mrs. 
Russell and the faithful office helpers. This was certainly not a 
crime; and indeed it is partly because of their consecration to the 
work that the expenses of the work are kept low. At all the 
events the office helpers are in and of our family, and I had 
pleasure in sharing 

3H129 

the credit on the Tract Fund records, although none outside the 
office would have known these matters had it not been for Bro. 
Bryan's peculiar view of them. 



Judgment of the brethren.-Bro. Bryan, the more of such charges 
you bring the more you reflect to Bro. Russell's honor. Where 
was the wrong, the sin, in Bro. R's giving you and the others 
credit on the Tract Fund? Had he not a right to do what he 
pleased with his own? Suppose he had deposited that four 
hundred and fifty dollars to your credit in some bank,-would that 
have been sinful? If not, how could it be wrong to use it in the 
Lord's service and then give you the credit and the voting- 
shares? But you admit that he did not insist on your having the 
credit when you objected. Where, then, is the room for 
complaint? If your own judgment is confused, do at least try to 
let other people of sounder judgment mind their own business. 
Discourage in yourself the disposition to be a busybody. 

Finally, we must say to you that this whole matter is simply 
ridiculous and gives evidence of a very unchristlike spirit. You 
called us to reprove Brother Russell after hearing your charges; 
but we find nothing to condemn and much to praise in all that 
you charge. Study and pray over the matter, and the Lord grant 
you needed help by his word and providence. Otherwise your 
present spirit is likely to lead you into "every evil work," and 
into outer darkness; for if any man have not the spirit of Christ 
he is none of his. 

But Bro. Bryan had not come to be convinced; but said, "I will 
press this to the utmost, so help me God!" He had merely taken 
this as a preliminary step to his "telling it to the Church," at 
which time he, with the other conspirators, had arranged to 
explode the "bombs" that "would knock this thing (Brother 
Russell and the work) sky high." 

The Brethren expostulated and showed that the very object of 
calling in two brethren for witnesses was to make sure that 
which ever one was in error should have the error pointed out to 
him, and that it was the one who would not hear the other three 
that was to be reported to the Church; and that, accordingly, Bro. 
Russell might, if he chose, report him (Bryan) to the Church as a 
busy body, if he refused or neglected now to heed the counsel of 
Bro. Russell and themselves. 

But the Arch-conspirator, Satan, had evidently determined that 
the present would be his most auspicious moment, and that he 
should probably never find any more substantial charges. So he 
brought Bro. Rogers here; and his arrival, and disaffection 
because his schemes were not praised, accepted as the Lord's 
message, and generally substituted for present methods, together 
with Bro. Adamson's disaffection on account of his tract, 
seemed to make the present a most favorable time for the firing 
of the "bombs" that he had been kept waiting for about two 
years. 

However, as before stated, the meeting called by them by 
personal invitation, and composed of a large number of the best 



brethren, and sisters of the Church at Allegheny (and which 
Sister Russell and myself did not attend), was rendered 
disorderly by the frantic efforts of the conspirators make sure 
that Brother Russell should have no defenders. But it seems that 
the bombs and fireworks charges had been entrusted to Bro. 
Bryan, to be fired with tragic effect, and that they were 
smothered, when, because of his spiteful, angry and disorderly 
manner and refusal to recognize the chairman, it was decided by 
vote of the congregation not to hear him, but to proceed to hear 
the others. 

Having since learned what the "bombs" are, we must now 
explode them, and show that they are as untruthful as were the 
other Zech and Bryan charges, and similarly "evil surmisings." 
We find that while only some of these have been mentioned in 
the printed circular, others of them have been circulated privately 
by word of mouth and by letter; and hence we clean up all that 
we can learn anything about. 

Bomb I.-Several years ago Brother Russell bought and sold 
some oil through a broker, a member of the Pittsburg Oil 
Exchange. This, we believe, is what people call "gambling," and 
is therefore dishonest and wicked. 

Answer.-As before stated, I was in the oil-producing business, 
and all the conspirators knew this. It is nothing to be ashamed of, 
and I never kept it a secret. This is a way in which I have done 
some "tent-making" and "fishing;" and the coin from this fish's 
mouth supports me and mine, so that we are not chargeable to 
any, and so that we can help along the work. Some years ago my 
monthly share of the oil produced by well in which I owned 
interests was considerably more than it is at the present. The 
price of oil seemed likely to go lower, so I not only sold all the 
oil I had on hand, but through a broker I sold in advance oil that 
I knew I had in the ground, but which it would take time to have 
pumped out. In due time the oil was produced and the broker 
closed the contract, earning his commissions for his trouble and 
securing me a better price for the oil. 

This is the legitimate use of the Oil Exchange. The misuse of it, 
called "gambling," is where people have no oil and merely bet so 
much money that the price will go up or that it will go down. 
Only obtuse heads or evil-thinking hearts reach the conclusion 
that there is no honest use of the great commercial Exchanges of 
the world. There is genuine and a counterfeit in everything that is 
worth counterfeiting. The finding of a counterfeit proves the 
existence of a genuine, in business as well as in money. My 
transactions were on the genuine, legitimate basis, as any 
business-man of honor and judgment will declare. 

Bomb Il.-Some one told Brother Bryan that he thought that 
another person surmised that Bro. Russell had cheated a man in 
Pittsburg as follows: Brother Russell owned a quarter interest in 



a small business venture, another man named Dubbs owned a 
quarter, and a man named Boyd owned the remaining half; that 
Bro. Russell had transferred his interest to Bro. Sweet and got 
Bro. Sweet to buy Mr. Dubb's interest for "a mere song," and 
afterward Bro. Russell got back his own quarter, and evidently 
Mr. Dubbs had been cheated. 

Answer.-This, another case of "evil surmising," can be easily 
explained and would have been explained to anyone. Evidently 
they all knew this and did not wish to have an explanation, 
preferring to believe it, so that they could conscientiously throw 
it as a "bomb" when they got ready. 

The business in question is so small as not to be worthy of the 
name business. I did purchase a quarter interest in it of Mr. 
Dubbs, the inventor. Mr. Boyd managed the business and Mr. 
Dubb's nephew was the only workman. One day Bro. Sweet 
came into the TOWER office and told 

3H130 

me that he was out of work and nearly out of money. He could 
make no success at colporteuring and was no hand at writing 
wrappers in the office, so I thought of the fact that Mr. Dubbs 
was anxious to sell his interest in the little venture, and that if he 
sold there would be a place for Bro. Sweet instead of Mr. Dubb's 
nephew. I told Bro. Sweet of it, and advanced him the full value 
of Mr. Dubbs' interest so that he could buy it, if Mr. Dubbs still 
wished to sell. But I realized that Mr. Dubbs who had sold me 
my interest, and was the inventor of the commodity, might feel 
under obligation to me, not to sell-so long as I held an interest- 
and especially as he had charged me more for my interest than 
we afterward found it to be worth-therefore, to let Mr. Dubbs 
feel entirely free to act as he pleased, I transferred my interest to 
Bro. Sweet who then bought Mr. Dubbs' interest with money I 
had advanced and Bro. Sweet got the situation. But as the 
business was not a success he never paid me back the money 
advanced. I took back the entire interest and since paid out some 
money on the same as my share of the loss. And Bro. Sweet's 
wife being ill, he removed to their old home in Virginia. 

Everything connected with this matter is straight-forward and 
honorable. Mr. Dubbs is still a Pittsburger and a warm business 
friend, who would take my word on a par with my bond. How is 
it that these evil surmisers are "brethren," who, while confessing 
that I never wronged them, but on the contrary, that they are all 
more or less my debtors, imagine that I have done wrong to 
some one else? Is it likely that the world, the devil and opposing 
nominal church people would pass by even slight transgressions 
of business etiquet or morals, if they could find them? On the 
contrary, my character, my word and my credit stand high 



amongst intelligent people whose only objection to me is, "his 
religious views"-which of course they generally misunderstand, 
because they have been misrepresented by both friends and foes. 

The following letter explains itself. 

Allegheny, Pa., April 25, 1894. 

"Mr. C. T. Russell., My Dear Sir:-My attention has just been 
drawn to certain charges, made against you by a busybody 
named Bryan, in the matter of a little business between you and 
me relating to my boiler-compound discovery, and the transfer of 
interests in the same to yourself and Mr. Sweet. I have also been 
shown a proof of your reply to the charge; and I desire to say to 
you that your conduct in that whole matter was entirely 
honorable, and quite satisfactory to me. My only regrets in the 
matter are that it has been the innocent cause of your being 
subject to such a v charge. ' 

"By the way, I notice that you refer to the slanderer as v Brother 
Bryan. ' I advise that you have a little as possible to do with that 
sort of brothers. In business parlance we call such folks v skunks, 
' and keep them at a distance. 

"In conclusion let me say that your business associations with 
me have all been most honorable in every respect, and I know 
that your business integrity stands too high in Pittsburg to be 
injured by such senseless calumnies. Abroad, however, where 
you are unknown, your reply may be needed. Sincerely yours, 
J. A. Dubbs." 

Since receiving this kind note from Mr. Dubbs, he tells me that 
Bro. Bryan called upon him some time before, and inquired 
whether he had been wronged in any manner in the matter of the 
sale of the said interest in the boiler-compound; and he was 
answered that everything was satisfactory to Mr. Dubbs. Yet, in 
the face of that, his conscience was so asleep or dead, and his 
malice so alive, that he still clung to his evil thought and used it 
as a dagger to strike down one of his best friends-who had 
always shielded his weaknesses, and spoke so well of him that 
his present course is a surprise to all except our immediate 
household. 

On the Sunday on which I refuted these charges before the 
Church here, I was afterward informed that Mr. Geo. Rindfuss 
(who was present), who had been my book-keeper for several 
years, and who was quite familiar with the above transaction, 
was claimed by the conspirators as in some degree associated 
and in sympathy with them. I therefore sent Sister Ball to see 
him the next morning with very satisfactory results. The 
following is her written report of her interview with him. 

The following are the sentiments of Mr. George Rindfuss, 
expressed to me in a special interview on the subject, at the 
office of Mr. John A. Snee, Ferguson Block, Pittsburg, Pa.-on 



Monday morning, April 9th, 1894, the day after Bro. C. T. 
Russell's public refutation, to the Church at Allegheny, of the 
charges privately and otherwise circulated by Otto von Zech, 
Paul Koetitz, Elmer Bryan, J. B. Adamson and S. D. Rogers. 

"The relations existing between Bro. Russell and myself have 
been uniformly pleasant. A report is being circulated that I lost 
money through him; but it is untrue. I never lost any money 
through him; and to my knowledge he never lost any through 
me. 

"I am Bro. Russell's friend, and I never wittingly said anything 
to damage his character or credit. Viewed from the standpoint of 
a business man of knowledge, experience and integrity, all his 
transactions and business dealings, so far as I am aware, are 
honest, fair and aboveboard-not shady, nor dishonorable, nor 
derogatory to his character-perfectly legitimate. 

"I do not believe in gossip, and if I had not been drawn into this 
affair, not only this time but several times before, I would have 
said nothing. These people (Otto von Zech, et al) may as well 
jump into the sea as to endeavor to do Bro. Russell injury. They 
will suffer the most. The truth will prosper and the work go on as 
the Lord sees proper, and they cannot hinder it. I have no 
sympathy whatever with their position. The trouble with them is 
they imagine and misconstrue and brood over little things until 
their minds are confused and they do not know where they are. 

"As I said on the evening of the meeting at Bro. Russell's house 
(about Feb. 15, 1893), these matters are no one's business, any 
more than my private business or any other man's. It is 
ridiculous to bring such charges. I never brought any because I 
have none to make. And I have testified to this in public. I love 
and respect Bro. Russell and shall do all I can to clear him of 
these misrepresentations." 

These sentiments are all those of Mr. Geo. Rindfuss, and in the 
majority of sentences I have used his own words; and this I do 
solemnly, sincerely and truly affirm. Witness, James C. Ewing. 
[Rose J. Ball. State of Pennsylvania, ss. County of Allegheny] 
Personally came before me the 

3H131 

deponent, Rose J. Ball, who being duly affirmed, testified to the 
truth of the foregoing statement. Witness my hand and seal at 
Allegheny, (seal) this 9th day of April, 1894. James C. Ewing, 
Notary Public. 

"Evil be to him who evil thinks," is an old proverb and a true 
one. These conspirators have treasured up evil thoughts and 
suspicions until they have injured themselves thereby, and are 
fast bringing forth "every evil work," as might be expected. -J as. 
3:16. 



ATTACK ON THE Z. W. T. TRACT SOCIETY 

I have now concluded the matter, except one item. The 
conspirators seem full of Bro. Rogers' idea that the saints are the 
fish, and that as Peter was sent to catch the fish and take the 
money out of its mouth, so they must take what money they need 
from believing saints-not even thanking them for it, but 
regarding it as a matter of duty on their part. And as some of the 
saints are already doing what they can through the Tower Tract 
Fund, and now-hoping perhaps that some of the donations to it 
would then fall to them individually— it seems policy to attack it. 
This they have done, declaring that Zion's Watch Tower Tract 
Society is a myth: it is merely Bro. Russell. Bro. Adamson 
declares that although a director he has never attended a meeting 
and knows nothing about the Society. Altogether, they evilly 
surmise again that something is wrong, and that they will see 
whether they can have the charter of the Society annulled, etc. 

What are the facts? It is necessary that they be clearly stated that 
not a doubt may find footing-that not a soul who has given a 
dollar to this fund may have any room to question the proper 
application of every penny of it. Even money stated by the 
donors to be for my personal use has all gone into the Tract 
Fund. The facts are as follows: 

The Society was formed in 1881, at the time of the free 
distribution of 1,400,000 copies of the pamphlet, "Food for 

Thinking Christians "-now out of print. It consisted of five of the 
Lord's children, and its affairs were entirely in my charge. 
Later, in 1884, at the instance of friends of the cause, who 
advised that matters be put upon a legal footing so that the work 
might not be interrupted in case of my sudden death, the Society 
applied for a charter under the laws of the State of Pennsylvania, 
and received one dated December 13, 1884-a copy of which we 
present, - 

CHARTER OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
TRACT SOCIETY 

Be it known that the subscribers, having associated themselves 
together for the purpose of the dissemination of Bible Truths in 
various languages, and being desirous of becoming incorporated 
agreeably to the provisions of the Act of the General Assembly 
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, entitled "An Act to 
provide for the Incorporation and Regulation of certain 
Corporations," approved the twenty-ninth day of April, Anno 
Domini, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-four, and its 
supplements, do hereby declare, set forth and certify that the 
following are the purposes, objects, articles and conditions of 
their association for and upon which they desire to be 
incorporated: 

I. The name of the Corporation shall be Zion's Watch Tower 
Tract Society. 



II. The purpose for which the Corporation is formed is, the 
dissemination of Bible Truths in various languages by means of 
the publication of tracts, pamphlets, papers and other religious 
document's, and by the use of all other lawful means which its 
board of directors, duly constituted shall deem expedient for the 
furtherance of the purpose stated. 

III. The place where the business of the said corporation is to be 
transacted is the City of Allegheny, in the County of Allegheny, 
and State of Pennsylvania. 

IV. The Corporation is to exist perpetually. 

V. The Corporation has no capital stock. Each donation of ten 
dollars to the funds of said corporation shall entitle the 
contributor, or his assigns, to one non-forfeitable, non- 
assessable, and non-divided bearing share, and to one vote for 
every such share in said corporation. Certificates of membership 
so acquired shall be issued by the Secretary, countersigned by 
the President, to the persons entitled thereto. 

VI. The Corporation is to be managed by a Board of Directors 
consisting of seven members, and the names and residences of 
those already chosen directors are (we given names of the 
present board and officers) as followsr-Charles T. Russell, 
President, W. C. McMillan, Henry Weber, Vice President, J. B. 
Adamson, Maria F. Russell, Sec'y & Treas, Simon O. Blunden. 
Rose J. Ball. 

VII. The said Corporation by its Board of Directors, a majority 
of whom shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of 
business, shall have full power and authority to make and enact 
by-laws, rules and ordinances, which shall be deemed and taken 
to be the law of said Corporation, and do any and every thing 
useful for the good government and support of the affairs of the 
said Corporation; provided the said by-laws, rules and 
ordinances, or any of them, shall not be repugnant to this charter, 
to the constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of 
Pennsylvania, and the Constitution of the United States. 

VIII. The said Corporation shall have as officers a President, 
who shall preside at the meetings of the Board of Directors; a 
Vice President, who shall preside in the absence of the President, 
and a Secretary, who shall also be Treasurer; and these officers 
shall be chosen from among the members of the Board of 
Directors annually on the first Saturday of each year, by an 
election by ballot, to be held at the principal office of the 
Corporation in Allegheny City, Pennsylvania. The members of 
the Board of Directors shall hold their respective offices for life, 
unless removed by a two-thirds vote of the shareholders, and 
vacancies in the Board occasioned by death, resignation or 
removal shall be filled by vote of a majority of the remaining 
members of the Board, who shall meet for that purpose within 
twenty days from the time when such vacancy or vacancies shall 



occur, and in the event of failure to fill such vacancy or 
vacancies, in the manner aforesaid, within thirty days from the 
time such vacancy or vacancies shall occur, then the said 
vacancy or vacancies shall be filled by the appointment of the 
President, and the person or persons so appointed shall hold his 
or their office or offices until the next annual election of officers 
of the Corporation, when such 

3H132 

vacancy or vacancies shall be filled by election, in the same 
manner as the President, Vice President, and Secretary and 
Treasurer are elected. The persons entitled to vote at annual 
elections of the Corporation shall be those who hold certificates 
of membership acquired in the manner aforesaid. 

IX. The said Corporation, under the name, style and title 
aforesaid, shall have full power and authority to make, have and 
use a common seal, with such device and inscription as they may 
deem proper, and the same to alter and renew at their pleasure; 
and by the name, style and title aforesaid, shall be able in law 
and equity to sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded in any 
Court or Courts, before any Judge or Justice of the Peace, in all 
manner of suits and complaints, pleas, causes, matters and 
demands whatsoever, and all and every matter or thing therein to 
do in as full and ample a manner, and as effectually as any other 
person or persons, bodies politic or corporate within the 
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, may or can do. 

X. The said Corporation, by the name, style and title aforesaid, 
shall have the right, power and authority to take, receive and 
hold in fee simple, or any less estate, all such messsages, lots, 
lands, buildings, tenements, rents, annuities, franchises and 
hereditaments as may be necessary and proper for its purposes; 
and to sell, lease, mortgage or otherwise dispose of the same or 
any part thereof; and it shall have the same right, power and 
authority to take, receive and hold, and to sell, lease or dispose 
of any and all kinds of personal property and money. 
(Acknowledged and Recorded in due form of law.) 

The object in taking out a charter is succinctly stated in the 
Watch Tower for January 1891, page 16, as follows: 

"This is a business association merely. It was chartered as a 
corporation by the state of Pennsylvania, and authorized to hold 
or dispose of property in its own name as though it were an 
individual. It has no creed or confession. It is merely a business 
convenience in disseminating the truth. Any one subscribing to 
one copy or more of the Society's quarterly, styled Old Theology 
Tracts (6 cents a year), is considered an active member of this 
Society-but not a voting member. Any one subscribing for $10 
worth or more of the O. T Tracts, or any one donating $10 or 
more to the funds of the Society for the spread of the Truth, is a 
voting member and is entitled to one vote for each $10 he or she 



may have donated. The affairs of the Society are so arranged that 
its entire control rests in the care of Brother and Sister Russell as 
long as they shall live. In fact, the only objects in having the 
corporation are:- 

"First, To provide a channel or fund through which those who 
wish can employ their money talent, whether small or great, to 
better advantage for the spread of the Truth than if each 
interested one acted and published independently of the others. 
Secondly, The corporation was called for by reason of the 
uncertainty of the lives of those at present managing the fund. 
Some wrote that they were doing all that their present necessities 
permitted but at their death they desired to do more; and urged 
the necessity of a legal corporation, as Brother and Sister Russell 
also might die, and they wanted their donations to go to the 
spread of the Truth. 

"The Society owns nothing, has nothing, pays no salaries, no 
rent or other expenses. Its policy is to use in the work every 
dollar received, to the best advantage, and as speedily as 
possible. Its success in publishing and circulating among the 
right kind of readers tons of Old Theology Tracts, is 
phenomenal alike to its friends and its enemies. The latter 
imagine there must be great wealth connected with the concern, 
whereas there is really very little. Few of the friends of this cause 
are able to do much financially; but what money there is, under 
economy and the divine blessing, is like the widow's cruise of 
oil: it accomplishes about a hundred times as much as other 
Tract Societies, which spend most of their receipts upon 
salaries." 

It will be seen from this and other mentions of the subject in the 
Watch Tower that I have never intimated otherwise than that the 
management of the Tract Society would probably rest entirely in 
the hands of myself and Sister Russell as long as we live, as 
provided by the regulations of the charter,-that the majority of 
voting-sharers elect the executive officers. Our reasons for 
expecting to control the Society while we live, we did not state, 
because of modesty and a desire not to seem to boast of our good 
works. But now it is necessary to state matters plainly in order 
that our good deeds be not evil spoken of and misunderstood, 
and thus become a stumbling-block to others.-Rom. 14:16. 

The fact is that, by the grace of God, Sister R. and myself have 
been enabled not only to give our own time without charge to the 
service of the truth, in writing and overseeing, but also to 
contribute more money to the Tract Society's fund for the 
scattering of the good tidings, than all others combined. If I were 
selling my services for money, the Tract Fund receipts could not 
secure them, as my business ability would command a large 
renumeration. 



God forbid that we should boast of this, or reckon ourselves on 
this account worthy of more honor than others of the Lord's 
servants who have been equally faithful in the use of the various 
opportunities or talents entrusted to them as stewards by the 
same Lord. The statement is forced from us. 

We realize, too, that even should one give all his goods to feed 
the poor hungry sheep and have not love, it is nothing. We are 
glad to know that what we have done was not done for vain- 
glory, but has all been done in love, -love for the Lord, love for 
his sheep and love for his Truth. Indeed it would be our joy to 
have done many times as much as we have done; and we could 
and would have done more than we did during the past two 
years, had it not been that we seemed to see a necessity for 
"setting our house in order" financially, and because the "Good 
Hopes" plan, introduced two years ago, has brought assistance 
from others of the household who we know have also been 
blessed by that systematic plan of "laying aside on the first day 
of the week according as the Lord hath prospered"-as directed 
by the Apostle. 

Having, up to Dec. 1, '93, thirty-seven hundred and five (3,705) 
voting shares, out of a total of sixty-three hundred and eighty- 
three (6,383) voting shares, Sister Russell and myself of course 
elect the officers, and thus control the Society; and this was fully 
understood by the directors from the first. Their usefulness, it 
was understood, would come 

3H135 

to the front in the event of our death. But, be assured, we shall 
take pleasure in sharing the responsibilities of the place we 
occupy with any one whose interest in the mission of the Tract 
Society shall by his donations to its funds relegate our voting 
shares to the place of a minority. And such a one would, no 
doubt, be well qualified to direct in the expenditures, etc. 

For this reason, also, formal elections were not held; because it 
would be a mere farce, a deception, to call together voting-share- 
holders from all over the world, at great expense, to find upon 
arrival that their coming was useless, Sister Russell and myself 
having more than a majority over all that could gather. However, 
no one was hindered from attending such elections; and all who 
desired to take part should have kept themselves informed as to 
their date -the first Saturday in each year. 

We have regularly printed certificates, which for a time we sent 
out to those who contributed ten dollars or multiples thereof. But 
they made trouble and extra letter writing, because many of the 
Lord's sheep have little knowledge of business. Some supposed 
that the certificates were appeals for money; others could not tell 
what to make of them, and wrote for full particulars as to how 
they should vote, etc. Others feared that the owning of the 
certificates brought them into liability for any debts which the 



Society might contract, etc. (We here remark that no liability is 
incurred by any share-holder.) 

It required patience and took time from more important work to 
Answer— scores of such letters; and we concluded that we had 
made a mistake so far as the certificates were concerned. 
However, a faithful record is kept of all donations and of all 
voting-shares, and the books are open to the inspection of all 
who have ever given one penny to the fund. 

Since the adoption of the "Good Hopes" method we credit the 
voting-shares at the close of each year, so that if a contributor 
gave a total of ten dollars during the year he would have a 
voting-share, even though no one of his donations amounted to 
ten dollars. Thus, if a friend sent in "Good Hopes" of seventy- 
five cents per week or nine dollars per quarter, he would have no 
voting-share if reckoned by the quarterly receipts, but if 
reckoned by the year his four remittances, $36, would represent 
three shares. 

We have plenty of blank Certificates and an accurate record of 
every dollar you have sent in, as we will take pleasure in making 
our Certificates for all who, understanding the matter, would like 
to have them. If you have old certificates issued years ago and 
have contributed more money since, so as to have more shares 
now, please send back the old certificates so that the new one 
when issue will show your full credit up to the end of our fiscal 
year, December 1, last or, if preferred, up to date. 

REPORTS OF THE TRACT SOCIETY 

Reports of the receipts and expenditures of the Society since its 
charter, can be found in Zion's Watch Tower issues of the 
following dates: For 1885, in Tower, Jan. 1886. "1886 to 1891" 
Jan. 1892. "1892 Dec. 1" Dec. 15,1892. "1893 Dec. 1" Dec. 15, 
1893. 

The donations for the six years 1886 to 1891, aside from my 
own, were very meager. So little interest being manifested I 
scarcely thought worth while to make a yearly report. Besides, 
during that time the inauguration of the colporteur work took 
considerable time and attention, which continues as the work 
enlarges. The increase of contributions since 1892, incident to 
the adoption of the plan called "Good Hopes," led to the return 
to yearly reports. 

In the foregoing extract from our issue of January 1891 (and 
which appeared in eight issues of the Tower for 1891) we say, 
"The Society owns nothing, has nothing, pays no salaries, etc." 
Lest some should misunderstand this, we will explain. The 
Tower Pub. Co. (which in a financial way represents 
myself)owns the Bible House, buys the paper, pays for the 
printing, binding electro-plates, etc., and keeps a large stock of 
Dawns and Tracts on hand and fills the orders of the Tract 



Society at any time, and at much lower prices than any worldly 
firm would charge for much poorer service. To do this requires 
that thousands of dollars lie idle continually, in electroplates, 
books, colporteurs' dues, tracts, etc; and as a consequence the 
Tower Pub. Co., is now a borrower to the extent of over twenty 
thousand dollars (the interest on which is over $1200.00 yearly), 
all of which, however, is amply secured by other property which 
I own. 

The Tract Society's funds are usually spent before received, as 
under the "Good Hopes" plan we know about what to expect. It 
runs a yearly account with the Tower Pub. Co., paying over 
moneys as received and balancing the account at the close of the 
year. 

Is it asked why the Tract Society does not do its own publishing? 
We reply, because it has neither capital nor credit. No banks 
would want the Tract Society's note. There are two ways in 
which it could do its own publishing: (1) By doing no work for a 
while, it could save up the yearly donations until it had a capital 
with which to purchase or rent a building, buy type, make 
electrotypes, and pay in advance for paper, printing, binding, and 
have capital with which to give colporteurs some starting credit, 
etc.; but this surely would not be as advantageous a way as the 
present one. (2) I could make a donation to the Tract Society of a 
part or all of the Tower Pub. Co's. outfit, and take that many 
more voting-shares. This I no doubt would have done had it not 
been for the greater caution of my esteemed help-mate, Sister 
Russell. Her advice was,-That would be no real benefit to the 
work, and you may be sure that if the Society really had any 
assets or property, some would soon begin to interfere with its 
management, or at least try to. So long as we live we had best 
keep matters as they are, and at our death put the Tract Society 
and the Lord's work in general on the best possible footing, and 
in the most consecrated hands we can find. I followed this advice 
rather reluctantly; but now, in the light of the slanders herein 
discussed, I see it to have been the very essence of wisdom. 

WHAT COULD HAVE BEEN THEIR OBJECT 

Such a conspiracy, so deeply laid and extending over eighteen 
months at least, must have had an object; and after-sight often 
makes known what foresight could not have even suspicioned. It 
is clear, now, that Bro. and Sister 

3H136 

Zech have long felt envious of Bro. and Sister Russell. We can 
see now the meaning of their desire to get full control of the 
German work, which we so readily surrendered, and their 
anxiety to get the German paper forced into the hands of all the 
Tower readers. They knew that a good many of them could read 
German, and they were anxious to exercise a rival influence over 
them. Had they been more moderate in their efforts I might have 



granted all they desired; but their repeated, extreme and 
unreasonable demands made me feel cautious, although I knew 
not of what. I felt that I must not trust them absolutely. But never 
for one moment did I suspicion that it was a disease of the heart, 
as now seems evident: I attributed it merely a differences of 
heads. 

We repeat that the evidence is strong that what has just occurred 
was planned to occur one year ago; and to use the expression of 
one who knew of this feverish condition of things before we had 
the least intimation of it, "the pot was kept boiling, ready for the 
explosion." And true enough the pot has been boiling, and many 
of the church here, especially of the new and weaker ones have 
been forced into it, while myself and Mrs. Russell were in 
blissful ignorance of it. Some stopped their ears and said, We 
will not hear this unrighteous gossip; others heard and 
disbelieved, and covered what they could not understand with 
the mantle of charity; while with a few others it has acted like 
venomous poison, prejudicing their minds so that they have no 
ear for the truth on the subject. 

Yes, the explosion has at last come;-but it is the explosion of 
their malice, hatred, envy and evil surmises. No doubt it will do 
some damage; for the fallen human mind is much more attracted 
to evil things than to good things, and more readily surmises evil 
than good. Only the pure in heart and considerably developed in 
Christian character are ruled by the love that "thinketh 
(surmiseth) no evil." (1 Cor. 13:5) No doubt the "explosion" will 
kill the interest of some of the new born lambs; and many will be 
wounded by it. But what cared the conspirators for such 
considerations, Brother Russell's character must be killed 
somehow, or else the work so successfully managed by him as 
the Lord's steward would not be wrecked. And only by wrecking 
the present work could they hope to gather some of its fragments 
into their "bag" (John 12:6), to start up a new work -a new 
paper, a new tract fund, etc., etc. 

Yes, that is manifestly the secret of it all: the conspirators 
managed ably; and Brother Adamson, with a large bundle of the 
assassinating circulars, went to work at once to take the money 
out of the mouths of the "fish" in Ohio and elsewhere-to start a 
new paper, in which, if they do as they desire me to do in the 
TOWER, all who will may publish truth and untruth ad libitum. 

Here I dismiss this painful subject, which has weighed heavily 
upon our hearts for three weeks past. In various ways it has 
greatly interfered with the Lord's work. And it has, no doubt, 
greatly disturbed the whole Church, and caused some at least-we 
know not yet how many-to turn aside from the way and work 
which God has seen fit to permit Satan to thus trouble and shake. 



The two weeks intervening between the receiving of the libelous 



circular of our enemies and the preparation and sending out of 
this defense, has doubtless been a period of severe testing to 
many of you, especially those young in the truth; but all who 
have been slow to believe evil, and who have determined to wait 
patiently and prayerfully until the right and the truth should be 
vindicated, have doubtless been drawn closer to the Lord, and 
made to feel yet more their dependence upon him. I know that 
many have been praying for me the Lord's grace and strength; 
for many have so written, and I am sure that others did who did 
not write it. I rejoice to tell all such that I have been wonderfully 
blessed and kept in the peace of God which passeth all 
understanding. And as a consequence of recent experiences I am 
sure that I can appreciate and sympathize with the Master's 
experiences as never before. I have learned to appreciate true 
friends, and the spirit of Christ as never before. Of course the 
tendency of the fallen minds is to believe any evil report; and in 
the present case this tendency would be backed by the fact that 
the very brethren who bring these charges were lifted up to 
notice and commended to your confidence by myself. We cannot 
wonder, then, if a considerable number will have their minds 
defiled, and be themselves "sifted as wheat" (Luke 22:31), and if 
some be taken entirely out of sympathy with the truth and its 
service. All that we could do we have done for these: we have 
prayed for them that their faith fail not, and we have published 
for them this lengthy explanation of the false charges. 

In writing this explanation, I have avoided making any 
countercharges or dragging in any of the personal affairs of the 
conspirators, except such fragments as touched upon their 
charges against me and were necessary to give you the true view 
of the matter. I thus avoid their affairs, not because I lack ability 
to surmise, suggest and hint evil of them, but because I hate such 
works of the flesh and the devil, and by the Lord's grace am 
seeking more and more the mind of the spirit-the mind of Christ, 
which "thinketh (surmiseth) no evil," but suffers long and is 
kind. 

But, dear brethren and sisters, we must beware lest the sacred 
title of brother and sister be abused and all its meaning lost. 
There are limits on this subject fixed in God's Word, and it 
behooves us to notice them and to act accordingly. 

First, any one who does not fully and heartily confess the Lord's 
death as his ransom-price, paid once for all eighteen centuries 
ago, should not be recognized as a brother or sister, however 
honorable his conduct, or respectable his manner and 
appearance. 

Secondly, the brother or sister (believer in the ransom), who, by 
a disorderly walk and conversation, brings reproach upon the 
cause of Christ, is to be withdrawn from and to be treated "as 
a heathen man and a publican, " that is, in all respects as though 
he were not a brother-as an erring brother disowned and 



disfellowshipped until such time as he shall fully and freely 
confess his fault and ask forgiveness. 

The question therefore is, what should be our attitude toward 
these conspirators? Would the Lord have us continue to 
fellowship them and think and speak of them as "Brethren," or 
not? They have not yet denied the ransom, although some views 
expressed by two of them, recently, look as though they were 
getting onto dangerous ground, in their endeavor to find 
something that they can present as strictly new and original. And 
to our knowledge they are 

3H135 

soliciting financial aid from the "no-ransom" folks who "walk no 
more with us," and are "enemies of the cross of Christ;" and it is 
but reasonable to suppose that they will seek to please those 
who will aid them, and that those who give aid will expect favor 
at their hands. 

For my own part I have concluded that it is our duty to 
fellowship them as brethren no longer; and that each may be able 
to decide the question for himself, I will lay before you all the 
Scriptural reasons, as follows: 

(1) Read what the Apostle Paul says the true Church should do 
respecting "unreasonable and wicked men." (2 Thess. 3:1-6.) 
Question- Are these conspirators unreasonable and wicked? Each 
must judge for himself according to the evidence; and I have laid 
it before you very carefully. The evidence proves that they are, 
all of them, unreasonable; and the facts of this conspiracy of 
several years-this attempted assassination of the character of one 
who always did them good and never did one of them the least 
harm,-is as strong evidence of wickedness of heart as we need 
ever expect to find. "Disorderly" does not fit this case: it is a 
thousand times worse than the disorderly conduct mentioned by 
the Apostle as a ground for withdrawing of brotherly regard, etc. 
(Verses 8-15.) This case is more nearly described in 1 Tim. 6:4,5 
and Rom. 16:17. 

(2) In our Lord's instructions, in Matt. 18:15-17, he gives us a 
rule for such cases. Has it been followed? Yes, we have here 
related how the conspirators themselves brought the brethren to 
hear and to join with them, and how their unjust thoughts and 
evil surmisings were rebuked by those whom they sought to 
poison and make my enemies. We have also related how some of 
the best representatives of thought in the congregation were 
twice called "to hear," and judge as you now have fully heard. 
Yet notwithstanding all, they will hear nothing but the voice of 
Satan, urging them on to more envy, malice, hatred and strife, 
publicly and privately expressed. Henceforth, such men should 



be to all who love righteousness, and obey the Lord's command, 
"as heathen men and publicans" until such times as they shall 
fully and humbly repent and reform. 

(3) The Apostle gives us a sure rule forjudging who are and who 
are not "brethren." He says, "If any man have not the spirit of 
Christ he is none of his"-no matter what he believes, and no 
matter what he may formerly have been or believed or done. The 
spirit manifested by these conspirators is far from the spirit of 
Christ-meekness, gentleness, patience, brotherly kindness and 
love which surmises no evil. And those who are none of his 
should, surely, be none of ours. Every branch in the Vine that 
beareth not fruit (the fruit of the spirit), God, the great 
husbandman, will take away (cast off).-John 15; 2. 

The violation and loss of the spirit of the truth generally comes 
first, but the loss of the letter of the truth, the true doctrine, is 
sure to follow, ere long. "If any man will do my Father's will he 
shall know of my doctrine," said the Master. And it is consistent 
to reason to the contrary, that those who have the doctrine, but 
fail to grow its proper fruits will lose the doctrine. 

This sudden and venomous attack upon my reputation by those 
who professed, even to the very date of the outbreak, the 
warmest of friendship-this search for years for something that 
could be misconstrued and made unto slander,-this berating of 
the colporteurs as my slaves, by the very men who (more than 
myself) urged all who could do so to engage in this service, and 
who denominated it the highest and best service of the Truth,- 
this attempt to apply to me all the vile names they can think of, 
such as "pope," "Man of Sin," "Saul," "King of Babylon," etc., 
may deceive some, but not those who have the spirit of the truth 
and who as true sheep know the voice of the Shepherd. Such will 
recognize it as the voice of a stranger, and will flee from its 
influence-John 10:5. 

The Lord who saw fit to permit the great Enemy to bring this 
storm upon his disciples, purposed not only the shaking out of all 
not worthy of the truth, but also the greater strengthening of faith 
and closer binding together of all who are truly his. He is able to 
say now, as of yore (Matt. 8:26), Peace, be still; and to give us a 
great peace and renewed confidence in him and in each other in 
whom we see his spirit. 

Just a word upon another matter. Slighting remarks have been 
made respecting the Dawns, and other of our publications, to the 
effect that these teachings are really old and merely restated 
therein. I reply: It is well known to all of our readers that we do 
not claim that our teachings are new; that, on the contrary, we 
specially designate them "the old theology;"-the teachings of 
Christ and the apostles and prophets. 

If it be true, that the same truths are taught in books published by 
others, I would be glad to know it; but I regret that I have never 



seen them. These who profess to know of such publications have 
evidently gotten as little good from them as they got from mine,- 
none. For he who gets not the spirit of the truth gets no blessing 
from the letter of the truth. 

That isolated parts or features of the truth are to be found in the 
various writings of the past three centuries is unquestionably 
true. Our Presbyterian friends have precious truth in the doctrine 
of election. Our Methodist friends have long held the blessed 
doctrine of free grace; our Universalist friends have long 
preached a false view of restitution; and almost all have held 
some truth with some error. The special blessing of the present 
harvest message is that it clarifies, harmonizes and systematizes 
all these fragments of truth, and brings order out of confusion,- 
rightly dividing the Word of Truth. 

Respecting the steps of the divine leading in reaching the present 
development of the truth, I refer the reader to three articles which 
appeared in Zion's Watch Tower for May, 1890, entitled "Perils 
Amongst False Brethren," "Harvest Gatherings and Siftings" and 
"Sifting the Wheat." These were published with reference to a 
previous sifting; but as many of our readers are new since then, 
we think well to let these articles form a conclusion to this paper. 

We know of no other publications than MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
etc., which teach an opportunity of restitution based upon a 
ransom- price given for all on Calvary; no others that distinguish 
between the human and the divine natures, showing the latter to 
be the heritage of the elect Church and the former the blessed 
hope set before the world; no others that teach distinctly the 
presence of our Lord, beginning in the Fall of 1 874; no others 
that 

3H136 

show the real cleansing of the Sanctuary; no others that 
harmonize all these doctrines (election, free grace, the "little 
flock," the "great company," the restitution class, etc., etc.,) in 
the one grand, beautiful, divine, Plan of the Ages. 

We could wish that there were many and abler pens than ours, to 
portray a message so worthy of the sublimest expression. But we 
rejoice, nevertheless, that we have a share in the work; and we 
remember always that not unto the human instruments, but to 
God, the divine author of the plan of the ages, belongs the honor. 
And we remember that in this, as in all things, God's Word is 
fulfilled which declares that "God hath chosen the weak things 
of the world and the things that are naught." 

But whoever might have been the instrument in the Lord's 
hands, in bringing to light the harvest message, we well know 
from the assurances of God's word that he could only expect as 
his present reward, that which the Master also received, when 
after opening the eyes of one born blind, they said, "Give God 



the praise: we know that this man is a sinner." John 9:16,24. 
Surely the disciple is not above his Master. 

I take this occasion to thank those of charitable judgment who by 
letter and in person have expressed their confidence and 
sympathy in this trial, and who have steadily held us, and all the 
interests of this harvest work, before the throne of grace. 
Continue to do so, dear brethren and sisters: "Watch and pray!" 
Watch, that no criticizing, evil-surmising spirit may find a place 
among you; and if any such appear in your midst, promptly 
check the tendency by refusing to be a party to any secret, 
underhanded slander; bring all such and their charges to the light 
at once; and if they refuse to state publicly to the accused, what 
they would hint and insinuate privately, reckon that such persons 
have not the spirit of Christ, but the reverse, the disposition of 
Satan, the accuser of the brethren: for the poison of asps is under 
the lips of the evil-surmising, backbiting gossip. (Rom. 3:13-18.) 
But cultivate rather the fruits of the spirit of love and peace, and 
seek to adorn the profession of godliness with a consistent walk 
and conversation. 

We quote below a few of the letters received. 

Your brother in Christ,-abiding under the shadow of the 
Almighty, C. T. Russell. 

To The Church of Christ, Greetings! 

I take this opportunity to speak in defense of my husband against 
the bold attack of our enemies in maligning his character and 
misrepresenting our domestic relations. Our household is 
composed only of ourselves and our esteemed and beloved 
helpers in the WATCH TOWER Office, all of whom gladly bear 
witness to the tranquility and happiness of our home, save as 
intrusions of false brethren and busybodies occasionally disturb 
it. 

Our home, so far from being a discordant one, is the very 
reverse,-most happy. I could, indeed, pray for no greater 
blessing upon all of the dear saints, than that their home-life 
might be as peaceful and happy as ours. The liberty wherewith 
Christ makes free is enjoyed by all who are of our household or 
in any way connected with the work;-not the liberty of anarchy, 
however, but of subjection to the spirit and Word of God. 

To the above answers of my beloved husband to the charges of 
his slanderers I give my unqualified endorsement in every 
particular. Although such calumnies are severe, and doubly hard 
to bear when they come from those whom we had supposed to be 
friends, but who, we now find, have been plotting these wicked 
deeds for several years, I assure you all that God has sustained us 
and given us his peace through it all. At first it came with almost 
the force and suddenness of an avalanche, both upon us and upon 
the Allegheny Church; and although we feared for the stability of 



some, we felt sure that it was permitted of the Lord for the 
purpose of what he saw to be a necessary sifting. But, thank 
God, the Church here has weathered the storm well; and now 
letters from some of the stronger ones abroad, who have 
received the libelous circulars are coming in, expressing 
continued confidence, and showing that Satan's arts are 
recognized; and these are further encouraging our hearts and 
answering our prayers, though we are still solicitous for many 
who are yet young in the truth, and who may be unprepared to 
withstand such a shock; for we well know that the time 
intervening between receiving the slanderous report and this 
reply is one of suspense and severe trial to all. 

We reflect, however, that "The Lord knoweth them that are his," 
and that he is able and willing to keep them from falling; and 
that, as with Gideon's band, some must needs be turned back. 
Who is on the Lord's side?-the truth's side? "Who shall be able 
to stand?"-"Who shall ascend into the hill (the Kingdom) of the 
Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place?" "He that hath clean 
hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto 
vanity, nor sworn (a solemn covenant) deceitfully. " 

Having committed our way unto the Lord, we are not fretting 
ourselves because of the evil doers, whose time is short, but we 
are trusting in the Lord, whose promises will in due time be 
fulfilled-"He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and 
thy judgment as the noonday" (Psa. 37); and until such time we 
will try to be patient, and will count it all joy to be esteemed 
worthy to suffer reproaches and afflictions for the name and 
cause of our beloved Lord. 

Oh! what are all earth 's gilded toys, 
Compared with heaven 's eternal joys, 
Or even to the feast now spread 
For pilgrims through the desert led? 

In Christian love and fellowship with all who love our Lord 
Jesus Christ and his truth in truth and sincerity, and who have 
no disposition to make merchandise of either the truth or the 
character of any of God's chosen instruments, I am Yours in the 
faith and hope of the Gospel, Mrs. C. T. Russell. 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH RESOLUTIONS 

At a meeting of the Church of Christ, of Allegheny, Pa., held in 
Bible House Chapel, following the preaching services, over one 
hundred being present, a Chairman and Secretary were elected, 
and a committee presented the following Resolutions, which 
were unanimously adopted. 

Whereas, It has come to our knowledge that certain persons, viz., 
Elmer Bryan, Otto von Zech, S. D. Rogers 



3H137 

and J. B. Adamson, have been for some time circulating verbal 
and printed reports concerning our pastor, Brother Charles T. 
Russell, which are derogatory to his character as a Christian 
gentleman, as a business man, and as our pastor; and 

Whereas, We have heard the reports and Brother Russell's 
answers to the same; therefore be it 

RESOLVED, That we, the congregation meeting at Bible House, 
Allegheny, Pa., place no confidence in the aforesaid reports 
which are being disseminated by the above-named persons, but 
consider them slanderours, and entirely unworthy of persons 
professing to be brethren in Christ; and be it further 

Resolved, That we take this opportunity to express, to Brother 
Russell and to all whom it may concern, our great regard for him 
as a Christian gentleman, our unshaken confidence in his 
integrity as a business man, and our ever-increasing love and 
appreciation of him as our pastor (not our pope, as they falsely 
allege); and to acknowledge that, to him, under God, we owe a 
debt of gratitude for fifteen years' faithful services as our pastor, 
in ministering to us the Truth, which has made us free, and 
whereby we have been and are growing in knowledge, grace and 
steadfastness; and for encouraging us to the use of the talents of 
which we are severally the stewards; and for providing a 
commodious and centrally-located meeting-place for us; all of 
which he does voluntarily, and without a penny of remuneration; 
and be it further 

Resolved, That we assure him of our sincere sympathy and 
earnest prayers on his behalf in this hour of trial, and that we 
commend him to the God of all comfort; and be it further 

Resolved, That the Chairman and Secretary of this meeting be 
and they are hereby authorized and instructed to sign these 
resolutions on behalf of the congregation, and to convey the 
same to Brother Russell. 

[Signed] The Congregation At Allegheny. [By] M. M. Tuttle, 
Chairman. April 22, 1894. Jennie Vero. Secretary. 

Allegheny, Pa., April 7, 1894. 

Dear Brother Russelh-Various reports having been circulated by 
persons, viz.: Elmer Bryan, S. D. Rogers, Mr. and Mrs. Otto von 
Zech, J. B. Adamson and Paul Koetitz, whose conduct shows 
them to be the enemies of the truth as well as of yourself, to the 
effect that those working in the office under your supervision are 
in bondage to you, "under his thumb," "dare not to call their 
souls their own," "slaves," etc., etc., without liberty to think or 
act according to the dictates of their own consciences and 
judgments, we desire to express ourselves positively in the 
matter, in writing, so that these reports may be understood in 



their true light, not only by yourself, but by others who have 
heard these rumors, and by whomsoever else you may wish to 
acquaint with the contents of this letter. 

We desire to state first, that we are not in bondage, nor 
oppressed, nor caused to say or do anything in any matter which 
is contrary to our wills. We are in the office from choice, as the 
part of the Lord's work in which, in our opinion, we can serve 
most fully and most to the Lord's praise. We are at liberty to 
exercise all our functions as members of the body of Christ, and 
we do so, not only with your consent, but with your approval and 
encouragement. In fact, far from exhibiting a desire to suppress 
any of us, we have found you always desirous of enlarging our 
field of usefulness as much as possible; and we would say 
further that you have our esteem and love as a servant of the 
Lord, and as one in whom his likeness is largely developed. 

But in several other respects we are in bondage. We were first 
the servants of Sin, "sold under Sin," receiving the daily wages- 
pain, sorrow, discontent, disease-of that inexorable master; and 
we found ourselves "under his thumb," fearing the death which 
we realized would finally be inflicted upon us. 

But, thanks be to God, we escaped before he had fully wrought 
out his evil purposes. We learned that we had been "bought with 
a price, even the precious blood of Christ;" and with you we fled 
to this new Master, to yield our members servants of 
righteousness, as we had formerly yielded them to the service of 
our old master, Sin. And did we count ourselves free? out of 
bondage? Free from Sin, yes; but not absolutely free. We had 
merely transferred our allegiance. We had now become the 
bond-servants or slaves of Christ, of righteousness, of truth. We 
were bound by our covenant of consciences; by the dictates of 
our consciences; by our judgments; by God's command, through 
the Apostle, that all we do, to the smallest item, should be to the 
glory of God (1 Cor. 10:31); and consequently we were obliged 
to bear the fruit of the spirit; for we recognized as binding upon 
us our Master's words: "In this is my Father glorified-that ye 
bear much fruit." 

We found that our new Master was not selfish in demanding this; 
for the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, forbearance, 
kindness, goodness, fidelity, meekness, self-control, all of which 
redound to our own benefit; and we realized that He could not be 
selfish in demanding this exhibition of un selfishness 
from us, especially as this is his own disposition.-Phil. 2:5. 

We were also bound in other ways, and more and more so as we 
studied the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, and saw how 
one after another of the desires and liberties of the flesh must be 
restrained, bound, in order that we might the more closely walk 
up to the requirements of that law. We found limitations, 
prohibitions, counsels, warnings, applicable to every walk in life; 



and we found some of them very crucial tests, dividing even 
"between the soul (the human instincts) and the spirit (the intents 
of the new mind)." "Let every man please (not himself, but) his 
neighbor unto edification; for even Christ pleased not himself." 
"Judge not, that ye be not judged;" but "judge this, rather, that no 
man put a stumbling-block or an occasion to fall in his brother's 
way." "Lie not against the truth." "Lie not one to another." "Put 
off the former conversation, and be renewed in the spirit of your 
mind." "Let not the sun go down upon your wrath." "Let no 
corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth." "Grieve not 
the holy spirit." "Let all bitterness and wrath and anger and 
clamor and evil-speaking be put away from you, with all malice; 
and be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one 
another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you." "Let 
no man deceive you with vain words." "Have no fellowship with 
the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them." 
"Walk circumspectly." "Redeem the time." "Submit yourselves 
one to another." "Put on the whole armor of God." "Beware of 
dogs and evil workers." "Continue 

3H138 

in prayer, and watch with thanksgiving." "Walk in wisdom 
toward them that are without." "See that none render evil for 
evil." "Avenge not yourselves." "Abstain from all appearance of 
evil." "Be not weary in well doing." "The love of money is the 
root of all evil." "Preach the word, be instant in season and out 
of season." "Avoid foolish questions." "Speak evil of no man." 
"In honor prefer one another." 

Yes, the more we study the law of the spirit of life, the more we 
find that it means death to self; so that we would "endure grief, 
suffering wrongfully," humiliation, pain, death itself, rather than 
displease our present Master, or allow the old autocrat, Sin, to 
gain the least ascendancy over us. Yea, we count all things as 
loss and dross, if we may but remain in Christ. 

In yet another way are we in bondage. We found that our new 
Master did not consult us as to what position in his household we 
would like to occupy: he arbitrarily appointed us our places, and 
we were thankful, oh, so thankful, to be used at all, that we were 
not very particular. We were glad to be used in any capacity. We 
found that "God hath set the members in the body as it hath 
pleased him. " Realizing this, we are content. He knows best how 
to use us; he has used us in the past and we trust him to use us 
more effectively in the future. 

But we are bound-bound to the body; and, being bound, we are 
endeavoring to supply that strength and stability, that grace, 
which will tend to the increase of the spirit of love, and to the 
effectual service of the entire body.-Eph. 4:15, 16. 

We are bound in still another way: "We can do nothing against 
the truth." The unenlightened world, the entire nominal church, 



some who once loved us, principalities and powers, seen and 
unseen, Satan with all his hosts, are arrayed against the truth, to 
destroy it if possible, to drag in the dust its most earnest 
advocates; but we, we can do nothing against the truth. The very 
thought is pain. Rather let all the anathemas pronounced by 
Papacy against heretics be upon us. We can do nothing, we will 
do nothing against the truth. "Let God be true, though it prove 
every man a liar." 

Glorious bondage! Glorious liberty from Sin, from death, from 
self. Glorious liberty in Christ! Glorious bondage to Christ! 

"Not my own!" Oh, "not my own!" 
Jesus, I belong to thee! 
All I have and all I hope for, 
Thine for all eternity. 

These, dear Bro. Russell, are the sentiments of our hearts toward 
the Lord and his work, and we believe them to be also the 
sentiments of your own heart. We want to assure you of our 
oneness of purpose with you in the forwarding of the work, over 
which we believe the Lord has made you overseer, and in which, 
by his grace, we are glad to be accounted "helps." (Can it be that 
the Apostle referred to us when he used that peculiar term?) This 
is a trying hour to you; and perhaps you feel a little as the Lord 
did, when some walked no more with him-" And will ye, too, go 
away?" So we want to sustain you by our love and sympathy and 
co-operation, as well as by our prayers, and to give you every 
reason to believe that we are your friends, as well as friends of 
the truth. 

We know not what to say concerning those who malign your 
character; but we fear for them the retribution of those who 
spoke evil of another to whom the Lord had given a special 
charge.-Num. 16:1-35. 

With this assurance of our sentiment, we are, Your servants in 
Christ, Edward F. Abbott, Wm. L. Campbell, Rose J. Ball, E. 
C. Henninges, James A. Weimar. 

New York, April 16, 1894. 

My Dear Brother And Sister Russell:-It is now near midnight, 
but I cannot retire without first trying to express (for words fail 
me to express fully) our deep love and sympathy to you both. 

This A. M. we received a "circular letter," which I take the 
liberty to enclose to you, believing you ought (if you do not) to 
know its contents. Truly it has been a sad day to us, more like a 
house of mourning. Mrs. G. is almost prostrated over it, but 
thank the good Lord, we have not read the Tower for over twelve 
years in vain. By God's grace, we can see the sophistry and 
detect the wolf beneath the covering of wool. Mr. Rogers is 
greatly mistaken in supposing that none who read the Dawn 
without the preached word can come into the Truth; for, thank 



the dear Lord, sister G. and myself were led into the light by it. 
Sisters Erlenmeyer and Clark were the first we met and talked 
with, and that is less than three years ago; and they will 
doubtless testify to our having considerable light. I have humbly 
done what I could to circulate Dawns and Tracts. 

But, dear brother and sister, I will not weary you; only be 
assured that you are always remembered in our prayers; and may 
the dear Lord be ever present with you in this your especial time 
of need. We shall ever trust in Christ, our ransom price, and 
strive to be led by the "spirit of truth." 

Pray for us, and do not fear. We are striving to be ever on the 
alert for Satan, come in what form he may, but we trust solely in 
Jesus; for if he be for us, who can be against us? 

God bless and keep you both is our constant prayer. 

Yours in the Truth, Mr. and Mrs. H. P. Ganoung. 

Ohio, April 15, 1894. 

Dear Sister Russell:-In writing you a few days ago I expressed 
great surprise at the course Bro. Rogers had taken. Judge my 
further surprise when yesterday I received a circular containing 
the letters of four brethren. Of course you know to what I refer. 
What can this mean? 

It takes no keen discernment to discover that they were not 
written in the spirit of meekness and love, the Christ spirit. The 
venom with which they seem to be permeated must certainly 
neutralize their effect. One of the writers in his anxiety to make 
out a case, by making public that which he had better wrapped in 
a mantle of charity and consigned to forgetfulness, has, in my 
estimation, violated his Christian honor. I honestly believe that I 
express the sentiment of the whole true church when I say that 
we still esteem our Brother Russell very highly in love for his 
work's sake, and sincerely believe that he will be able to clear 
himself of each and every charge, and come forth from this fiery 
trial 

3H139 

unscathed as he has done from former ones. He never to my 
knowledge claimed infallibility or wished to assume either office 
or title of "pope." Nor can I see how any member of the church 
possessed of intelligence and sanctified common sense can 
accuse him of this. 

I have written, dear sister, to express to you my continued love 
and confidence, also my sympathy in this trial. 'Tis doubtless a 
well-laid scheme of the adversary to shake your faith. Recall 
your own words in your last letter to me: "We are in the shaking 
time when all that can be shaken will be, and only that which 
cannot be shaken will remain," and, holding fast your 
confidence, go on, looking unto Jesus. Please express my 



Christian love and sympathy to Bro. Russell, and tell him to fear 
none of these things which he shall suffer. 

I commend you both to the "Father of mercies and the God of all 
comfort." In Christian loyalty and love. Sincerely yours, M. J. 
Tucker. 

Bro. W. E. Page, for some time a member of an office force and 
of our family, writes a few kind word and encloses a copy of a 
letter sent to Bro. Gilruth, as follows:- 

Des Moines, April 18, '94. 

Dear Brother Gilruth:-Yours of 6th inst. came duly. I am grieved 
that the Rogers, Zech, Bryan, Adamson manifesto must now 
arise to stumble some, though, since the Lord permits it, I am not 

dazed by it; nor do I let it worry me At the meeting that 

continued until 4 o'clock, A. M., to which Zech refers, I presided 
as chairman. When first going into the work Zech had no money, 
but later was left some by German relatives. He was anxious to 
invest it and finally conceived the idea of establishing a printing 
plant and doing Bro. Russell's work. Bro. Russell discouraged 
the idea, though, through regard for Zech and to aid him, he 
finally consented to give him the work, advising against the 
scheme; and Zech knows this, though stating to the contrary. 
Zech insisted on Bro. Russell treating him in all things on the 
principle of "love," as he put it, i. e., that he do everything he 
could for him and pay the highest price for all work done, while 
he, Zech, act wholly on the principle of avarice-get all you can- 
with Bro. Russell. 

I do not think that Zech saw the point on this plainly, his 
financial interests and lack of business ability keeping the fear 
that he might lose money constantly in the foreground. His 
money has proven a snare to him. I have been all over this 
ground with both parties, and am sure Brother Russell has done 
Zech no injury. 

Bryan is a very peculiar man, and always has been-by heredity, I 
judge, assisted by training. He must needs have the care of every 
conscience subject to his observation, demanding that all 
conform to his views of right and wrong. To an insane degree he 
constantly exhibited the determination during the last of his 
connection with the office, to make Bro. Russell acknowledge to 
him that he was a wrong-doer, and especially in doing contrary 
to Bryan's judgment. His insinuations and intimations regarding 
the boiler cleaning compound are, / am sure, more the result of 
prejudice than fact; though this particular thing was not 
canvassed when I was in Allegheny. Similar and even worse 
charges were, and found groundless. 



My knowledge of the weaknesses, prejudice, poor judgment, 
lack of discernment, etc., of Zech and Bryan, with the 
information I have proving the most of these charges groundless, 
leads me to give but little if any weight to their criticism. 

Rogers has stumbled over having a special mission to convert 
everybody to his methods. No one can or will object to his living 
according to it; and he might be blessed in some ways by so 
doing. Surely you and I prefer to earn our own bread, that we 
may be chargeable to none, and have to give to him who is in 
necessity;-not who supinely puts himself in a dependent 
condition. 

I have had a long correspondence with Adamson regarding his 
tract, and refused to contribute toward the expense of printing, 
not knowing what it would teach. He abused me roundly for this 
and severely criticized my free-will offering to the Tract Fund, 
indicating a perverse spirit. However, we can and I do leave the 
quartet in God's hands. He knows their weaknesses and how 
much perverseness is mixed up in their courses. 

We know that God's plan will be fully accomplished in due time 
and that any and all who resist the truth, even as Jannes and 
Jambres did Moses, will gain a full recompense of reward (2 
Tim. 3:8,9) and in no way prevent the full setting up of the 
Kingdom. Then, too, we know that wicked servants are sent into 
outer darkness by the Master, and he is managing the harvest 
work. We can abide in him, and have our weakness turned into 
strength. Yours in service, W. E. Page. 

W. Virginia, April 17, 1894. 

Dear Brother Russell:-"Be not weary nor faint in mind." May 
you be delivered out of every trouble. "Think it not strange." 
Yours in the Lord, H. L. Gillis. 

Illinois, April 24, 1894. 

Dear Brother Russell :-I want you to understand how we regard 
the trouble. Your friends will court an investigation. Better wait 
until A., B., R. and Z. have something more definite than their 
very gauzy manifesto to offer. Do not, please do not, make the 
same mistake of haste and anger which characterizes their 
villainous letter. Sorry you did not mention the Adamson matter 
when you were here with us, on your return from your visit to 
him, as only a few days after I sent a small subscription for his 
tracts. 

Careful study of the manifesto shows that it covers considerable 
time, during which the four signers were in intimate 
communication with you. Suddenly they change, and with haste 
and irritation describe troubles already examined and decided 
against them; and they wantonly villify one whom within the 
present month they loudly proclaimed as their trusted leader and 
friend. 



Our only information is gleaned from the bare, cold, 
unsympathetic black and white of the printed page,-evidently 
hastily written, under the stress of strong excitement, couched in 
language vague and ambiguous, hinting at things to us unknown 
but presumably dreadful, and all better calculated to whet the 
appetite of a scandal-monger than to enlighten the saint. 

Referring to the circular alphabetically, we note that it extends 
from A to Z — Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the 
beginning to the end: and, indeed to cover the entire ground. If 
the desire to bring Bro. Russell to the varying standards of 
excellence in the minds of the four writers has been unwarranted 
by the facts, none should 

3H139 

more regret it than themselves. Such however being the case, we 
appear to have four popes instead of only one. 

Bro. Adamson's tract begins-"Introductory. This outline of 
God's plan in the ages is designed to be an introduction to the 
volumes of the Millennial Dawn." He says, "Concerning 
parables heard, while the author of Dawn is not responsible here, 
we believe it is in harmony with Millennial Dawn teaching." 
From this the reader might fairly infer at least that the "author of 
DAWN" does not disagree. While the truth is the very reverse, 
this tract is now being shamelessly foisted upon the public. More 
than this, Brother Adamson endeavors to throw the responsibility 
on the author of Dawn by failing to note any other possible 
author, and by announcing himself under the title of 
"Distributor." 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, when read in the order in which it is 
written, the order intended by its author, is as plain as the 
alphabet, and no more needs an introduction, or explanation than 
do our A. B. C's. To write an alleged introduction, supposedly 
on behalf, but without the request, of the author of the book, is to 
insinuate obscurity and incapacity in the author, and is to him a 
gratuitous insult. To insist on publishing such an introduction 
regardless of the author's repeated protests, would even in civil 
courts, subject such publisher to heavy penalties. How much 
more, then, should such conduct be reprobated by those who will 
judge, not only the world, but angels. 

Without at present charging error, it is only just to say that in 
many instances Bro. Adamson's writings are hopelessly 
ambiguous, and therefore dangerous. 

Several of Bro. Bryan's charges have already to my knowledge 
been tried impartially in a manner and by a tribunal of his own 
Scriptural choosing; but he forgets that their findings in each 
instance supported you, Brother Russell, and were unfavorable to 
himself. That he should now drag forth these once disposed of 
matters, without honestly advising his readers of the fact, seems 



to argue a decidedly drowsy condition of his once so vigilant 
conscience. 

Brother Rogers is plainly guilty of a shameful waste of printers' 
ink, blank paper, and his readers' time, in requiring two full 
pages closely packed, on which to confess that while a duly 
accredited agent, under the instructions and at the expense of the 
Tower Tract Society, he disobeyed orders, violated his 
agreement, and returned to England expecting to persuade you 
that he knew more about your purpose and plans than you did 
yourself. 

Bro. Zech in his attempt to describe a family difficulty, said to 
have occurred as long ago as Christmas, '92 has failed; hence we 
have only his word that there was an "insult." If there really were 
one, it has doubtless long since been forgiven. The demand for a 
public apology was not called for according to its own showing; 
and in publishing the names of its signers he has probably no 
more consulted their wishes than those of the other parties 
concerned. 

Our confidence in you remains unshaken, and our sympathy is 
most hearty and sincere. Your brother in Christ, WM. M. 

Wright. 

Ohio, April 24, 1894. 

Dear Brother Russell :-My heart has been exceeding sad for the 
last two weeks. Because I would not condemn you unheard, I 
have been abused and likened to an idol worshiper, been told to 
repent and be converted and it has even been hinted to me that I 
am not consecrated. This dreadful thing (the defamatory circular) 
came on us in Columbus like a flash of lightening from a clear 
sky. Bro. Adamson never hinted to me that there was the least 
inharmony between yourself and him when he asked me to 
subscribe for his tracts. 

I wrote Bro. A. as follows: 

"I cannot judge Bro. Russell from the standpoint of your four 
witnesses. He has three witnesses in his favor now,-Food For 
Thinking Christians, Millennial Dawn and Zion's Watch Tower, 
besides brethren yet to hear from. If Bro. Russell has erred, the 
Lord will judge him for it. I cannot condemn him unheard." 

I hope dear brother, that you may be able to refute the slander of 
your enemies. I cannot believe that the Father would reveal his 
plans and truths to one so wicked as your enemies would make 
you out to be. I feel that the Lord will be with you. "For God is 
not unrighteous to forget your labor of love, which ye have 
showed toward His name, in that ye have ministered to the saints 
and do minister." 

This morning I got from Bro. A. the enclosed unkind letter, 
accusing me of something that I have not done, as follows; 



"Bro. Zech wrote me that Bro. Russell had tasked me with 
changing an order from Sister McOmber from 100 Ingersoll 
tracts to s my' tracts; accusing me of scratching out the 
v Ingersoll' and putting v my' above it. I suppose you sent the 
letter to Bro. Russell as an evidence of my rascality. " 

It is very evident that Bro. Adamson is jealous of the amounts, 
small as they are, that I send to the Tract Fund, which has 
become so hateful to him that he will even accuse me falsely. 

Hoping that all things may abound to the glory of God, I remain 
your sister in Christ our Redeemer, Belle F. Miller. 

[Reply: The only letter of the kind referred to by Bro. A., that I 
know of, was one sent to him by Bro. Sherman. In it Bro. S. 
enclosed $5.00 for one hundred Ingersoll tracts. Bro. A. crossed 
off the words "Ingersoll tracts" and wrote above "your new 
tract." Bro. A. sent that altered letter to a friend, from whom he 
desired a like amount, and in due time it came to me. I do not 
believe, however, that it was done fraudulently ; nor that it was 
a misapplication of funds. I merely say that he should first have 
assured himself, beyond all question, as to Bro. Sherman's real 
intention: knowing that so intelligent a penman is not likely to 
misstate himself; especially, too, as Bro. A. was a Director in the 
Tract Society.] 

New Albany, April 19, '94. 

Dear Brother Russell:-It is with heaviness of heart that we write 
you these few lines. Without taking sides on the merits of the 
case as the trouble now stands, and as viewed from the circular 
letter of Bros. Zech, Rogers, Bryan and Adamson, we must 
protest against their course of procedure against you as unworthy 
of brethren. We extend to you and Sister Russell our sympathy. 
Your labor in the cause of present truth deserves better treatment 
than these men would mete out to you. 

3H141 

If you have done wrong, may the dear Lord help you to see your 
error; and I believe in such event you would cheerfully 
acknowledge it. Your brother and sister in Christ, F. J. & Alice 
E. Bourquin. 

The following is a copy of a letter sent by same mail to Brother 
von Zech. Dear Brother:-It is in great sorrow and heaviness of 
heart that I acknowledge receipt of your circular letter. 

Myself and wife have made it a subject of prayer, as we did 
when we first read DAWN, and we feel that we cannot wait one 
mail longer without writing and apprising you of our disapproval 
of your course, which we believe is very unscriptural and 
involving terrible consequences to yourselves, the body of Christ 
at large, many private individuals, and many who may now be 
just receiving the lights. It seems to us that Satan could not, with 



all his cunning, conceded ingenuity and ability, have concocted a 
scheme by which he could have injured more the cause of 
present truth than thus to deceive you and inspire you to do this 
thing as you have. 

Should all you claim be true, which I do not admit to believe, 
then you still have not done as the Lord has instructed his 
followers to do. We have not conferred with flesh and blood-we 
passed that point long ago; but we have conferred with our 
Heavenly Father, and we take our stand on what we believe to be 
the right and truth and do not desire to injure the least one of 
those who believe in Christ. Others may do as they see right in 
the matter, but for our part we need not wait to see what step 
others may take or what they may say: we are willing to assume 
the responsibility thrust upon us by your very unwise, unkind 
and wicked letter. The course you have taken is certainly not the 
result of any inspiration received in communion with the Father 
in your private closet: no, dear erring brother, it must come from 
another source. The course pursued would kill the brother if 
guilty of all you claim, instead of reclaiming him. 

For our part, we do not own one "pope;" if we did, we think we 
would prefer Bro. Russell to either of the four writing the 
circular letters; neither do we want two, three or four popes, and 
we confess that the said letters do smack of popery. You ask too 
much entirely, after failing to do as our Lord directed (Matt. 
18:15-17.) You with three others set yourselves up as judges, 
witnesses and jury, and I might also add, without drawing too 
much on the imagination, as executioners. Now I wish to say to 
you that I know enough of the law of the world to know that this 
is very unlawful. No accused is to be adjudged guilty on ex parte 
testimony; even an accused criminal is to be presumed innocent 
until proven guilty by witnesses put under the testing fire of 
cross examination, all in the presence of the "accused," a phrase 
you use repeatedly. 

Bro. Zech, this letter is unworthy of you; and if my finances 
were as at one time, I would hasten to you, and talk to you face 
to face, for I would ten thousand times rather say this to you than 
to write it. I do not wish to evade responsibility when the cause 
of truth and the Master is at stake and in peril by false brethren, 
deceived and ignorant, as I believe, but false nevertheless, 
through the wiles of Satan. 

Before I was a Christian I would never have betrayed such a 
secret, obtained as guest in a family, under any circumstances; if 
not from pure motives, I would have feared to be despised and 
distrusted by those to whom I should have revealed my perfidy 
and infidelity. 

Why did you not wait until after to-day (the Anniversary of 
Christ's death) before sending out your miserable stuff? This 
seems to be the time, though, for Satan to manifest himself, and 



it does look to me that this time he has taken four men who 
might have made good "shoemakers" and made Judges and 
lawyers of them, and they have "butchered" the job for 
everybody. I cannot express my indignation in words, at such 
audacity and assumption of power. After carefully rereading the 
letter I am convinced the writers are incompetent to try such a 
case, even if asked to do so by the congregation. The personal 
grievances are too prominent. Having confidence that our Lord is 
able to overrule the machination of the powers of darkness and 
make the wrath and wickedness of men to praise him and serve 
His good purpose, I am striving to be a faithful servant of the 
Lord. F. J. Bourquin. 

Dear Brother and Sister Russell:-This last month has been, in 
my experience, a very sad one. The printed circular, coming 
from parties from whom we expected better things, has troubled 
me and made me very sad. 

But after some mature reflection, and when I discovered from 
whom it emanated, I was not so surprised; for I have long ago 
seen that there was a Korah in the camp, who was soon joined by 
Dathan and Abiram. As they were the ringleaders in the 
rebellion against Moses and Aaron, so likewise those you have 
made confidants and entrusted with your private affairs,-who 
have sat at your table, as one of your family and been made 
partakers together of spiritual as well as natural things, little 
thinking you were nourishing a viper of the most poisonous 
nature, as it were in your bosom. 

The three Spring Meetings previous to the Chicago Convention, 
notwithstanding the great good I received while there, were 
somewhat marred with what I saw and heard by three of the 
same parties now prominent in this disruption; and I was many 
times tempted to give you a hint on the subject, but I quieted my 
conscience by attributing it to their weakness. These are the three 
stones that in my dream I saw hurled at you while you were 
ministering to us the Word of Life, that caused blood to flow 
from your temples. Do you remember my mentioning it to you 
about three years ago? Oh! it makes me sad indeed. Anything 
from the outside world I can endure-as David expresses it "Had 
it been an avowed enemy, I could have borne it." 

Oh, may this dark hour of trial draw us closer, and closer, under 
the sheltering arms of our Heavenly Father! May God bless you 
with the riches of his grace, and the fulness of His spirit, is the 
earnest prayer of your brother in Christ, John W. Mason. 

"A little while, our fightings shall be over; 
A little while, our tears be wiped away; 
A little while, the power of Jehovah 
Shall turn our darkness into gladsome day. " 



HARVEST SIFTINGS 

PERILS AMONG FALSE BRETHREN 
2 Cor. 11:26 

Our Christian experiences differ; no two exactly the same, 
because our temperaments and talents differ as well as our 
surroundings. But we may rely upon it that no real son of God is 
exempted from the needed trials of patience, faith and love. No 
matter how strong the character, or how seemingly impregnable 
to the ordinary besetments, we may rely upon it that such have as 
great trials and crosses as others-perhaps greater; perhaps such 
as would prostrate weaker ones, whom the Lord will therefore in 
love and mercy not suffer to be tempted above that they are able 
to bear.- 1 Cor. 10:13. 

Even our blessed Lord Jesus, though perfect, had to pass through 
an experience to test and prove his complete submission to the 
Father's will. Looking at our Lord's testing, we cannot doubt 
that his strong character was measurably unmoved by the 
sarcastic, bitter words and threats of the Scribes and Pharisees, 
and that likewise he speedily and firmly settled Satan's 
temptations negatively. None of these things, which would have 
been the greatest temptations to others, seemed to move or even 
to greatly annoy him. He answered coolly and often ironically 
the attacks of open enemies, and was comparatively unmoved by 
them; but it was when those who dipped in the dish with him 
lifted up the heel against him (Psa. 41:9; Matt. 26:23) and left 
him, that his heart was troubled;-wounded by professed friends. 
The only discouraged expression recorded, relative to his work, 
was toward the close of his ministry when the test became more 
and more severe, and "many went back and walked no more in 
his company," saying of his doctrines, "This is a hard saying; 
who can hear it?" His unreproachful but sorrowful words, then 
expressed to the twelve specially staunch disciples, were full of 
pathos and disappointed grief: "Will ye also go away?" The 
prompt response of Peter-"Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou 
hast the words of lasting life"-must certainly have come as a 
comforting balm to that noble, loving heart, whose only impulse 
was to do good and to bless others. 

And yet as he approached the close of his ministry, the time 
came that he must still further suffer wounds from those he most 
loved. No wonder that, catching a clear view of how his sacrifice 
was to be completed, how all his bosom disciples would forsake 
and disown him, and how one of them would betray him with a 
kiss, he was sorrowful, troubled in spirit, and testified, "Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me." And 
though Peter courageously said, "Though I should die with thee, 
yet will I not deny thee"-and so said they all-Jesus saw that all 
would be scattered, forsaking him in his most trying hour, and 
that courageous Peter would be so terribly sifted of Satan and 



prove so weak that he would even swear that he had never 
known him. Truly these trials from "brethren," some of whom 
were only weak, and one false at heart, must have been among 
the sorest of our Lord's experiences, during his period of trial. 
Yet none of these things moved him or for a moment influenced 
him to choose another course. He cheerfully followed the narrow 
path and left it for God, in his own time, to bring forth his 
righteousness as the light of noonday. (Psa. 37:6). He was 
obedient to God, and faithful to the truth, and it was thus that he 
suffered, not only at the hands of evil men, but also from the 
misunderstandings of his closest friends, who did not clearly 
grasp the situation, nor see how needful it was that he should 
first be Redeemer before he could become Restorer and King. 

The same lesson of perils among false brethren, and among 
brethren who had not so fully as himself grasped the Truth, was 
also the Apostle Paul's experience. 

We never hear from him a complaint about the way the world 
rejected his message, spoke evil of him and maltreated him as 
the leading exponent of the unpopular doctrine of the cross of 
Christ, which was opposed both by the stumbling blinded Jews 
and by the worldly-wise believers in the philosophies of the 
Gentiles. Indeed, instead of being downcast or discouraged at his 
past experiences, or in the prospect of bonds and imprisonments 
awaiting him in the future, he boldly and cheerfully declared, 
"But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear 
unto myself."-Acts 20:19-24 

But, like the Lord Jesus, Paul had his severest trials from "false 
brethren"; who, instead of being faithful yoke-fellows and co- 
workers, as good soldiers of the cross, became puffed up, heady, 
and anxious to be leaders. These, being unwilling or unable to 
see the truth as fully and clearly as did Paul, because of their 
wrong condition of heart, and being envious of his success and 
the results of his zeal and labor, followed after him in the various 
cities where he had labored, and by misrepresentation of his 
character as well as of his teachings, sought to lower him in the 
esteem of the household of faith, and thus to open the way for 
various sophistical theories which would reflect honor upon 
them as teachers of what they claimed were advanced truths, 
though actually subverting the real truth in the minds of many. 

The only annoyance ever manifested by the Apostle Paul, in any 
of his letters, was upon this subject of his misrepresentation by 
false brethren. Referring to these false apostles by name, that 
they might be known and recognized as such (See 1 Tim. 
1:19,20; 2 Tim. 4:10, 14-17; 2 Cor. 11:2-23), he clearly exposed 
their unholy motives of pride, ambition and envy, which 
scrupled not to make havoc of the Church and of the truth. 



Especially did he point out that, in their attempt to be leaders, 
they had manufactured a different gospel, built upon a different 
foundation than the only true foundation-the death of Christ as 
man's ransom-price. 

Paul was zealous for the truth's sake, lest these false apostles 
should use smooth words and misrepresentations of his character 
and of the truth as a lever to turn men aside from the true gospel. 

He warns them against those teachers, not to keep himself 
uppermost in their hearts, but to put them on their guard, lest 
receiving the new teachers, they should be injured by the false 
teachings they presented, and lest in rejecting him and losing 
confidence in him as an honest and true man and teacher they 
should discard his teachings, which were the truth. Hence his 
reference to himself was not in self-defence and self-laudation, 
but in defence of the truth and an endeavor to have them see that 
his character 

3H143 

and career as a true teacher comported well with the true 
message he bore to them. 

And he fearlessly pointed out that men might claim to present 
the same Jesus, the same spirit and the same gospel, and yet be 
false teachers and deceitful workers, transforming themselves 
into apostles of Christ. And, he says, marvel not at such a thing 
as that men should be great workers in the name of Christ from 
ambitious motives: "No marvel, for Satan himself fashioneth 
himself into an angel of light. It is no great thing, therefore, if his 
ministers also transform themselves as ministers of 
righteousness." 

Paul's letter to the Galatians was written evidently to counteract 
the misrepresentations of false brethren. (Gal. 1:6; 3:1.) To re- 
establish confidence in the gospel message he had delivered, it 
was needful that he should rehearse to them something of his 
history. In doing so it was necessary to refer again to the false 
brethren (Gal. 2:4), who claimed to be of the same body and who 
yet, in opposition to the truth, brought again upon God's 
children the bondage of errors already escaped from. 

HARVEST GATHERING AND SIFTINGS 

A BRIEF SKETCH OF THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF PRESENT TRUTH 

Many are the inquiries relative to the truths presented in 
Millennial Dawn and Zion's Watch Tower, as to whence they 
came and how they developed to their present symmetrical and 
beautiful proportions- Were they the results of visions? Did God 
in any supernatural way grant the solution of these hitherto 



mysteries of his plan? Are the writers more than ordinary 
beings? Do they claim any supernatural wisdom or power? or 
how comes this revelation of God's truth? 

No, dear friends, we claim nothing of superiority, nor 
supernatural power, dignity or authority; nor do we aspire to 
exalt ourselves in the estimation of our brethren of the household 
of faith, except in the sense that the Master urged it, saying, "Let 
him who would be great among you be your servant." (Matt. 
20:27.) And our position among men of the world and of the 
nominal church is certainly far from exalted, being everywhere 
spoken against. We are fully contented, however, to wait for 
exaltation until the Lord's due time. (1 Pet. 5:6.) In the apostle's 
words we therefore answer, "Why look ye upon us, as though by 
our own power we had done these things? We also are men of 
like passions with yourselves-of like infirmities and frailties, 
earnestly striving, by overcoming many besetments, dis- 
couragements, etc., to press along the line toward the mark of the 
prize of our high calling, and claiming only, as faithful students 
of the Word of God, to be index fingers, as we have previously 
expressed it, to help you to trace for yourselves, on the sacred 
page, the wonderful plan of God-no less wonderful to us, we 
assure you, than to you, dearly beloved sharers of our faith and 
joy- 
No, the truths we present, as God's mouthpieces, were not 
revealed in visions or dreams, nor by God's audible voice, nor 
all at once, but gradually, especially since 1 870, and particularly 
since 1880, a period of above twenty years. And this present 
clear unfolding of truth is not due to any human ingenuity or 
acuteness of perception, but to the simple fact that God's due 
time has come; and if we did not speak, and no other agent could 
be found, the very stones would cry out. 

We give the following history, not only because we have been 
urged to give a review of God's leadings in the path of light, but 
specially because we believe it to be needful that the truth be 
modestly told, that misapprehensions and prejudicial mis- 
statements may be disarmed, and that our readers may see how 
hitherto the Lord hath helped and guided us. In so far as the 
names and views of others, who have parted company with us, 
may be associated with this history, we shall endeavor to bring 
forward only such points as are necessary to an understanding of 
our position and of the Lord's leadings. Nor can we name all the 
little points of divine favor in which faith was tested, prayers 
were answered, etc., remembering that our Master and the early 
church left no such example of boasting faith, but rather 
admonished otherwise, saying, "Hast thou faith, have it to 
thyself." Some of the most precious experiences of faith and 
prayer are those which are too sacred for public display. 

We will not go back to tell how the light began to break through 
the clouds of prejudice and superstition which enveloped the 



world under Papacy's rule in the dark ages. The reformation 
movement, or rather movements, from then until now, have each 
done their share in bringing light out of darkness. But we will 
here confine ourselves to the consideration of the harvest truths 
set forth in Millennial Dawn and Zion's Watch Tower. 

We begin the narrative at the year 1 868, when the editor, having 
been a consecrated child of God for some years, and a member 
of the Congregational Church and of the Y. M. C. A., began to 
be shaken in faith regarding many long accepted doctrines. 
Brought up a Presbyterian, and indoctrinated from the 
Catechism, and being naturally of an inquiring mind, I fell a 
ready prey to the logic of infidelity as soon as I began to think 
for myself. But that which at first threatened to be the utter 
shipwreck of faith in God and the Bible, was, under God's 
providence, overruled for good, and merely wrecked my 
confidence in human creeds and systems of misinterpretation of 
the Bible. 

Gradually I was led to see that though each of the creeds 
contained some elements of truth, they were on the whole, 
misleading and contradictory of God's Word. Among other 
theories, I stumbled upon Adventism. Seemingly by accident, 
one evening I dropped into a dusty, dingy hall, where I had heard 
religious services were held, to see if the handful who met there 
had anything more sensible to offer than the creeds of the great 
churches. There, for the first time, I heard something of the 
views of Second Adventists, the preacher being Mr. Jonas 
Wendell, long since deceased. Thus, I confess indebtedness to 
Adventists as well as to other denominations. 

Though his Scripture-exposition was not entirely clear, and 
though it was very far from what we now rejoice in, it was 
sufficient, under God, to re-establish my wavering faith in the 
divine inspiration of the Bible, and to show that the records of 
the apostles and prophets are indissolubly linked. What I heard 
sent me to my Bible to study with more zeal and care than ever 
before, and I shall ever thank 

3H144 

the Lord for that leading; for though Adventism helped me to no 
single truth, it did help me greatly in the unlearning of errors, 
and thus prepared me for the truth. 

I soon began to see that we were living somewhere near the close 
of the Gospel Age, and near the time when the Lord had declared 
that the wise, watching ones of his children should come to a 
clear knowledge of his plan. At this time, myself and a few other 
truth-seekers in Pittsburgh and Allegheny formed a class for 
Bible study, and from 1870 to 1875 was a time of constant 
growth in grace and knowledge and love of God and his Word. 
We came to see something of the love of God, how it had made 
provision for all mankind, how all must be awakened from the 



tomb in order that God's loving plan might be testified to them, 
and how all who exercise faith in Christ's redemptive work and 
render obedience in harmony with the knowledge of God's will 
they will then receive, might then (through Christ's merit) be 
brought back into full harmony with God, and be granted 
everlasting life. This we saw to be the Restitution work foretold 
in Acts 3:21. But though seeing that the Church was called to 
joint-heirship with the Lord in the Millennial Kingdom, up to 
that time we had failed to see clearly the great distinction 
between the reward of the Church now on trial and the reward of 
the faithful of the world after its trial, at the close of the 
Millennial age-that the reward of the former is to be the glory of 
the spiritual, divine nature, while that of the latter is to be the 
glory of restitution-restoration to the perfection of human nature 
once enjoyed in Eden by their progenitor and head, Adam. 

However, we were then merely getting the general outlines of 
God's plan, and unlearning many long-cherished errors, the time 
for a clear discernment of the minutiae having not yet fully 
come. And here I should and do gratefully mention assistance 
rendered by Brothers Geo. Stetson and Geo. Storrs, the latter the 
editor of The Bible Examiner, both now deceased. The study of 
the Word of God with these dear brethren led, step by step, into 
greener pastures and brighter hopes for the world, though it was 
not until 1872, when I gained a clear view of our Lord's work as 
our ransom price, that I found the strength and foundation of all 
hope of restitution to lie in that doctrine. Up to that time, when I 
read the testimony that all in their graves shall come forth, etc., I 
yet doubted the full provision-whether it should be understood 
to include idiots or infants who had died without reaching any 
degree of understanding, beings to whom the present life and its 
experiences would seem to be of little or no advantage. But 
when, in 1872, I came to examine the subject of restitution from 
the standpoint of the ransom price given by our Lord Jesus for 
Adam, and consequently for all lost in Adam, it settled the 
matter of restitution completely, and gave me the fullest 
assurance that ALL must come forth from their graves and be 
brought to a clear knowledge of the truth and to a full 
opportunity to gain everlasting life in Christ. 

Thus passed the years 1869-1872. The years following, to 1876, 
were years of continued growth in grace and knowledge on the 
part of the handful of Bible students with whom I met in 
Allegheny. We progressed from our first crude and indefinite 
ideas of restitution to clearer understanding of the details; but 
God's due time for the clear light had not yet come. 

During this time, too, we came to recognize the difference 
between our Lord as "the man who gave himself," and as the 
Lord who would come again, a spirit being. We saw that spirit- 
beings can be present, and yet invisible to men, just as we still 
hold and have set forth in Millennial Dawn Vol. II., Chap. V. 



And we felt greatly grieved at the error of Second Adventists 
who were expecting Christ in the flesh, and teaching that the 
world and all in it except Second Adventists would be burned up 
in 1873 or 1874, whose time-settings and disappointments and 
crude ideas generally of the object and manner of his coming 
brought more or less reproach upon us and upon all who longed 
for and proclaimed his coming Kingdom. 

These wrong views so generally held of both the object and 
manner of the Lord's return led me to write a pamphlet-'T/ie 
Object and Manner of The Lord's Return," of which some 
50,000 copies were published. 

It was about January 1876, that my attention was specially drawn 
to the subject of prophetic time, as it relates to these doctrines 
and hopes. It came about in this way; I received a paper called 
The Herald of the Morning, sent by its editor, Mr. N. H. Barbour. 
When I opened it I at once identified it with Adventism from the 
picture on its Cover, and examined it with some curiosity to see 
what time they would next set for the burning of the world. But 
judge of my surprise and gratification, when I learned from its 
contents that the editor was beginning to get his eyes open on the 
subjects that for some years had so greatly rejoiced our hearts 
here in Allegheny-that the object of our Lord's return is not to 
destroy, but to bless all the families of the earth, and that his 
coming would be thief-like, and not in flesh, but as a spirit- 
being, invisible to men; and that the gathering of his Church and 
the separation of the "wheat" from the "tares" would progress in 
the end of this age without the world's being aware of it. 

I rejoiced to find others coming to the same advanced position, 
but was astonished to find the statement very cautiously set 
forth, that the editor believed the prophecies to indicate that the 
Lord was already present in the world (unseen and invisible), 
and that the harvest work of gathering the wheat was already 
due,-and that this view was warranted by the time-prophecies 
which but a few months before he supposed had failed. 

Here was a new thought: Could it be that the time prophecies 
which I had so long despised, because of their misuse by 
Adventists, were really meant to indicate when the Lord would 
be invisibly present to set up his Kingdom-a thing which I 
clearly saw could be known in no other way? It seemed, to say 
the least, a reasonable, a very reasonable thing, to expect that the 
Lord would inform his people on the subject-especially as he 
had promised that the faithful should not be left in darkness with 
the world, and that though the day of the Lord would come upon 
all others as a thief in the night (stealthily, unawares), it should 
not be so to the watching, earnest saints.-l Thess. 5:4. 



I recalled certain arguments used by my friend Jonas Wendell 
and other Adventists to prove that 1873 would witness the 
burning of the world, etc.-the chronology of the world showing 
that the six thousand years from Adam 

3H145 

ended with the beginning of 1873-and other arguments drawn 
from the Scriptures and supposed to coincide. Could it be that 
these time arguments, which I had passed by as unworthy of 
attention, really contained an important truth which they had 
misapplied? 

Anxious to learn, from any quarter, whatever God had to teach, I 
at once wrote to Mr. Barbour, informing him of my harmony on 
other points and desiring to know particularly why, and upon 
what Scriptural evidences, he held that Christ's presence and the 
harvesting of the Gospel age dated from the Autumn of 1874. 
The Answer—showed that my surmise had been correct, vis: that 
the time arguments, chronology, etc., were the same as used by 
Second Adventists in 1873, and explained how Mr. Barbour and 
Mr. J. H. Paton, of Michigan, a co-worker with him, had been 
regular Second Adventists up to that time; and that when the date 
1874 had passed without the world being burned, and without 
their seeing Christ in the flesh, they were for a time dumb- 
founded. They had examined the time-prophecies that had 
seemingly passed unfulfilled, and had been unable to find any 
flaw, and had begun to wonder whether the time was right and 
their expectations wrong,-whether the views of restitution and 
blessing to the world, which others were teaching, might not be 
the things to look for. It seems that not long after their 1874 
disappointment, a reader of the Herald of the Morning, who had 
a copy of the Diaglott, noticed something in it which he thought 
peculiar, -that in Matt. 24:27, 37, 39, the word which in our 
common version is rendered coming is translated presence. This 
was the clue; and, following it, they had been led through 
prophetic time toward proper views regarding the object and 
manner of the Lord's return. I, on the contrary, was led first to 
proper views of the object and manner of our Lord's return and 
then to the examination of the time for these things, indicated in 
God's Word. Thus God leads his children often from different 
starting points of truth; but where the heart is earnest and 
trustful, the result must be to draw all such together. 

But there were no books or other publications setting forth the 
time-prophecies as then understood, so I paid Mr. Barbour's 
expenses to come to see me at Philadelphia (where I had 
business engagements during the summer of 1 876), to show me 
fully and Scripturally, if he could, that the prophecies indicated 
1874 as the date at which the Lord's presence and "the harvest" 
began. He came, and the evidences satisfied me. Being a person 
of positive convictions and fully consecrated to the Lord, I at 
once saw that the special times in which we live have an 



important bearing upon our duty and work as Christ's disciples; 
that, being in the time of harvest, the harvest-work should be 
done; and that present truth was the sickle by which the Lord 
would have us do a gathering and reaping work everywhere 
among his children. 

I inquired of Mr. Barbour as to what was being done by him and 
by the Herald. He replied that nothing was being done; that the 
readers of the Herald, being disappointed Adventists, had nearly 
all lost interest and stopped their subscriptions; and that thus, 
with money exhausted, the Herald might be said to be practically 
suspended. I told him that instead of feeling discouraged and 
giving up the work since his newly found light on restitution (for 
when we first met, he had much to learn from me on the fullness 
of restitution based upon the sufficiency of the ransom given for 
all, as I had much to learn from him concerning time ), he 
should rather feel that now he had some good tidings to preach, 
such as he never had before, and that his zeal should be 
correspondingly increased. At the same time, the knowledge of 
the fact that we were already in the harvest period gave to me an 
impetus to spread the truth such as I never had before. I therefore 
at once resolved upon a vigorous campaign for the truth. 

I determined to curtail my business cares and give my time as 
well as means to the great harvest work. Accordingly, I sent Mr. 
Barbour back to his home, with money and instructions to 
prepare in concise book-form the good tidings so far as then 
understood, including the time features, while I closed out my 
Philadelphia business preparatory to engaging in the work, as I 
afterward did, traveling and preaching. 

The little book of 196 pages thus prepared was entitled The 
Three Worlds; and while it was not the first book to teach a 
measure of restitution, nor the first to treat upon time-prophecy, 
it was, we believe, the first to combine the idea of restitution 
with time-prophecy. From the sale of this book and from my 
purse, our traveling expenses, etc., were met. After a time I 
conceived the idea of adding another harvest laborer and sent for 
Mr. Paton, who promptly responded and whose traveling 
expenses were met in the same manner. 

But noticing how quickly people seemed to forget what they had 
heard, it soon became evident that while the meetings were 
useful in awakening interest, a monthly journal was needed to 
hold that interest and develop it. It therefore seemed to be the 
Lord's will that one of our number should settle somewhere and 
begin again the regular issuing of the Herald of the Morning. I 
suggested that Mr. Barbour do this, as he had experience as a 
type-setter and could therefore do it most economically, while 
Mr. Paton and I would continue to travel and contribute to its 
columns as we should find opportunity. To the objection that the 
type was now sold, and that the few subscriptions which would 
come in would not, for a long time, make the journal self- 



sustaining, I replied that I would supply the money for 
purchasing type, etc., and leave a few hundred dollars in bank 
subject to Mr. Barbour's check, and that he should manage it as 
economically as possible, while Mr. Paton and I continued to 
travel. This, which seemed to be the Lord's will in the matter, 
was done. 

It was after this, while on a tour of the New England states, that I 
met Mr. A. P. Adams, then a young Methodist minister, who 
became deeply interested and accepted the message heartily 
during the week that I preached to his congregation. 
Subsequently, I introduced him to little gatherings of interested 
ones in neighboring towns, and assisted otherwise, as I could, 
rejoicing in another one who, with study, would soon be a co- 
laborer in the harvest field. About this time, too, I was much 
encouraged by the accession of Mr. A. D. Jones, then a clerk in 
my employ in Pittsburgh-a young man of activity and promise, 
who soon developed into an active and appreciated co-laborer in 
the harvest work, and is remembered by some of our readers. Mr. 
Jones ran well for a time, 

3H146 

but ambition or something eventually worked utter shipwreck of 
his faith, and left us a painful illustration of the wisdom of the 
Apostle's words: "My brethren, be not many of you teachers, 
knowing that we shall have the severer judgment"-Jas. 3:1.- 
Diaglott. 

SIFTING THE WHEAT 

"Satan hath desired to have you, that he might sift you as 
wheat. "-Luke 22:31. 

Thus far all had run smoothly and onward: we had been greatly 
blessed with truth, but not specially tested in our love and 
fidelity to it. But with the Summer of 1878, the parallel in time 
to the Lord's crucifixion and his utterance of the above quoted 
words, the sifting began, which has continued ever since, and 
which must, sooner or later, test every one who receives the light 
of present truth. "Marvel not, therefore, concerning the fiery trial 
which shall try you, as though some strange thing happened unto 
you;" for this "fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it 
is"-whether he has built his faith flimsily of wood, hay and 
stubble, instead of with the valuable stones of God's revealed 
truth, or whether he has built it upon the shifting sands of human 
theory-evolution, etc., -or upon the solid rock, the ransom, the 
only sure foundation, which God has provided. They who build 
upon the rock shall be safe personally, even though they may 
have built up an illogical faith which the "fire" and shaking of 
this day of trial shall overthrow and utterly consume; but they 
who build upon any other foundation, whether they use good or 
bad materials, are sure of complete wreck.-Luke 6:47-49; 1 Cor. 
3:11-15. 



The object of this trial and sifting evidently is to select all whose 
heart-desires are unselfish, who are fully and unreservedly 
consecrated to the Lord, who are so anxious to have the Lord's 
will done, and whose confidence in his wisdom, his way and his 
Word is so great, that they refuse to be led away from the Lord's 
Word, either by the sophistries of others, or by plans and ideas of 
their own. These, in the sifting time, will be strengthened and 
shall increase their joy in the Lord and their knowledge of his 
plans, even while their faith is being tested by the falling into 
error of thousands on every hand.-Psa. 91:7. 

The sifting began thus: Regarding Paul's statement (1 Cor. 
15:51, 52), "We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed- 
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye," etc., we still held the 
idea which Adventists, and indeed all Christians hold, that at 
some time the living saints would be suddenly and miraculously 
caught away bodily, thenceforth to be forever with the Lord. 
And, now, our acquaintance with time-prophecy led us to expect 
this translation of the saints at the point of time in this age 
parallel to the Lord's resurrection; for many of the parallelisms 
between the Jewish and Christian dispensations were already 
seen by us, and formed one of the features of the little book 
above referred to-The Three Worlds. 

We did not then see, as we now do, *that that date (1878) 
marked the time for the beginning of the establishment of the 
Kingdom of God, by the glorification of all who already slept in 
Christ, and that the "change" which Paul mentions (1 Cor. 15:51) 
is to occur in the moment of dying, to all the class described, 
from that date onward through the harvest period, until all the 
living members ("the feet") of the body of Christ shall have been 
changed to glorious spirit beings. But when at that date nothing 
occurred which we could see, a reexamination of the matter 
showed me that our mistake lay in expecting to see all the living 
saints changed at once, and without dying-an erroneous view 
shared in by the whole nominal church, and one which we had 
not yet observed or discarded. Our present clear view as the 
result of the examination thus started. I soon saw that in the 
Apostle's words, "We shall not all sleep, " the word sleep was 
not synonymous with die, though generally so understood; that, 
on the contrary, the expression sleep, here used, represents 
unconsciousness; and that the Apostle wished us to understand 
that from a certain time in the Lord's presence, his saints, 
though they would all die like other men (Psa. 82:6, 7), would 
not remain for any time unconscious, but in the moment of dying 
would be changed and would receive the spirit body promised. 
Throughout this Gospel age, dying has been followed by 
unconsciousness, "sleep." This continued true of all saints who 
"fell asleep in Jesus" up to the time when he took the office of 
King (Rev. 11:17), which we have shown* was in 1878. 



*See Millennial Dawn, Vol. Ill, chapter 7. *Millennial Dawn, 
Vol. II, pages 218, 219. 

Not only did the King at that date "awaken in his likeness" all 
the members of his body, the Church, who slept, but for the 
same reason (the time for establishing his Kingdom having 
come) it is no longer necessary that the "feet" or last remaining 
members should go into "sleep" or unconsciousness. On the 
contrary, each now, as he finishes his course, faithful unto death, 
will at once receive the crown of life, and, being changed in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, cannot be said to sleep, or to 
be unconscious at all. Here-1878-Rev. 14:13, is applicable, 
"Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth. " 

So this re-examination showed further light upon the pathway 
and became a good cause for encouragement, as evidencing the 
Lord's continued leading. 

But while I was thus helped to clearer views and brighter hopes, 
and while I diligently endeavored to help others, the Spring of 
1878 proved far from a blessing to Mr. Barbour and to many 
under his influence. Rejecting the plain, simple solution 
presented above, Mr. B. seemed to feel that he must of necessity 
get up something new to divert attention from the failure of the 
living saints to be caught away. 

But, alas! how dangerous it is for any man to feel too much 
responsibility and to attempt to force new light. To our painful 
surprise, Mr. Barbour soon after wrote an article for the Herald 
denying the doctrine of the atonement-denying that the death of 
Christ was the ransom-price of Adam and his race, saying that 
Christ's death was no more a settlement of the penalty of man's 
sins than would the sticking of a pin through the body of a fly 
and causing it suffering and death be considered by an earthly 
parent as a just settlement for misdemeanor in his child. I was 
astonished, supposing that Mr. B. had a clearer understanding of 
the work of Christ as our sin-offering, our willing Redeemer who 
gladly, co-operating in the divine plan, gave himself as the 
ransom or corresponding price to meet the penalty upon Adam, 
that Adam and all his posterity 

3H147 

might in due time go free from sin and death. A totally different 
thing indeed was the willing, intelligent, loving offering of our 
Redeemer, according to the plan devised and revealed by infinite 
wisdom, from the miserable caricature of it offered in the above 
illustration. I had either given Mr. B. credit for clearer views 
than he ever had, or else he was deliberately taking off and 
casting away the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness. The 
latter was the only conclusion left; for he afterward stated that he 
had previously recognized Christ's death as man's ransom-price. 



Immediately I wrote an article for the Herald in contradiction of 
the error, showing the necessity "that one die for all"-"the just 
for the unjust;" that Christ fulfilled all this as it had been written; 
and that consequently God could be just and forgive and release 
the sinner from the very penalty he had justly imposed. (Rom. 
3:26) I also wrote to Mr. Paton, calling his attention to the 
fundamental character of the doctrine assailed, and pointing out 
how the time and circumstances all corresponded with the 
parable of the one who took off the wedding garment when just 
about to partake of the wedding feast. (Matt. 22:11-14.) He 
replied that he had not seen it in so strong a light before, that Mr. 
Barbour had a strong, dogmatic way of putting things which had 
for the time overbalanced him. I urged that, seeing now the 
importance of the doctrine, he also write an article for the 
Herald, which, in no uncertain tone, would give his witness 
also for the precious blood of Christ. This he did. These articles 
appeared in the issues of the Herald from July to December, 
1878. 

It now became clear to me that the Lord would no longer have 
me assist financially, or to be in any way identified with, 
anything which cast any influence in opposition to the 
fundamental principle of our holy Christian religion; and I 
therefore, after a most careful though unavailing effort to reclaim 
the erring, withdrew entirely from the Herald of the Morning and 
from further fellowship with Mr. B. But a mere withdrawal I felt 
was not sufficient to show my continued loyalty to our Lord and 
Redeemer, whose cause had thus been violently assailed by one 
in position to lead the sheep astray-and in that position, too, very 
largely by my individual assistance and encouragement when I 
believed him to be, in all sincerity, true to the Lord. I therefore 
understood it to be the Lord's will that I should start another 
journal in which the standard of the cross should be lifted high, 
the doctrine of the ransom defended, and the good tidings of 
great joy proclaimed as extensively as possible. 

Acting upon the leading of the Lord, I gave up traveling, and in 
July, 1879, the first number of Zion's Watch Tower and Herald 
of Christ's Presence made its appearance. From the first, it has 
been a special advocate of the ransom, and by the grace of God 
we hope it will ever be. 

For a time we had a most painful experience: the readers of the 
TOWER and of the Herald were the same; and from the time the 
former started and the supply of funds from this quarter for the 
Herald ceased, Mr. B. not only drew from the bank the money 
deposited by me and treated all he had in his possession as his 
own, but poured upon the Editor of the Tower the vilest of 
personal abuse in order to prevent the Tower and the doctrine of 
the ransom from having due influence upon the readers. This of 
course caused a division, as such thing always do. The personal 
abuse, being regarded by some as true, had its intended effect of 



biasing the judgments of many on the subject of the ransom; and 
many turned from us. 

But the Lord continued his favor, which I esteem of more value 
than the favor of the whole world. It was at this time that Mr. 
Adams espoused the views of Mr. Barbour and likewise forsook 
the doctrine of the ransom. And, true to our interpretation of the 
parable of the wedding garment as given at the time, Mr. 
Barbour and Mr. Adams having cast off the wedding garment of 
Christ's righteousness, went out of the light into the outer 
darkness of the world on the subjects once so clearly seen- 
namely, the time and manner of the Lord's presence; and since 
then, for twelve years, they have been expecting Christ, Spring 
or Fall, down to the Spring of 1892, which was their latest 
disappointment, so far as we have heard. 

During the ordeal, or we might truly call it battle, for the cross of 
Christ, we had the earnest co-operation of Mr. Paton, who, up to 
the summer of 1881, was an appreciated co-laborer and defender 
of the doctrine of coming blessings through Christ, based upon 
the ransom for all given at Calvary. The book, The Three 
Worlds, having been for some time out of print, it seemed as if 
either another edition of that, or else a new book covering the 
same features, should be gotten out. Mr. Paton agreed to get it 
ready for the press, and Mr. Jones offered to pay all the expenses 
incident to its printing and binding and to give Mr. Paton as 
many copies of the book as he could sell, as remuneration for his 
time spent in preparing the matter, *provided I would agree to 
advertise it liberally and gratuitously in the TOWER-well 
knowing that there would be a demand for it if I should 
recommend it, and that his outlay would be sure to return with 
profit. (For those books did not sell at such low prices as we 
charge for MILLENNIAL DAWN.) I not only agreed to this, but 
contributed to Mr. Paton' s personal expenses in connection with 
the publishing, as well as paid part of the printer's bill at his 
solicitation. 

In the end, I alone was at any financial loss in connection with 
that book, called Day Dawn, the writer and publisher both 
being gainers financially, while I did all the introducing by 
repeated advertisements. We need to give these particulars, 
because of certain one-sided and only partial statements of facts 
and misrepresentations, which have recently been published and 
circulated in tract form by Mr. Paton, who is also now an 
advocate of that "other gospel" of which the cross of Christ is 
not the center, and which denies that he "bought us with his own 
precious blood." Mr. P. has since published another book, which, 
though called by the same name as the one we introduced, being 
on another and a false foundation, I cannot and do not 
recommend, but which I esteem misleading sophistry, tending to 
undermine the whole structure of the Christian system, yet 
retaining a sufficiency of the truths which we once held in 



common to make it palatable and dangerous to all not rooted and 
grounded upon the ransom rock. 

The false foundation which it presents is the old heathen doctrine 
of evolution revamped, which not only denies the fall of man, 
but as a consequence, all necessity for a redeemer. It claims, on 
the contrary that not by redemption and restitution to a lost 
estate, but by progressive evolution or 

3H148 

development, man has risen and is still to rise from the lower 
condition in which he was created until, by his own good works, 
he ultimately reaches the divine nature. It claims that our blessed 
Lord was himself a degraded and imperfect man, whose work on 
earth was to crucify a carnal nature, which, it claims, he 
possessed, and to thus show all men how to crucify their carnal 
or sinful propensities. 

*For this reason Mr. Jones' address, was, properly, the only one 
mentioned in our advertisement of it. 

'''Millennial Dawn, Vol. 1, page 162. 

And here we remark that the darkness and degradation which 
came upon the whole world in its fallen, cast-off condition, and 
which was only intensified by Papacy's priestcraft during the 
dark ages, when contrasted with the light of intelligence, which 
God is now letting in upon the world, have gradually led men to 
esteem present intelligence as merely a part of a process of 
evolution. This view, as we have shown, *though quite incorrect, 
is nevertheless the occasion of the predicted great falling away 
from the faith of the Bible during the harvest period. (Psa. 91:7.) 
And a few Christian people seem to be well enough grounded in 
the truth to be able to withstand this trial of the evil day, in 
which many will fall while only the few will stand. For this 
cause we use great plainness of speech. 

The little history of the way in which Mr. Paton came to turn 
from us and from the ransom, to oppose that which he once 
clearly saw and advocated, is important, as it became the 
occasion of another sifting or testing of the Watch Tower 
readers, by that time a much larger number (because Mr. Paton 
had been a respected brother and co-workers with us, and 
because as a traveling representative of the TOWER and its 
doctrines, his expenses being met in part by TOWER 
subscriptions and renewals, as well as by money from me, he 
was personally known to a larger number of the readers than 
was the editor of the Tower). It came about thus:- 

In the year 1881, Mr. Barbour, still publishing the Herald, and 
still endeavoring to overthrow the doctrine of the ransom, 
finding that on a preaching tour I had used a diagram of the 
Tabernacle to illustrate how Christ's sacrifice was typified in the 
sacrifices of typical Israel, wrote an article on the Atonement, in 



which he undertook to show that the sacrifices of the Day of 
Atonement typified almost anything else than what they do 
typify. I could readily see through the fallacy of his presentation, 
which made of the bullock a type of one thing in one verse and 
another thing in each other verse in which it was mentioned, and 
so too with the goat. But I well knew that people in general are 
not close reasoners, and that, with the cares of life upon them, 
they are too apt to accept a seeming interpretation, without a 
critical examination of the words of Scripture and their context. 

I thought the matter all over. I examined the chapter (Lev. 16), 
but while seeing the inconsistency and error of Mr. Barbour's 
interpretation, I could only confess that I did not understand it 
and could not give a connected interpretation which would fit all 
the details so plainly stated, and all of which must have a 
particular meaning. What could I do? Those reading the Herald 
as well as the TOWER would probably be misled if not helped 
out of the difficulty; and to merely say that the Herald's 
interpretation was inconsistent with itself, and therefore a 
misinterpretation, would be misunderstood. Many would surely 
think that I opposed that view from a spirit of rivalry; for there 
are always people with whom everything resolves itself into 
personality, rivalry and party spirit, and such cannot understand 
others who take a higher and nobler view and who think always 
and only of the truth, regardless of persons. 

I went to the Lord with this as with every trial, told him just how 
it seemed to me, how anxious I felt for the dear sheep, who, 
having their appetites sharpened by some truth, were by their 
very hunger exposed to Satan's deceptions. I told him that I 
realized that he was the Shepherd, and not I, but that I knew also 
that he would be pleased at my interest in the sheep and my 
desire to be his mouthpiece to declare the truth, the way and the 
life to them; that I felt deeply impressed that if the time had 
come for the permission of a false view to deceive the unworthy, 
it must also be his due time to have the truth on the same subject 
made clear, that the worthy ones might be enabled to stand, and 
not fall from the truth. Believing that the due time had come for 
the correct understanding of the meaning of the Jewish 
sacrifices, which all Christians see were typical of "better 
sacrifices," and that the Lord would grant the insight as soon as I 
got into the attitude of heart best fitted to receive the light, I 
prayed with confidence that if the Lord's due time had come, and 
if he were willing to use me as his instrument to declare the 
message to his dear family, that I might be enabled to rid my 
heart and mind of any prejudice that might stand in the way and 
be led of his spirit into the proper understanding. 

Believing that the prayer would be answered affirmatively, I 
went into my study next morning prepared to study and write. 
The forenoon I spent in scrutinizing the text and every other 
Scripture, likely to shed light upon it, especially the epistle to the 



Hebrews, and in looking to the Lord for wisdom and guidance; 
but no solution of the difficult passage came. The afternoon and 
evening were similarly spent, and all of the next day. Everything 
else was neglected, and I wondered why the Lord kept me so 
long; but on the third day near noon the whole matter came to 
me as clear as the noon-day sun-so clear and convincing and so 
harmonious with the whole tenor of Scripture, that I could not 
question its correctness; and no one has ever yet been able to 
find a flaw in it. (This has been published in several editions in 
pamphlet form under the title, "The Tabernacle Shadows Of The 
Better Sacrifices," and can still be had by addressing the Watch 
Tower office.) 

Then I knew why the Lord had led me to it so slowly and 
cautiously. I needed a special preparation of heart for the full 
appreciation of all it contained, and I was all the more assured 
that it was not of my own wisdom; for if of my own why would 
it not have come at once? I found that the understanding of that 
subject was bound to have a wide influence upon all our hopes 
and views of all truths-not in that it overturned old truths or 
contradicted them, but, on the contrary, in that it set them all in 
order and harmony and straightened out little knots and twists. 
For instance, the doctrine of justification by Faith had always 
been more or less confused in my mind, as it is in every mind, 
with the doctrine of sanctification which calls for self-sacrifice 

3H149 

and works. This was all made clear and plain at once; for the 
types showed that we all, as sinners, needed first of all Christ's 
ransom sacrifice, that we appropriate its merits (justification- 
forgiveness) to ourselves by faith, and that thus we are justified 
(reckoned free from sin) when we by faith accept of Christ's 
sacrifice on our behalf. The type showed, too, that it is only after 
being thus cleansed in God's sight (by our acceptance of Christ's 
finished work as our ransom-sacrifice) that God is willing to 
accept us as joint sacrifices with Christ, and that if faithful to the 
end, following in his footsteps, we should be granted the favor of 
joint-heirship with him. 

Here I first saw that the great privilege of becoming joint-heirs 
with Christ and partakers with him of the divine nature was 
confined exclusively to those who would share with him in self- 
sacrifice in the service of the truth. And here, too, I saw for the 
first time that the Lord was the first of these sacrifices, the Sin- 
Offering; consequently, that none of God's servants, the 
prophets, who lived and died before Christ, were priests after his 
order, nor sharers in sacrifice with him, even though some of 
them were stoned, others sawn asunder and others slain with the 
sword, for the cause of God; that though they would get a good 
and great reward, they would belong to a separate class and order 
from those called to sacrifice and joint-heirship with Christ on 
and since Pentecost. Here, too, I first saw that the acceptable 



day of the Lord signifies this Gospel Age-the time during which 
he will accept the sacrifice of any who come unto God through 
Christ, the great Sin-Offering; that when this acceptable day 
ends, the reward of joint-heirship and change to the divine nature 
ends; and that when this great day of sacrifice, the Gospel age 
(the real day of Atonement), has closed, when all the members of 
the body of Christ have participated with him in the sacrifice of 
their rights as justified men, and been glorified, then the blessing 
will begin to come to the world-the Millennial blessings 
purchased for men by their Redeemer, according to the grace of 
God. 

This first brought us to a clear recognition of the distinction of 
natures-of what constitutes human nature, what constitutes 
angelic nature and what constitutes divine nature, as shown in 
Millennial Dawn, Vol. I, Chapter X. And whereas we formerly 
used the word Restitution in a general way to mean some sort of 
blessed change, now, under a clearer light, we began to see that 
the great work of restitution could only mean what the word 
implies-a restoration of that which was lost (Matt. 18: 1 1)— a 
restoration to the original condition from which man once fell. 
Then I saw that God's plan, when carried out, would not bring 
all his creatures to the one level of the divine nature, but that he 
purposed to have an order of creatures called Angels, who, 
though perfect, would always be of a different order, or nature, 
from the divine nature, and he likewise purposed to have a race 
of beings of the human nature, of whom Adam was a sample or 
pattern and whose future earthly home, Paradise, Eden was a 
sample or pattern. I also saw that God purposed that Christ and 
his joint-sacrificers and joint-heirs are to be God's instruments 
for blessing the fallen race and restoring them to the condition of 
perfection enjoyed by Adam in Eden-a condition which God 
said was "very good," and an image of himself. And these joint- 
heirs with Christ, I saw, were to be highly exalted to a nature 
higher than restored and perfect manhood, higher, too, than the 
angelic nature-even to be partakers of the divine nature. When 
all these things so unexpectedly shone out so brightly and 
clearly, I did not wonder that the Lord gave me several days of 
waiting and preparation for the blessing, and to him I rendered 
praise and thanks. All my faintness of heart and fear of the bad 
effect of the wrong view fled before this evidence of the Lord's 
leading in the pathway that "shines more and more unto the 
perfect day." I saw at once that these new developments would 
probably prove a stumbling block to some, as well as a great 
blessing to others who were ready for it. Instead, therefore, of 
publishing it in the next TOWER, I determined to first present 
the matter privately to the more prominent brethren;- 
remembering Paul's course in a similar matter-Gal. 2:2. 

Accordingly I sent invitations and the money necessary for 
traveling expenses to four of the more prominent brethren, 
requesting a conference. Mr. Paton from Michigan was one of 



the four, and the only one who rejected the fresh rays of light. 
Nor could he find any fault with the exegesis, though urged, as 
all were to state anything which might seem inconsistent, or to 
quote any passages of Scripture thought to be in conflict. But 
there were none; and every question only demonstrated more 
fully the strength of the position. I therefore urged that what was 
beyond the criticism of those most familiar with the plan of God 
must be the truth, and ought to be confessed and taught at any 
cost, and especially when it arranged and ordered all the other 
features of truth so beautifully. I pointed out, too, how necessary 
it was to a logical holding of the ransom, to see just what this 
showed; viz.: the distinctions of nature-that our Lord left a 
higher nature, and took a lower nature, when he was made flesh, 
and that the object in that change of nature was, that he might, as 
a man, a perfect man, give himself a ransom for the first perfect 
man, Adam, and thus redeem Adam, and all lost in him. I also 
showed how, as a reward for this great work, he was given the 
divine nature in his resurrect! on-a nature still higher than the 
glorious one he had left, when he became a man. But either Mr. 
Paton's mental vision or heart was weak; for he never took the 
step; and before long he, too, forsook the doctrine of the ransom. 
Yet he still used the word "ransom," while denying the idea 
conveyed by the word; nor can he give the word any other 
definition, or otherwise dispute the correctness of the meaning 
which we attach to it-which may be found in any English 
dictionary and is true to the significance of the Greek word 
which it translates. 

Notwithstanding our best endeavors to save him he drifted 
farther and farther away, until I was obliged to refuse his articles 
for the Tower for the same reason that obliged me to refuse to 
longer spend the Lord's money entrusted to me to assist Mr. 
Barbour to spread the same pernicious theory. 

It was about this time that Mr. Jones informed me that the copies 
of the book Day Dawn which I had purchased last were all that 
were left; and, announcing it so that no more orders for it might 
come to the TOWER office, I took occasion to promise 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, which 

3H150 

should present the Plan of the Ages in the clearer more orderly 
manner made possible by the new light shed upon every feature 
of it by the lessons from the Tabernacle. About this time Mr. 
Paton concluded that he would publish another book under the 
name Day Dawn, revised to harmonize with his changed views, 
which ignored the ransom, ignored justification and the need of 
either, and taught all men will be everlastingly saved-not in any 
sense as the result of any sacrifice for their sin by Christ, but as 
the result of each one's crucifying sin in himself-the law under 
which the poor Jew tried to commend themselves to God, but 
which justified none. Many and severe were the calumnies 



heaped upon me, because I exposed this change, told that the 
original was out of print and that the new book was on a 
different foundation from the one I commended. 

During this time I was busied by an immense work known to 
many of you-the issue and circulation of over 1,400,000 copies 
of two pamphlets, entitled FOOD FOR THINKING 
CHRISTIANS and TABERNACLE TEACHINGS, whose united 
matter was about the same as that of Dawn, Vol. 1; and besides 
this I was flooded with thousands of joyous and joy-giving 
letters, from those who had received and were reading the 
pamphlets thus distributed, and asking questions and more 
reading matter. To add to our throng, financial complications 
came; and thus for four years I was hindered from fulfilling my 
promise of Millennial Dawn. Nor will our promise of the 
complete set be fulfilled for some time yet; for though three 
volumes are now out and a fourth on the way, I purpose several 
more, as the Lord shall give grace and strength, in connection 
with the other features of his work entrusted to my care. But 
during those four years we were struggling through an immense 
amount of labor and many draw-backs (all cheerfully 
undergone for the sake of the Lord and his saints), and each year 
we hoped afresh to be able to gather the hours necessary to 
complete the first volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN. And the 
same great Adversary of the truth still hinders each volume-the 
fourth volume being now retarded by these latest agencies of 
Satan-the conspirators. 

Some who have The Three Worlds or the old edition of Day 
Dawn would perhaps like to know my present opinion of them- 
whether I still think them profitable books to loan to truth- 
seekers. To this I reply, Certainly not; because the very immature 
views of God's truth therein presented fall far short of what we 
now see to be God's wonderful plan. Things which are now clear 
as noonday were then cloudy and mixed. The distinctions 
between the perfect human nature to which the obedient of the 
world will be restored during the Millennium, and the divine 
nature to which the little flock, the sacrificing elect of the Gospel 
age, are soon to be exalted, were then unnoticed. All now so 
clear was then blurred, mixed and indistinct. Neither had we then 
seen the steps or planes, shown upon the Chart of the Ages, 
Millennial Dawn, Vol. I, which have assisted so many to 
distinguish between justification and sanctification, and to 
determine their present standing and relationship to God. 

And the time reckonings which those books present, lacking 
point and leaving the reader in doubt as to what the author is 
attempting to prove by them, tend only to confuse the mind and 
to give the impression that time prophecies are merely clues and 
serve no definite purpose or object. Hence, I Answer— most 
decidedly, I would not recommend nor use either of those books 
to-day. Once I was much less careful about what I circulated or 



commended, but I am learning every day to be more careful as to 
what sort of food I put before any of the Lord's hungry sheep. 
The Lord has taught me that it is a responsible matter to be a 
teacher, even to the extent of circulating a book or a paper. Even 
Food for Thinking Christians (now also out of print), I no longer 
commend because it is less systematic and therefore less clear 
than later publications. 

Another chapter in our experience needs to be told, as it marks 
another shaking and sifting. Mr. A. D. Jones proposed to start a 
paper on the same line as the WATCH TOWER, to republish 
some of the simpler features of God's plan and to be a sort of 
missionary and primary teacher. Knowing him to be clear on the 
subject of the ransom, I bade him God speed and introduced a 
sample copy of his paper, Zion's Day Star (now for some years 
discontinued), to our nearly ten thousand readers-only, as it soon 
proved, to stumble some of them into rank infidelity and others 
into the rejection of the ransom; for though the Day Star for a 
few months steered a straight course and maintained the same 
position as the Tower with reference to the ransom, and for the 
same reason refused the no-ransom articles sent for its columns 
by Mr. Paton, yet within one year it had repudiated Christ's 
atoning sacrifice, and within another year it had gone boldly into 
infidelity and totally repudiated all the rest of the Bible as well as 
those portions which teach the fall in Adam and the ransom 
therefrom in Christ. 

All this meant another strain, another sifting, another cutting 
loose of friends, who erroneously supposed that our criticisms of 
the false doctrines were prompted by a spirit of rivalry, and who 
did not so soon see whither his teachings were drifting, nor how 
great the importance of holding fast the first principles of the 
doctrines of Christ-how Christ died for our sins and rose again 
for our justification. 

This brings the history down close enough perhaps to the present 
time; but we want to put you all on notice that the shaking and 
sifting process, so far from being over and past, is bound to 
progress more and more until all have been tried and tested 
thoroughly. It is not a question of who may fall,but of "Who 
shall be able to stand?" as the apostle puts it. And we have need 
again to remember the admonition, "Let him who thinketh he 
standeth (who feels very confident, as did Peter when he said 
v Lord, though all deny thee, yet will not I') take heed lest he 
fall." 

This doctrine of another way of salvation (and salvation for all, 
too) than by the cross of Christ, is not only the error which is, 
and has been since 1874, sifting all who come into the light of 
present truth, but it is the trial that is to come upon the whole of 
so-called Christendom to try them. (Rev. 3:10.) It is already 
spreading among all classes of Christian people, especially 
among ministers of all denominations. The number who believe 



that Christ's death paid our sin-penalty is daily getting smaller, 
and before very long 

3H151 

there will be a regular stampede from the doctrine of man's fall 
in Adam and his ransom from that fall by "the man Christ 
Jesus." (1 Tim. 2:5,6.) As the Psalmist prophetically pictured it, 
a thousand will fall to one who will stand.-Psa. 91:7. 

The time has come for each one to declare himself boldly. He 
who is not for the cross and the ransom there effected is against 
it! He that gathereth not scattereth abroad! He who is silent on 
this subject, when it is being assailed by foes on every hand, 
whether it be the silence of fear, or of shame, or of indifference, 
is not worthy of the truth, and will surely be one to stumble 
quickly. He who from any cause sits idly by, while the banner of 
the cross is assailed, is not a soldier of the cross worthy of the 
name, and will not be reckoned among the over-comers who 
shall inherit all things. And God is permitting these very siftings, 
in order to sift out all who are not "over-comers," and to test and 
manifest the little flock, who, like Gideon's final army, will, 
though few, share the victory and honors of their Captain in 
glory. 

Are you prepared for the issue, dear brethren and sisters? The 
armor of truth has been given you for some time past; have you 
put it on? have you made it your shield and buckler? your 
defense against all the wily arts of the evil one? 

Do not be deceived by the agents he often makes use of. In this 
he will be as cunning as in his presentation of the deceptive 
misrepresentations of truth, making unwitting use of many a 
weaker brother, and to some extent of every stumbling and 
deceived one, to spread farther the infection of false doctrine. 
And while every child of God should take earnest heed, that he 
prove not an occasion of stumbling to any, we cannot doubt that 
every one, through some instrumentality, will be assailed. 

Aptly indeed did the Prophet liken it to a pestilence. (Psa. 91:6.) 
A pestilence spreads because people are in a physical condition 
which renders them susceptible to disease. Physicians say that 
those whose systems are in good, healthy order are in little 
danger of any disease. So it is with a spiritual pestilence: it will 
flourish not only because all will be exposed to it who have not a 
clear intellectual appreciation of the doctrines of Christ, but from 
another cause also. Out of the heart are the issues of life, and 
most needful of all to be in right condition is the heart. How is 
your heart? is it proud, boastful, independent, self-conscious and 
self-willed? If so, take care; you will be very liable to this 
epidemic, no matter how far from it you may seem to be. Pray 
for 



"A heart resigned, submissive, meek, 
The dear Redeemer's throne, 
Wire re only Christ is heard to speak, 
Where Jesus reigns alone. " 

With such a heart you are safe. In meekness and lowliness, you 
will never think of redeeming yourself from the condemnation 
that you inherited through Adam, by sacrificing present sinful 
desires, but you will flee to the cross, where God himself opened 
the fountain for sin and uncleanness, present as well as past. 

DOTH THIS OFFEND YOU 

We presume that it will offend some, though it is not designed to 
offend any. It is written for the defense of the meek against the 
sophistries of error. "Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord 
(into the Kingdom offered)? or who shall stand in his holy place? 
He that hath clean hands and a pure heart (who is diligently 
fashioning his life after the principles of holiness); who hath not 
lifted up his soul unto vanity (who cultivates no earthly 
ambitions or pride, but patiently waits for the glory to follow the 
course of present self-sacrifice), nor sworn deceitfully (ignoring 
or despising his covenant with God): He shall receive the 
blessing of the Lord (the Kingdom glory and joint-heirship with 
Christ), and righteousness (perfection-full deliverance from 
present infirmities, etc.) from the God of his salvation." (Psa. 
24:3-5.) "Seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall 
be hid in the day of the Lord's anger (in this "evil day'-this day 
of snares and pitfalls and flying arrows and destructive 
pestilences)." "Watch and pray, that ye enter not into 
temptation"-that "your minds be not corrupted from the 
simplicity that is in Christ." Let all the meek fully awake to the 
trial of the hour; and while many are putting stumbling blocks in 
the way of the "feet" of the body of Christ, let each soldier of the 
cross be vigilant, not only to stand, but to assist others-bearing 
up the "feet." -Psa. 91:11,12 

A CONCLUDING WORD 

It is proper here to state that in the article foregoing, A 
Conspiracy Exposed, we used the term "brother" with reference 
to the conspirators in deference to our readers. We have not 
recognized these men as "brethren" since we discovered their 
deeply laid and murderous plan for the assassination of my 
character. But we could not expect our readers to cut them off 
from fellowship until they too had seen the evidence of their 
terrible fall. 

While ready and anxious to forgive and, so far as possible, forget 
their great sin if repented of, I have little hope that any of them 
will repent. If it were a blunder of the head, we might have hope; 
but it seems like a disease of the heart, which has been 
developing for years. 



Their reaping will correspond to their sowing. The fruitage of 
their malice, envy and misrepresentation will surely be a 
whirlwind of evil, which will damage others as well as 
themselves. 

What can be expected from such men, actuated by such a spirit? 
Grapes cannot be gathered from thorn-bushes. The Voice of the 
Reaper may indeed "gather out of his Kingdom the things 

which offend and them that do iniquity;" but the Voice of the 
Good Shepherd will lead the true sheep,-a stranger they will not 
follow. "The Lord knoweth them that are his," and no man can 
pluck them out of his hand;-they "shall never fall. "-John 10:28; 
2 Tim. 2:17-21; 2 Pet. 1:5-11. 

3H152 

Tower Publishing Co., Allegheny, Pa. 

THREE DISCOURSES 

EXPLANATORY OF 

THE CHART OF THE AGES 

Dear Friends, we are met together as a company of the Lord's 
people-all interested, we trust, in God's great Plan of Salvation- 
THE PLAN OF THE AGES. From the fact of our presence here 
we assume that all accept the Bible as God's Word. We will 
consider now such portions of the Word as outline the DIVINE 
PLAN OF THE AGES. Our talk on the Plan of God will be 
illustrated by this Chart. The Chart is designed as an aid to the 
mind through the eye in grasping the subjects to be presented. 

We believe in the old theology of the Lord and the Apostles and 
Prophets. We have no new thing to present to you-no plan or 
theory of our own; and we do not wish you to receive anything 
that the speaker says simply because he has said it,but because 
he has shown it to you in the Word of the Lord. Much that we 
have to say we trust you will recognize as old and familiar truths, 
while some things will be recognized as truths forgotten or 
overlooked or never noticed heretofore; but we believe that all 
will be ready to accept without equivocation whatever shall be 
shown from the Scriptures to be the Word of the Lord-whatever 
has been "written for our learning," as the Apostle suggests.- 
Rom. 15:4 

It is in order that we may be "thoroughly furnished" that we are 
told to "search the Scriptures" (John 5:39); and if we wish to be 
wise toward God, we must come as learners and receive the 
instruction which God gives us in His Word, which is "able to 
make us wise unto salvation," with the "Wisdom that cometh 
down from Above." (2 Tim. 3:15; James 3:17,18.) We want to 
put on the "whole Armor of God."-Eph. 6: 1 1 



page 130 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



page 130 

YOUR LETTER RECEIVED,-THANKS! 



Please accept our thanks for your hundreds 
of letters received recently, and know of our 
hearty appreciation of your sympathy and confidence. 
The fact that you were slow to believe 
an evil report, and that you waited 
patiently for our reply, speaks well for your 
spiritual condition;— "thinketh no evil," being 
one of the fruits of the spirit of Christ, just 
as "evil surmisings" evidence a carnal mind. 
Cultivate in yourselves more and more the 
spirit of the truth you enjoy. So your hearts 
will be in that healthy condition which neither 
breeds a spiritual pestilence, nor is susceptible 
to its contagion from others. 

Our thoughts were more with you than for 
ourselves, we feared for the younger and the 



weaker ones, and prayed for you all,— that 
your faith fail not, and that you cast not away 
your confidence which hath great recompense 
of reward. The letters referred to came as 
answers to our prayers, as assurances that the 
Lord knoweth them that are his and that none 
are able to pluck them out of his hand. Sister 
Tucker's letter came first, and was specially 
acknowledged at the throne of grace. This 
trial by which the great Adversary sought to 
disrupt the Lord's work and scatter the Lord's 
sheep is really drawing the true hearts nearer 
to each other and to the Lord. We realize 
afresh that all things are working together for 
good to them that love God, the called ones 
according to his purpose. The Lord will not 
forget this, your ministry of love toward us. 
(See Heb. 6: 10; 10:32-39.) Even a cup of 
cold water given in the name of a disciple will 
in due time receive a reward from the King. 
Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the least of 
his disciples, ye did it unto him. 

Please accept this as a reply to your kind 
letters, as we are just now pressed with work, 
cannot conveniently answer each personally. 

WALL CHARTS FIVE FEET LONG. 

We contracted with a first-class painter, 
during his dull season last winter, for one hundred 
copies of The Chart of the Ages on cloth, 
five feet long, mounted on a spring roller, 
suitable for little parlor gatherings. These 
would ordinarily cost about $5.00 each, for the 
painting alone, but by reason of the quantity, 
etc.,— we are enabled to offer them to you at 
$ 1 .50 each, delivered, at your nearest Express 
office. 



Please remember that Canadian and all 
other Foreign stamps are useless to us. 



R1647:page 131 

VOL. XV. MAY 1 & 15, 1894. NOS. 9 & 10. 

THE SHEPHERD AND THE SHEEP. 



"And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth 
before them, and the sheep follow him; for they 



know his voice. And a stranger will 
they not follow, but will flee from him; 
for they know not the voice of 
strangers."— John 10:4,5. 

IN the days of our Lord's first advent, as today, 
there were many widely recognized 
leaders and teachers; and various systems of 
human philosophy claimed the attention of 
thinking men. Among the Jews much uninspired 
teaching was added to the sacred literature 
of the Law and the Prophets, while the 
neighboring Greeks were diligently dealing in 
philosophic speculation and ever seeking something 
new. And now the long expected, but 
generally unrecognized, Messiah of Israel was 
about to introduce a new system of teaching, 
the philosophy and the ethics of a new dispensation 
of divine providence and grace, the 
outgrowth and the antitype of Judaism. 

But the changes were to be so radical and 
revolutionary, and so different from all human 
expectations among either Jews or Gentiles, 
that the Lord realized that its announcement 
would be to the Jews in general a stumbling-stone 
and to the Greeks foolishness, and that, 
under the blinding influence of the prince of 
this world, to the few only would it be manifestly 
the power of God and the wisdom of 
God. (1 Cor. 1:23,24.) And this few he knew 
would be the meek and humble-minded ones 
in Israel. Such he characterized as his sheep, 
sheeplike meekness being the chief trait of 
their character, the same symbol being applied 
also to the Lord himself— "Behold the Lamb 
of God that taketh away the sin of the world." 

Upon the few who had thus far received his 
teaching and become his disciples, as well as 
upon all such subsequently, he desired to impress 
the lesson of meekness and to assure 
them of his tender care over them. Therefore 
he says, "I am the good Shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep," etc. 
And no matter how many others might claim 
to be the shepherd, he declared himself to be 
the only true one, and that he would prove it, 
even to the sacrifice of his life for them. 

Again he said, "I am the door: by me if 
any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall 
go in and out and find pasture." But how 
does this harmonize with that other statement 
—"He that entereth in by the door is the 
shepherd of the sheep?" How could our Lord 
both enter by the door and also be the 
door? In this way: According to God's plan 
of salvation the way of man's recovery from 



death and of his access to eternal life was to 
be legally opened up by a ransom sacrifice; 
and when our Lord Jesus freely offered himself 
to fulfil that requirement of the divine plan, 
he thereby entered the divinely arranged door 
of opportunity to become the Savior of the 
world and the Shepherd of the Lord's sheep. 
He entered the door of the divine plan and 
thus became to us the door of opportunity, the 
way of access to eternal life, and was also 
therefore counted worthy to be the good Shepherd 
to lead the lost flock of humanity back 
to the fold of God, in whose favor is life and 

R1647 : page 132 

at whose right hand there are pleasures forevermore. 

(Psa. 16:11.) He that entered in 

by the way of Jehovah's appointment is thus 

both the door of access to God and the good 

shepherd of the sheep. "To him the porter 

[the holy spirit of God] openeth [the way 

to the sheep]." This opening was done in all 

the various ways which proclaimed him to us 

as the beloved Son of God, in whom the 

Father was well pleased, and our Redeemer 

and Savior— in the testimony at his baptism, 

and again on the mount of transfiguration; in 

the vailed heaven and the rent rocks on the occasion 

of his death; in the fact of his resurrection 

and its testimony by angels and eye-witnesses; 

in the perfect agreement of all the 

prominent features of his life and character 

with the testimony of prophets regarding him; 

and in the authority and character of his 

teaching and the simplicity and purity of his 

character which outshone that of every other 

man, so that even those who did not recognize 

him as the Son of God, declared, "Never 

man spake like this man." 

And the sheep, thus assured, recognize Jehovah's 
Anointed as their shepherd; and thenceforth 
they "hear his voice." "And he calleth 
his own sheep by name [he is interested in 
them, not only as a general flock, but as individuals] 
and leadeth them out." 

While the Lord thus proclaimed himself the 
true shepherd and the only door into the fold 
of God, he characterized all others as strangers, 
false and hireling shepherds, and thieves 
and robbers; for there is none other name 
under heaven given among men whereby we 
may be saved than the name of Jesus. (Acts 4:12.) 
Plato, uninstructed in divine truth and 
blindly groping about with the torch of human 
reason, in seeking to solve the mysteries of 



human life, may at times have struck a chord 
of the divine harmonies with thrilling effect 
upon thoughtful minds; but soon the clash of 
discords broke the spell or led the mind into 
channels of error. So also with Aristotle, 
Socrates, Confucius and other seekers after 
God, before life and immortality were brought 
to light by Jesus Christ. Such men could not 
be classed as false shepherds; for they evidently 
were seeking and following the best light 
they had. Rather, they, or at least some of 
them, were bell sheep which themselves had 
lost the way and were wandering upon the 
mountains, and leading the flocks to the best 
pastures and the purest waters they could find. 
But those who, after light has come into the 
world, and after they themselves have seen and 
realized it, love darkness rather than light, 
and who, instead of pointing men to Christ, 
direct them to the human philosophies of 
Plato, or Darwin, or others— all such merit the 
appellations which the Lord applies to them. 
They truly are thieves and robbers, teaching 
men that they can climb up into God's favor 
and into his fold by some other way than that 
which God hath appointed— through faith in 
the atoning sacrifice of Christ. Such teachers 
are the hireling shepherds to whom the Master 
refers; they have little or no real interest in 
the sheep and seem reckless of their eternal 
interests, their own present advantage being 
always of paramount importance. They want 
to be known as popular leaders and teachers, 
or original thinkers and great philosophers; 
or they are linked with old systems of error 
which furnish liberal remuneration, or at least 
a livelihood which they could not so easily secure 
in any other way. 

Such are the hirelings, whose number in these 
days is legion. And now that the wolf of infidelity 
has boldly made its appearance among 
the sheep, these hireling shepherds are scattering 
in all directions and leaving the sheep to 
wander about alone. Some of these shepherds 
are fleeing away from the old systems and running 
after Darwin and Huxley and Spiritism 
and so-called Christian Science; and many of 
them are industriously endeavoring to dissuade 
the sheep from all faith in the inspiration 
of the sacred Scriptures. Witness the prominent 
cases of Dr. Chas. A. Briggs, Prof. Henry 
Drummond, Dr. Lyman Abbott, Prof. Swing, 
Dr. Smith, and the recent and startling developments 
in the great Chicago University where 
the president, Dr. Harper, and the entire faculty 
and all the students are boldly declaring 



themselves against the divine authority of the 
Bible, and the reliability of its records. The 

R1647 : page 133 

great Parliament of Religions held in Chicago 
last summer was a most remarkable manifestation 
of the disposition of prominent hireling 
shepherds, who sought to attract the attention 
of the sheep to the various heathen philosophies 

R1648 : page 133 

—Buddhism, Brahminism, Mohammedanism, 
Shintoism, Confucianism, and others, 
saying in effect, These, whom we have been 
accustomed to think of as heathen, are really 
about as much Christian as we are, except in 
name. Therefore let us receive them as brethren 
and make common cause with them. And 
the people looked in astonishment upon this 
new departure, scarcely knowing what to think. 
This great movement, as we pointed out in 
our issue of Nov. '93, was a most significant 
feature of present-day tendencies in religious 
circles. And now some of those representatives 
of the heathen religions have returned to 
their homes, and reports have already come 
back from Japan to the effect that at a great 
mass meeting in Yokohama the people were 
gathered to hear the reports from Christian 
America. And the returned Japanese delegates 
told them they had been most agreeably 
disappointed; for instead of having been invited 
to America, as they surmised, to be 
Christianized or perhaps indirectly ridiculed, 
they actually found that the Christians were 
in great doubt themselves about their religion, 
and were eager to learn what the foreigners 
had to say of their religions and what points 
of their philosophies could be engrafted upon 
Christianity. Indeed, they pointed to America 
as a hopeful field for the propagation of 
their faiths, and mentioned that an influential 
and wealthy convert had been made during 
the sessions of the Parliament. Thus the hireling 
shepherds are bewildering, confusing and 
scattering many of the timid sheep who are 
not sufficiently attentive to the voice of the 
good Shepherd which speaks through his inspired 
Word. 

Yet only the wayward and heedless sheep 
can be harmed and scattered by these things. 
The obedient, trusting sheep will all be tenderly 
cared for by the good Shepherd, to whose 
voice they hearken and the softest tones of 



which are familiar to their ears. There are 
really, we thus see, two classes of the sheep, as 
the Lord indicates— the obedient ones just described, 
who are easily led by the voice of the 
Shepherd, and a more listless and somewhat 
wayward class who need some driving and guiding 
with the crook. The former are the sheep 
of this flock referred to in verse 16, while the 
latter are those "other sheep" whose number 
shall also be greatly augmented, when, by and 
by, the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
earth as the waters cover the sea— i.e., during 
the Millennial reign of Christ— when there will 
not be conflicting voices seeking to drown the 
voice of the good Shepherd. 

Nor need we be surprised at the exceedingly 
small number who now diligently hearken and 
obediently follow the Shepherd's voice; for 
the Lord forewarned us it would be only a 
little flock, saying, "Fear not, little flock, it 
is your Father's good pleasure to give you the 
Kingdom." It is a choice flock the Lord is 
selecting now— a flock that needs no driving 
nor coaxing, but who meditate in it day and night. 
The good Shepherd does not propose to drive 
any sheep into his kingdom; and he desires 
for the high office to which he is calling them 
in this age only such as need no driving, and 
who gladly follow him through evil and through 
good report. "And when he putteth forth his 
own sheep, he goeth before them [to lead, and 
not behind them to drive], and the sheep follow 
him; for they know his voice." 

Of the sheep of this flock the Master says, 
"My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, 
and they follow me,. ..and they shall never 
perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my 
hand. My Father, which gave them me, is 
greater than all; and no man is able to pluck 
them out of my Father's hand." (John 10:27-29.) 
How blessed is the assurance of heavenly 
guidance and protection now to all the 
sheep of this flock, the truly consecrated and 
obedient. 

"And a stranger they will not follow, but 
will flee from him; for they know not the 
voice of strangers." If the stranger come 
with enticing words, saying, Let me show 

R1648 : page 134 

you a broader salvation than that you have 
learned from the apostles and prophets to hope 
for; that eternal salvation is to be universal, 
and that not one of God's creatures shall ever 
perish, the true sheep says, That sounds very 



benevolent, and yet it has not the ring of the 
Shepherd's voice in it; for he tells us of 
"wolves in sheep's clothing" and of "vessels 
of wrath fitted to destruction" and warns 
against "presumptuous sins" and of a possible 
destruction for all wilful sinners and "whosoever 
loveth and maketh a lie," and plainly 
says that the devil and those following him 
shall be destroyed. (Rev. 21:8; Matt. 25:41; 
Heb. 2: 14.) No, this voice that prophesies 
smooth things, contrary to the Word of God, 
is not the voice of the good Shepherd. 

If he come again with a show of logic and 
of worldly wisdom (which is foolishness with 
God) and says— Let me show you a more 
reasonable way of salvation than by the barbarous 
Bible method of an atoning sacrifice; 
viz., a salvation by a process of evolution and 
the survival of the fittest, according to which 
theory there was no original human perfection, 
no fall, and consequently no necessity for a 
ransom sacrifice— the sheep says, No, I cannot 
receive this teaching; for the voice of the 
good Shepherd tells me there is no other way 
than the one he opened up for us by freely 
offering up his life on our behalf, and I am 
not prepared to begin at the first chapter of 
Genesis and reconstruct the whole Bible after 
your theory. 

Then he hears other voices declaring that 
the unalterable purpose of God is the eternal 
torment of a very large majority of his human 
creatures; some even declaring that such has 
been God's purpose, determined long before 
man's creation. No, says the true sheep, 
I cannot think that of God: though I cannot 
understand all your reasonings, nor fully combat 
your doctrine with the Scriptures, I surely 
cannot credit such a slander on my Heavenly 
Father's name; but this I do know— that 
"the Judge of the whole earth will do right," 
and so I will trust him where I cannot trace 
him, and wait for further light. 

Such is the attitude of all the true sheep; 
and such being their attitude, God is both able 
and willing to shield and protect them under 
all circumstances and at all times; and the 
good Shepherd of his appointment shall lead 
them into green pastures and beside the still 
waters. They shall be abundantly fed with 
the "meat in due season,"— with the spiritual 
food so necessary to their life and to their 
growth and development; and such temporal 
things as are needful will not be withheld. 
Truly we can say with the Psalmist, "I have 
never seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed 



begging bread." 

While all the true sheep of this flock may indeed 
rejoice in the loving care of the good 
Shepherd, it is also a further cause for rejoicing 
that all the other sheep now lost and 
wandering, and blinded by the god of this 
world and misled by other voices, are also to 
be sought out and found and rejoiced over 
when the Lord, in his own good time, shall 
spread "a feast of fat things and of wines on 
the lees well refined." And then there shall 
be one fold and one Shepherd. 

Though only a "little flock" is now recognized 
as the Lord's sheep, there shall by 
and by be a mighty host (John 10:16); and 
the redeemed of the Lord shall go forth with 
songs and ever lasting joy upon their heads. 
Glorious plan of salvation! how worthy it is 
of the character of our God! 



R1648 : page 134 

"WHO HATH HEARD SUCH A THING?" 



"Before she travailed she brought forth; before her pain 
came she was delivered of a man-child. Who hath 
heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? 
Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? 
or shall a nation be born at once? for as 
soon as Zion travailed she brought forth 
her children."— Isa. 66:7,8. 

THE name "Zion" was anciently applied 
to a prominent hill of Jerusalem, generally 
regarded as the south-western and highest of 
those on which the city was built. It included 
the most ancient part of the city with the 
citadel; and, being first occupied for a palace, 

R1648 : page 135 

it was called "the city of David." (2 Chron. 5:2.) 
It was also called the "holy hill," or 
"hill of the sanctuary." (Psa. 2:6), being the 
original site of the tabernacle, pitched by 
David for the reception of the ark. 

By the prophets the name was often put for 
Jerusalem itself, and also for its inhabitants, 
sometimes called sons or daughters of Zion. 
It was also used in a wider sense, as was Jerusalem 
also, to signify the entire nation of Israel. 
And since fleshly Israel was typical of 



spiritual Israel, the Gospel Church, the symbolism 
applies with still deeper significance to 
the Gospel Church, which term, throughout 
the Gospel age, included the entire body of 
professed Christians, all of whom are on probation 
for full membership in the Church triumphant 
—the true Church, the Zion of the 
future, and the true Zion of the present age, 
the elect "little flock" to whom it is the Father's 
good pleasure to give the Kingdom. In 
the symbolic application of the term we must 
therefore judge from the character of the 
prophecy whether the reference is to the fleshly 
or to the spiritual house of Israel, or to 
both; or, if to the latter, whether it applies in 
its broadest sense to the nominal gospel church, 
or to the elect little flock, the only true Church 
in God's estimation. 

The symbolic travail, in the above prophecy, 
is a reference to the great time of trouble— 
the travail that is to come upon the nominal 
gospel church, great "Babylon," from which 
some are to be counted worthy to escape. 
(Luke 21:36.) This is indicated by the preceding 
verse which locates the time of this 
prophecy as synchronous with that wherein is 
heard "a voice of noise [confusion] from the 
city" (Babylon), and "a voice [of truth and 
warning] from the temple" (the elect little 
flock of consecrated and faithful ones), and "a 

R1649 : page 135 

voice of Jehovah that rendereth recompense to 
his enemies"— in the great time of trouble. 

The travail that is coming is to be upon 
nominal Zion— "Christendom," "Babylon;" 
and it will be a great and sore affliction— "a 
time of trouble such as was not since there 
was a nation." But the marvelous thing the 
Prophet here has to record is that a man-child 
is to be born out of Zion before this travail 
comes. This is a striking reference to the 
fact, elsewhere clearly taught, that the ripe 
wheat of the Gospel Church is to be separated 
from the tares, that they are to be exalted and 
glorified before the burning, the consuming 
trouble, shall come upon the latter. This 
man-child is, therefore, the little flock— the 
true Zion in God's estimation, the body of 
Christ; as it is written, "There shall come out 
of Zion [the nominal gospel church] the deliverer 
[the Christ, Head and body], and shall 
turn away ungodliness from Jacob [the fleshly 
Israel or Zion]."— Rom. 11:26. 

This is the man-child that is to bless all the 



families of the earth. (Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:16,29-) 
The birth of the man-child is the first 
resurrection. Blessed and holy are all they 
that have part in the first resurrection. Such 
are now begotten of God by the Word of 
truth, and quickened by the holy spirit (Jas. 1:18; 
Eph. 2: 1 ; Rom. 8: 1 1), and in due time 
—before the travail— they will be born in the 
glorious likeness of Christ. The birth of this 
man-child began over eighteen hundred years 
ago with the resurrection of Christ Jesus. 
There the head of this body of Christ came 
forth; and as surely as the head has been born, 
so surely, shall the body come forth. "Shall 
I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring 
forth? saith the Lord: shall I cause to bring 
forth and shut the womb? saith thy God." 
(Isa. 66:9.) Ah, no: "the man-child," the 
Christ complete, the Great Deliverer, shall 
come forth. 

Yet "who hath heard such a thing? who 
hath seen such things?" for not only shall the 
body of Christ, the true overcoming Zion, the 
"holy nation, the peculiar people," be delivered 
out of nominal Zion, before the travail; 
but when she travails a great company of other 
children will be born. This is the great company 
described in the Apocalypse as coming 
up out of the great tribulation, having washed 
their robes and made them white in the blood 
of the Lamb. (Rev. 7:14.) The body of Christ, 
the man-child, born before the travail, will be 
composed of those who heard and obeyed the 
call, "Come out of her, my people," etc. 

R1649 : page 136 

(Rev. 18:4), and who were counted worthy 
to have part in the first resurrection; while the 
many children born through the great tribulation 
will be those believers in nominal 
Zion, Babylon, who have allowed themselves 
to become measurably intoxicated by the spirit 
of Babylon, the spirit of the world, and who, 
therefore, are not quick to discern and prompt 
to obey the voice of the Lord in this harvest 
time. They fail to see that it is harvest time, 
and consequently fail to understand the separating 
work which the sickle of present truth is 
accomplishing, regarding those servants of God 
who wield it as enemies, and hence as opposing 
them and the Lord whom they serve. 

The great tribulation or travail that is coming 
upon nominal Zion is the only thing that 
can convince such as these— and they include 
a large number of believing children of God, 



whose manner of life is righteous and generally 

circumspect, but who are nevertheless worldly-minded, 

and who are not rendering themselves 

a living sacrifice to God, following him through 

evil and through good report, and meekly 

bearing the reproach of Christ. They have 

respect to men's opinions, traditions and plans, 

and fail to fully submit themselves to the will 

and plan of the Lord. And only when they 

behold the wreck of nominal Zion— Christendom, 

Babylon— will they realize its gross errors 

and be delivered from them and it. 

"Behold," says the Prophet, "I lay in Zion 
a stumbling-stone and Rock of offence; and 
whosoever believeth on him shall not be 
ashamed." (Rom. 9:33; Isa. 8:14,15; 28:16.) 
That stumbling-stone is the doctrine of redemption 
through the precious blood of Christ. 
At that stone the fleshly Zion stumbled, and 
so now the nominal spiritual Zion is stumbling 
at the same stone; for it was to be "a stone 
of stumbling and a rock of offense to both the 
houses of Israel"— the fleshly and the spiritual. 
The elect little flock of overcomers do not so 
stumble, but recognize this as the chief corner-stone 
of the true Zion, remembering the words 
of the Prophet, "Behold I lay in Zion a chief 
corner-stone, elect, precious; and he that believeth 
on him shall not be confounded. Unto 
you, therefore, which believe [in Christ as 
your Redeemer, who bought you with his 
precious blood] he is precious; but unto them 
which be disobedient, ...the same is made 
...a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence, 
even to them which stumble at the word, being 
disobedient; whereunto also they were appointed" 
(1 Pet. 2:6-8); for God does not 
propose to deliver his Kingdom unto any of 
the disobedient. They need the fiery trial of 
the coming tribulation to bring them into a 
proper attitude before God; and hence must 
come up through the great tribulation. 

While those who are truly begotten of God 
and who have been quickened by his spirit to 
the new spiritual life, and who are faithful in 
fulfilling their covenant of entire consecration 
as living sacrifices unto God, may well rejoice 
in hope of the first resurrection, and of being 
born before the travail upon nominal Zion, it 
is also a cause for rejoicing that many of the 
weaker children of God, now stumbling with 
nominal Zion, will, nevertheless, by and by 
be recovered and saved so as by fire (born) 
through the great tribulation (travail), in 
which nominal Zion shall expire, but from 
which they shall come forth. 



REJOICE YE WITH JERUSALEM. 



"Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad 
with her, all ye that mourn for her." "Behold, 
I create Jerusalem a rejoicing and her people 
a joy. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem and 
joy in my people, and the voice of weeping 
shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice 
of crying. "-Isa. 66:10; 65:18,19. 

This call to rejoice with Jerusalem immediately 
follows the prophetic announcement of 
the birth of Zion, the terms Zion and Jerusalem 
being used here interchangeably. The 
birth of Zion, the exaltation of the body of 
Christ to kingdom power and glory, will indeed 
be cause for rejoicing on the part of all people; 
for it is for this exaltation and manifestation of 
the sons of God that the whole creation waits, 
groaning and travailing together in pain until 
now.— Rom. 8:22,23. 

When the true Zion is thus exalted, then will 
follow the great work of the Kingdom. The 
travail upon nominal Zion immediately succeeding 

R1649 : page 137 

will quickly liberate the true children 
of God still in her, and they shall come forth 
to larger views and higher principles, and to 
develop rapidly into nobler characters. The 
rule of the iron rod will quickly subdue all 
things, completely breaking up the whole present 
social fabric and accomplishing the leveling 
process which will make ready for the 
peaceful reign of righteousness. 

Then the great Millennial reign of righteousness 
will begin, when every man will have a 
full, fair opportunity to win eternal life by faith 
and obedience. And no man's opportunity 
will be less than a hundred years; though if 
he wastes all of that time without taking any 
steps toward reformation, he will be considered 
unworthy of life and will be cut off in the 
second death. (Isa. 65:20) But the obedient 
shall eat the good of the land (Isa. 1:19): 
"They shall build houses and inhabit them 
[There will not be so many houses to let in 
those days probably, but more improved and 
cultivated homesteads in which the owners 
shall take pleasure and comfort]; and they 
shall plant vineyards and eat the fruit of them. 
They shall not build and another inhabit; they 
shall not plant and another eat: for as the days 



of a tree are the days of my people ["They 
shall renew their strength"— Isa. 40:31]; and 
mine elect [all the faithful and obedient then] 
shall long enjoy the work of their hands. They 
shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for 
trouble; for they are the seed [the children] 
of the blessed of the Lord [the Church] and 
their offspring with them." 

"And it shall come to pass that before they 
call I will answer, and while they are yet speaking 
I will hear"— so near will the Lord be, so 
mindful of all their interests. 

"The wolf and the lamb shall feed together 
[The reference here may be to men formerly 
of wolf-like or lamb-like character, or to animals, 
or to both— the expression signifying in 
any case a reign of peace]; and the lion shall 
eat straw like the bullock, and dust shall be 
the serpent's meat [—another expression similar 
to, "His enemies shall lick the dust," 
signifying the destruction of the serpent, or 
rather of Satan whom the serpent symbolizes]. 
They shall not hurt, nor destroy, in all my 
holy mountain [Kingdom], saith the Lord."— 
Isa. 65:21-25. 

Thus the birth of the true Zion will be cause 
for rejoicing among all who truly love righteousness: 
for, though it will first dash in pieces 
all their long cherished hopes, it is the dawn 
of real hope for all the world. It will humble 
all their pride, despoil them of all their cherished 
possessions and what they have come to 
esteem their rights, break down all their boasted 
institutions, civil, social and religious, and 
completely wreck all their order and all hope 
until they begin to see hope in the new order 
of things inaugurated by the Kingdom of God. 

Yes, rejoice with Jerusalem, Zion, and be 
glad with her, all ye that love her, as well as 
all ye that mourn for her now and try to dissuade 
her from her course, not seeing the prize 
at the end of her life of faithful self-sacrifice; 
for soon her glory will appear, not only to her 
own exceeding joy, but also to the joy and 
blessing of all the families of the earth. 



R1650 : page 137 
VESSELS UNTO HONOR. 



"If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall 
be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for the 



Master's use, and prepared unto every good work."— 2 Tim. 2:21. 

IT is important to notice that this instruction 
is given, not to the world, but to the 
Church— to those who are believers in Christ 
and who are consecrated to him and desirous 
of being used in his service. If the counsel 
were given to worldly people, no such incentive 
would be held out; for such have no ambition 
to be in the Lord's service. The world 
can better appreciate such maxims as, "Honesty 
is the best policy," etc.; for temporal 
good is all they seek. Yet it is indeed a good 
thing for worldly men to purge themselves of 
evil dispositions and practices. Moral reforms 
are always commendable as steps in the right 
direction, and we are always glad to see worldly 
men trying to break away from the bondage 

R1650 : page 138 

of bad habits— from the drink habit and from 
lying, profanity and other vices. 

But such purging from the filth of the flesh 
can never render such vessels fit for the Master's 
use. With all their efforts at cleansing 
they are still unclean, and the Lord desires 
clean vessels for his use. It is only when, by 
faith, we are plunged in the cleansing blood 
of our Redeemer that we are clean and acceptable 
to God. 

"There is a fountain filled with blood 

Drawn from Immanuel's veins; 
And sinners plunged beneath that flood, 
Lose all their guilty stains." 

But having been thus reckonedly cleansed 
from sin and clothed in the pure robe of 
Christ's righteousness, it is all-important that 
we strive to make this reckoned righteousness 
an actual thing to the extent of our ability; 
for only so can we prove ourselves worthy of 
the imputed righteousness. It is purely of divine 
grace that we are reckoned of God as 
righteous, before we have actually become so. 
Seeing in us the desire to be righteous and the 
effort to be so in his appointed way, God, accepting 
the will for the deed, reckons us righteous 
now, and treats us as sons, since we have 
been redeemed from the curse and have accepted 
this gracious provision for reconciliation. 

If, however, after being thus reconciled to 
God and reckoned righteous, our course of 
conduct proves that we no longer love righteousness; 
if we do not endeavor to make the 
reckoned righteousness an actual thing by a 
constant endeavor to purge out the old leaven 



of sin; if we are content to let it remain and 
to work in us, and if we neglect to strive 
against it, then we are proving by such a 
course that our love of righteousness is growing 
weaker, and we are proving our unworthiness 
of the Lord's gracious reckoning in our favor. 
But if, on the contrary, we are striving daily 
to purge out the old leaven of sin,— not merely 
working it down occasionally and allowing it 
again and again to ferment and disturb the 
whole spiritual being and to endanger its complete 
souring and spoiling,— but purging it 
out by constantly resisting it, cleansing our 
thoughts, words and deeds with the truth, 
and cultivating the blessed fruits of the spirit 
of love, joy and peace, then indeed, as the 
Apostle affirms, we shall be vessels meet for the 
Master's use. 

And not only so, but the Lord can honor 
such vessels because they honor him: they fairly 
represent him and his cause. If they are 
meek and humble-minded, not inclined to 
think of themselves more highly than they 
ought to think, but to think soberly, the Lord 
can exalt them to positions of trust and honor 
without injury either to themselves or to the 
cause; and thus they are more and more sanctified 
and prepared for every good work. 

Let as many, therefore, as would be honored 
and used of the Master now and hereafter— as 
many as have this hope in them— seek to purify 
themselves, to purge out the old leaven of 
sin. In the language of another forceful illustration, 
let us endeavor to war a good warfare 
against the world, the flesh and the devil. 
And be assured that in these duties we have 
the work of a lifetime; and even at its close 
we will still find the necessity for the robe of 
Christ's righteousness to cover our remaining 
deformities of character. 

While the purging here spoken of has reference 
to the general cleansing from all sin and 
uncleanness, the Apostle had special reference 
on that occasion to purging from a disposition 
to hearken to false doctrines of those who 
would subvert the faith of the Church. His 
counsel is to avoid foolish questions and strife 
about words to no profit, to shun profane and 
vain babblings which increase only unto more 
ungodliness, which savor more of bombast and 
self-exaltation than of truth and godliness, and, 
on the contrary, to study to show ourselves approved 
unto God, workmen that need not be 
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of truth. 

There is much significance in that word 
"study;" and only the studious find the narrow 



way to the divine approval and acceptance. 
Study to show thyself approved— study 
the doctrine, study your course of conduct, to 
keep it in harmony with the doctrine. Study 
how to promote the peace and prosperity of 
Zion, and how to shield yourself and others 
from the missiles of error and from the poison 
of an evil, worldly spirit. Study to perform 

R1650 : page 139 

the duties of a faithful soldier of the cross- 
trie seemingly insignificant, as well as the 
bravest and noblest deeds. A soldier has 
many seemingly trivial duties to perform; and 
he is as really doing his duty as a soldier when 
he is polishing his armor, foraging, cooking his 
meal, cleaning camp, clearing the way or building 
bridges for the army to pass as when he is 
fighting the enemy. All such necessary incidental 
work is entirely compatible with his 
commission as a soldier, and is not to be considered 
"entanglements" or hindrances. And 
these things cannot be avoided or carelessly 
done without a measure of unfaithfulness. 

So with the Christian soldier. The routine 
of life, house-work, daily toil, any and everything 
incidental to a proper and honest provision 
of "things needful" for ourselves and 
those dependent on us for support, as well as 
provision for the prosecution and care of the 
Lord's work,— all this is a proper part of our 
engagement as soldiers of the Lord. The 
Apostle Peter was as truly serving the Lord 
when catching the fish from whose mouth he 
got the coin wherewith to pay the Lord's taxes 
and his own, as when proclaiming, The Kingdom 
of God is come nigh unto you. The 
Apostle Paul was as truly a soldier of the cross 
and doing his proper work as such when making 
tents (rather than be chargeable to any) 
as when he preached Jesus and the resurrection 
at Mars hill. Whatever is done with a view 
to the glory of our Lord, the Captain of our 
salvation, or for the benefit of any of our 
fellow-soldiers, or for our own preparation for 
this warfare, or in the discharge of obligations 
which our Captain has recognized and approved, 
—this is proper work for us as soldiers, and 
not entanglement in the affairs of this life. 

But the Christian soldier must study to perform 
even the commonest duties in a manner 
creditable to his calling. Nor must he permit 
himself to become entangled with other 
things which do not relate to his duties as a 
soldier, and thus to be side-tracked. For instance, 



if a soldier knowing how to repair 
watches were to divert his attention from his 
regular duties, neglect his camp and battle 
duties, and the commands of his Captain and 
the proper work of a soldier to acquire some 
extra compensation by this means, he would 
be an unfaithful soldier. And so the Christian 
who turns aside to seek some personal, 
temporal advantage, to the detriment of his 
duties as a soldier, is likewise, to some extent, 
an unfaithful soldier and likely to be drawn 
out of the ranks entirely. 

Study to show thyself approved. Study the 
Word. Study yourself that you may become 
well acquainted with yourself— that you may 
know your talents for service and in what directions 
they lie, and your weak points and 
how they may be guarded against; that you 
may know both your abilities and your shortcomings. 
Then study to avoid error and to 
shun all foolish questions and profane and vain 
babblings. Remember that only the foundation 
of God standeth sure, and that all other 
foundations are worthless and all other theories 
must come to naught. But "The foundation 
of God standeth sure, having this seal, 
The Lord knoweth them that are his. And 
let every one that nameth the name of Christ 
depart from iniquity." 

And if any man desire honor from God, 
let him not fail to seek it in God's appointed 
way— along the pathway of humility; 
for the Lord giveth his favors to the humble. 
If you would be a vessel fit for the Master's 
use and a vessel of honor, humble yourself under 
the mighty hand of God and he will exalt 
you in due time. Do not be in a hurry about 
it either; but whatsoever thy hand findeth to 
do, do it with thy might, beginning and ever 
continuing to cleanse your earthen vessel, 
that it may be fit for the Master's use. 



R1650 : page 139 

THE MEMORIAL CELEBRATED. 



We have received 99 reports of celebrations of 
our dear Redeemer's death, upon its last anniversary, 
April 19th. These gatherings were of 
course small,— the Allegheny meeting, at 
which about 160 were present, being the largest; 
while New York and Brooklyn meetings 



R1650 : page 140 

consolidated report a larger than usual attendance 
—eighty-five, Chicago (two meetings), 
Des Moines, Altoona, Boston, Baltimore and 
Philadelphia followed in order, down to the 
threes and twos and even the solitary ones. 

All the gatherings report blessed seasons of 
communion, though marred in some instances 
by a knowledge of the great trial which the 
adversary has brought upon the Church, as 
explained in our Extra edition, of April 25th. 
All this, however, only deepened the impressiveness 
of the impressive occasion. 

The conduct of some who learned of the 
trial and who, though sorely grieved and perplexed 
by it, kept it from others and made 
them subjects of prayer, that their faith might 
not fail when the storm of trial should reach 
them, was indeed a beautiful manifestation of 
the spirit of Christ, in which we greatly rejoice. 
And thus we are made to understand 
more fully that expression of the Apostle Peter 
(1 Peter 1:7): "The trial of your faith, being 
much more precious than of gold," etc. 

The effect of the latest trial and sifting 
seemed to be to draw all our hearts nearer 
together than ever; and the reports show 
that the dear ones assembled in little groups 
poured out earnest prayers to the throne of 
grace on our behalf and on behalf of all the 
members of the body of Christ everywhere. 
These prayers, dear friends, in our case were 
answered. We enjoyed the peace of God 
which passeth all understanding. It ruled our 
hearts while "unreasonable and wicked men" 
did all that they knew how to do to injure and 
distract us— even circulating their slanderous 
circulars amongst our worldly neighbors. 

Appropriate to our feelings, therefore, was 
our opening hymn at the Memorial,— 
"Blest be the tie that binds 
Our hearts in Christian love." 

The meaning of the service was explained— 
we communed with the Lord in prayer and 
meditation, and closed with the hymn, 
"Abide, sweet Spirit, heavenly dove, 
With light and comfort from above." 



R1650 : page 140 

"FERVENT IN SPIRIT, SERVING THE LORD." 



Many who cannot go out into the Colporteur 
work, but who burn with a desire to tell 
the good tidings and show forth the praises of 
him who hath called us out of darkness into 
his marvelous light, inquire— What can we do? 
Can you not help us to use our limited talents 
and opportunities? 

We can only suggest methods of labor;— 
your talents (opportunities, etc.) and your 
zeal must decide to what extent you can or will 
use these or better methods, if you know of 
better. 

(1) One good plan is by a systematic distribution 
of Old Theology Tracts. This may 

be done at any time, but especially on Sundays. 
Have slips like No. 14 for the masses 
and larger tracts for the thoughtful and earnest 
looking,— at the hotels, in the parks, etc. 
And a good plan is for several to serve those 
who go toward or return from church service. 
But do not stand near the church building- 
go at least half a block away so as not to appear 
to specially seek their conversion: they 
will take it as an insult and resent it— for "surely 
it is in vain that a net is spread in the sight 
of any bird." 

(2) Another good method is to visit your 
friends and tell them what great things God 
has done for your soul. Speak chiefly of the 
fruits and graces of the spirit and afterward 
about the truths which enlightened and refreshed 
your hearts and brought forth those 

fruits. When you come to speak of the latter 
—the doctrines of God's Word— be very cautious, 
and feed them with "milk" rather than 
"strong meat." Remember the Lord's words, 
to some under similar circumstances, "I have 
many things to tell you, but ye cannot bear 
them now." Remember to ignore yourself in 
telling the blessed tidings. Don't try to shine; 
don't try to impress your hearer with your 
wisdom, your knowledge of Scripture, etc. 
Forget self entirely, and let your whole aim be 
to glorify God and bless your hearer. 

(3) Unless you are very well versed in the 
truth and apt at teaching it, your success will 
lie chiefly in awakening a curiosity and interest 
and then selling or loaning the M. DAWN 

or a specially selected Old Theology Tract. 
The gospel in print is doing many times more 
good than the gospel by voice in the present 
harvest; but the latter introduces and supplements 
well the former and the two together are 
preferable to either alone,— if the spoken gospel 



be spoken with wisdom and to the ignoring 
of the speaker. 

How can you get an opportunity to speak a 
word in season, and to loan the book or tract? 

R1650 : page 141 

We reply that there are several good ways,— 

(a) Select your most consecrated Christian 
friends to begin with, and next any of your 
acquaintances that are inclined to be skeptical. 

(b) When you have done what you can for 
your friends and acquaintances, and when you 
find opportunity to enlarge your sphere of 
labor, attend Methodist Class-meetings, and 
Christian Endeavor meetings, and prayer-meetings 
common to all denominations. Take 

part in these according to the liberty accorded, 
confining yourself within the recognized 
liberties of said meetings in speaking and 
praying. Seek to give no offense; manifest 
the spirit which is from above, which is first 
pure; then "Let your moderation be known 
unto all men." Avoid wrangling; "for the 
servant of God should not strive," but should 
"speak the truth in love." 

Let your light shine before them, the light 
of the spirit of the truth,— the light of a justified 
life, and more, of a sanctified life. Do 
not intrude doctrines, or anything else at their 
meetings, that a large majority present would 
disapprove. Speak on lines of Christian experience, 
etc., in harmony with their rules and 
habits. Leave your doctrinal explanations, 
etc., for private conversation or for an occasion 
specially arranged at which they would be 
agreeable. At these meetings get well acquainted 
with the whole hearted and pure 
hearted— the consecrated or those "feeling 
after God," and let them get acquainted with 
your heart. If they come to take knowledge 
of you that you have been with Jesus and 
learned of him, and that you are truly his 
"brethren," you will then be able to introduce 
to them the precious present truths 
which you can see to be so needful for their 
ripening. 

(c) While always careful not to belie the 
truth, careful not to be mistaken for a member 
in any of the nominal churches, this need not 
hinder any from sometimes attending divine 
worship in any of them, if thus we may do 
more good than in any other way known to us. 
By mingling with them occasionally you may 
have opportunities for speaking a word in 
season and handing a tract or book, that you 



would not otherwise have. 

(d) Study very thoroughly the Chart which 
you find in M. DAWN VOL. I., until you understand 
its every feature and can explain it clearly. 
(See explanation, Chapter xii.) Then you 
might procure one of our new five feet charts 
(See notice page 2), invite in your neighbors 
and friends and explain it to them; and 
when you have callers it may sometimes prove, 
not only of interest and profit to them, but a 
blessing to yourself; for every time we explain 
God's great plan to others we get a fresh blessing 
therefrom upon our own hearts. 



page 141 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1650 : page 141 
ISRAEL IN EGYPT. 



II. QUAR., LESSON VII., MAY 13, EXOD. 1:1-14. 

Golden Text— "Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
Psa. 124:8. 

As preceding lessons showed us how God 
prepared a place for his people in Egypt 
and transported them thither and planted 
them in the best of the land and gave them 
great temporal prosperity during the lifetime 
of all the first generation, we now come 
to view them under another course of instruction 
—this time in the school of adversity. 

In the midst of prosperity they had marvelously 
increased so that the second generation 
filled the land of Goshen; and the 
new king which knew not Joseph, and the 
new generation of Egyptians, too, which 
forgot the gratitude of their fathers toward 
Joseph and the disposition to manifest it in 
favor to his relatives and descendants, began 



to fear lest this prosperous people in their 
midst might some time rise up against them 
or ally themselves with their enemies. Hence 
the decree of the king mentioned in verse 10. 
VERSES 1 1-14 tell the bitter story of their 
oppression, under which they were taught 
valuable lessons of humility and patience, 
of dependence upon God, and of hope for 
deliverance inspired by his precious promises. 
Here, too, their common sufferings 
bound them together as a people, and kept 
them distinct and separate from the Egyptians 

R1651 : page 141 

and consequently from their influence 
in matters of religion, etc. 

But notwithstanding their hard bondage 
the promises of God that they should rapidly 
multiply (Gen. 15:5; 22:17) was being 
fulfilled, so that, from the handful of seventy 
souls that went down into Egypt, there 

R1651 : page 142 

came out, after about three centuries, about 
six hundred thousand men, which implies a 
population of about two millions. 

To those who are able, through a knowledge 
of God's plan, to rise to his standpoint 
in viewing his dealings with his people, 
there is a most manifest exhibition of fatherly 
wisdom and care in this discipline in 
Egypt, as well as in all their subsequent 
leadings. As a wise father, God foresaw 
that too much prosperity would be greatly 
to their disadvantage— tending to pride, ambition, 
independence, self-gratification, self-indulgence, 
indolence; and to assimilation 
with friendly aliens from the commonwealth 
of Israel and the imbibing of their 
idolatrous principles and practices. All this 
was checked and guarded against by the 
bitter experiences of Israel in Egypt, while 
the opposite tendencies were all encouraged. 
And thus also the way was paved for a 
grand exhibition of God's further care and 
wisdom in their timely and wonderful deliverance 
when his purposes for them in 
Egypt had been fully accomplished. 

R1651 : page 142 

THE CHILDHOOD OF MOSES. 



II. QUAR., LESSON VIII., MAY 20, EXOD. 2:1-10. 

Golden Text— "I will deliver him and honor him."— 
Psa. 91:15. 

This lesson presents several features of 
divine interposition worthy of very special 
consideration. (1) It calls to mind the 
promise of God to Jacob hundreds of years 
previous (Gen. 46:4)— to bring his posterity 
back to the land of promise, his purposes 
in sending them down into Egypt 
having been accomplished; and now he is 
preparing to fulfil that promise. 

(2) It is another illustration (See also 
Rom. 9: 1 1) of God's elections of certain 
individuals for special services in the present 
life, and the shaping of their course in 
view of that purpose. Like the Apostle 
Paul (Gal. 1:15) Moses seems to have been 
chosen, even before he was born. These 
elections were not unto everlasting life, but 
to a place of service in the present life. 
Though Paul was "a chosen vessel" to 
preach Christ to the Gentiles, he might 
have become "a castaway" (1 Cor. 9:27) 

so far as future honors are concerned. 

(3) It affords another illustration of 
special divine providence in the protection, 
preservation and training of the chosen instruments 
of service. Born under the cruel 

edict of death, that very circumstance was 
divinely overruled for Moses' advantage, 
and through him for that of all Israel: and 
so the wrath of opposing men was made to 
advance the divine plan, instead of to retard 
it, as intended. It was due to this circumstance 
that Moses was brought up in 
all the learning of the Egyptians, and thus 
fitted for his future work as a great leader 
and statesman. 

(4) It shows how God, while working 
out his grand designs on a large scale, is 
not unmindful of the faith and devotion of 
humble individuals who put their trust in 
him. By faith Moses' parents hid him 

three months, and then took him to the river's 
brink and left him alone in the hands 
of God; and confidently trusting him, "they 
were not afraid of the king's commandment." 
-Heb. 11:23. 

(5) It shows how God has respect both 

to the character and to the natural qualifications 

of his chosen instruments. Thus, 

for instance, for the leadership of Israel he 



chose a good man, a godly man, one who 
preferred to suffer affliction with the people 
of God rather than to enjoy the pleasures 
of an Egyptian court, esteeming the 
reproach of Christ greater riches than the 
treasures of Egypt. (Heb. 11:24-27.) But 
for the throne of Egypt at that particular 
time he chose one of very opposite character 
(Rom. 9:17), and thus his purpose was 
wrought out in the fullest exercise of the 
free moral agency of both. 

It is notable also that in choosing Moses 
for his great work as a deliverer and statesman, 
God did not choose a novice, but, on 
the contrary, he chose one of great natural 
ability and gave to him just the kind of education 
he needed for his work— his earliest 
years under the training of godly parents, 
whose instilling of the principles of truth 
and righteousness and whose instructions 
in the hope of Israel, were not without 
their desired effect in all the subsequent 
years of life; then the remainder of forty 
years under the most favorable circumstances 
for learning what the most enlightened 
nation of that day afforded; and then 
forty years in the retirement of domestic 
life, well suited for the mellowing and refining 
of his character and the deepening, 
and enriching of experience. 

And yet in choosing this man of learning 
and ability God, as in the case of the Apostle 
Paul, permitted a thorn in the flesh, lest 

R1651 : page 143 

he should be exalted above measure by the 
honors of his high position. He was slow 
of speech— a diffident, retiring man and not 
at all gifted as an orator. The office, however, 
did not require oratory, and so the charms 
of eloquence were not given— his meekness 
coupled with great executive ability especially 
fitted him for it. A similar course 
of previous training is also very noticeable 
in the case of the Apostle Paul. (See Gal. 1:15; 
Acts 22:3; 26:24.) And the same 
Apostle urges all who would be used of the 
Lord to study to show themselves workmen 
approved unto God.— 2 Tim. 2:15. 

(6) It is also noticeable that for special 
leadership God chooses the few and not the 
many, and more frequently only one at a 
time. There was only one Lord Jesus to 
redeem and restore our lost and ruined race. 
There was only one Paul to lead on in declaring 



the unsearchable riches of Christ to 
the Gentiles, and to leave his rich legacy of 
inspired love to the Gentile Christians of all 
subsequent generations. There was only 
one Moses to lead the hosts of Israel out of 
bondage and to be a father unto them and 
a judge, though there was a host of honored 
co-workers with him— Aaron, Hur, 
Joshua, Caleb, et al. So also in later days 
God has from time to time raised up special 
instruments, amply fitted to serve in 
special emergencies, and to lead in reforms, 
etc.; e.g., Martin Luther, John Knox, John 
Wesley, etc. But in every such case the 
present reward has been persecution. And 
so severe have been the trials and so perilous 
the positions of such men, that nothing 
but their zeal and devotion to the cause and 
its future recompenses could be a sufficient 
incentive to induce them to fulfil their 
mission. 

In view of these facts, it becomes the 
people of God at all times to carefully observe 
such remarkable evidences of God's 
appointment, and to co-operate with God 
in whatever way he may be pleased to use 
their talents. If any man would be more 
abundantly used of the Lord in his blessed 
service, let him seek first to be fitted for it 
more and more. Let him imitate that beloved 
and honored servant, Moses, in meekness, 
humility, energy and untiring zeal and 
self-sacrificing service of the Lord. But 
the wise steward will seek always to cultivate 
along the lines of his natural abilities, 
and not expect the Lord to work a miracle 
for his advancement, and so waste valuable 
time seeking to develop that which he does 
not by nature possess. True, the Lord could 
work a miracle if he desired to do so; but 
that is not his usual method. Miracles are 
his reserve forces, and are only brought forward 
when the natural means are insufficient 
to accomplish the divine purpose. 

R1651 : page 143 

MOSES SENT AS A DELIVERER. 



II QUAR. LESSON IX., MAY 27, EXOD. 3:10-20. 

Golden Text— "Fear them not, for I am with thee."- 
Isa. 41:10. 



When God would deliver Israel, he chose 
for his servant and representative the meekest 
man, Moses. (Num. 12:3.) This disposition 
was necessary not only for the 
task before him, but also because this one 
was to be a type of the great deliverer of 
all mankind from the bondage of sin— "the 
man Christ Jesus," who was "meek and 
lowly of heart;" and also the body of Christ 
which is the Church.— See Acts 3:22,23. 

Moses' humble birth, as one of an enslaved 
race, would naturally incline him to 
humility. And this disposition continued 
with him, even though he became an adopted 
member of the royal family. His subsequent 
boldness and ability as an executive 
were due to the fact that he acted as God's 
agent and representative. This gave that 
beautiful blend to his character, of ability 
with humility. 

It was forty years from the time that 
Moses was born to the time when he first 
essayed to help his brethren and was misunderstood 
(Exod. 2:11-15), and it was 
forty years from that time until he became 
their deliverer. These two equal periods 
seem to be typical of the two ages— the 
Jewish and the Gospel ages, which were 
also of equal length— 1845 years. At the 
end of the Jewish age Christ offered himself 
to Israel as their deliverer, but they refused 
him and he went away. His return 
is due at the end of a like period, at the 
close of the Gospel age. At his second 
presence, during the Millennial age, he will 
deliver all who are "God's people" from 
the bondage of sin under Satan, as Moses 
delivered his people from the bondage of 
Egypt under Pharaoh. 

During Moses' absence he married a Gentile 
wife, and so in the interval between 
Christ's first and second advents he selects 
a wife from among the Gentiles— the Gospel 
Church, the Bride, the Lamb's wife. 

R1652 : page 144 

After the long preparation of his chosen 
instrument— God's time had come to send 

R1652 : page 144 

him, and his servant was ready; and lo, 

from the midst of the burning bush that 

was not consumed, and which forcibly illustrated 

the power of God to preserve and 



use his servant in the midst of fiery trials, 
Moses heard the call of God to become the 
leader of his people out of Egyptian bondage. 
-Verse 10. 

But how could he do it? Moses looked 
at himself and at the magnitude of such an 
undertaking, and feeling his own insufficiency 
he replied, "Who am I, that I should 
go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring 
forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?" 
It seemed a most improbable thing that the 
Egyptians would give up two millions of 
profitable slaves for any consideration that 
he could present, or any power that he 
could bring to bear upon them. Then how 
could the people be induced to follow his 
leadership? To these misgivings concerning 
himself, Moses received the all-sufficient 
assurance of the Lord— "Certainly I 
will be with thee," etc. That was enough; 
and strong in this confidence, he went forth 
to prove at every step of the way the abundant 
sufficiency of divine grace. 

Herein is encouragement also for every 
true servant of the Lord who humbly relies 
upon his promises while striving to walk 
in the ways of his appointment: "Certainly 
I will be with thee." Oh, how much 
we need this blessed assurance; for who, 
of himself, is sufficient for the responsibilities 
of the Lord's service? 

The great deliverance was indeed wrought 
out by God by miracles and wonders by 
the hand of his servant Moses; and those 
modern critics who reject the testimony of 
miracles are simply insisting that God 
should always operate within the range of 
human understanding. But to the sincere 
inquirer after truth there is no clearer testimony 
of the divine power and resources 
than the testimony of miracles. The ten 
miraculous plagues upon Egypt did their 
appointed work, and Israel went out a free 
people under the leadership of Moses; and 
all the world were witnesses of the power 
of the God of Israel. 

This deliverance of Israel from Egypt 
was a marvelous deliverance, and yet the 
prophets tell us of a still greater deliverance 
for the people, yet to be accomplished, 
when they shall be gathered out of all nations 
whither they have been driven, and 
when even the generations of them that are 
in the graves shall come forth, and they 
shall be brought into their own land and 
securely planted there. (See Jer. 16:14,15; 



Ezek. 37:12-14; Isa. 65:21-23.) In 
comparison with this deliverance yet to be 
accomplished, we are assured that the former 
from Egypt will seem so insignificant 
as not to be named any more; for that was 
but a type of the one to come. Then Abraham 
will realize the reward of his faith, 
when he and his posterity actually come into 
the land which God promised him for an 
everlasting possession (Gen. 17:8), and which 
Stephen said (Acts 7:5) he never owned a 
foot of in his past life, but died in faith that 
the promise would be fulfilled at his return, 
—in the morning of the resurrection. 

"For this purpose have I raised thee up," 
is recorded of this Egyptian Pharaoh. 
(Rom. 9:17.) As God made choice of 
Moses for one purpose, he also made choice 
of this Pharaoh for another. He did not 
make the one hard and tyrannical, and the 
other meek and obedient; but he chose 
such as were so naturally and of their own 
free will and choice. The meek man was 
chosen to one position and the froward one 
to another. God did not let a good man 
come to the throne and then corrupt him; 
but he raised up a bad man, and thus had 
in him a suitable one by whom to show 
forth his power. 

God's dealings, always just, and often 
merciful, have an effect upon men according 
to their hearts. The same providence 
that would move one man to repentance 
would move another to hardness of heart. 
In Pharaoh's case the plagues brought repentance, 
but the goodness of God in hearing 
his prayer and removing the plagues 
each time produced hardness of heart. 
Thus seen, it was not by exerting some bad 
influence upon Pharaoh's mind, but by extending 
his mercy to Pharaoh and his people, 
that God hardened his heart. 

The Egyptian bondage typified the bondage 
of sin; Pharaoh typified Satan; and 
Israel typified all those who long for deliverance 
that they may present themselves 
to God and his service. The deliverance 
from Egypt represented this overthrow of 
the power of sin at our Lord's second advent. 
The plagues upon Egypt represented 
the troubles coming upon the whole world 
in the near future which will effectually 
break down the various enslaving and oppressive 
systems of the present time— social, 
political, religious and financial— and 
engulf them all in utter ruin. 



page 146 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1655 : page 146 

LETTERS OF CONGRATULATION. 



Our mails are very large since the Extra 
TOWER was sent forth. We are receiving from 
all quarters congratulations on the completeness 
of the answer to the charges of the 
conspirators. 

Please accept our thanks for these; and be 
assured that we will no more be puffed up by 
the loving congratulations of our friends than 
we were cast down by the slanders of our enemies. 
To the Lord be praise, now and ever 
more. Give thanks with us for our mutual 
deliverance.-THE EDITORS. 

R1652 : page 146 

ANCIENT RECORDS. 



ACCOUNTS OF THE HEBREW INVASION FOUND IN 
EGYPT. 

Science contains an interesting account of 
the Tellel-Amorna tablets from the pen of the 
Rev. Thomas Harrison, of Staplehurst, Kent. 
These tablets, 320 in number, were discovered 
by a fellah woman in 1 887 among the ruins of 
the palace of Amenopis IV., known as Khu-en-Aten, 
between Missieh and Assiout, about 180 
miles south of Cairo. They have been found to 
contain a political correspondence of the very 
greatest interest, dating from some 3,370 years 
back. Many are from Palestine, written by 
princes of the Amorites, Phenicians, Philistines, 
etc., the burden of almost all being: "Send, 
I pray thee, chariots and men to keep the city 
of the King, my Lord." Among the enemies 
against whom help is thus invoked are the 
Abiri, easily recognized as the Hebrews. The 
date fixes that of the Bible (1 Kings 4:1) as 
accurate. Many names occur which are familiar 
in Scripture, as for example, Japhia, one 
of the Kings killed by Joshua (Josh. 10:3); 
Adonizedec, King of Jerusalem (ditto); and 
Jabin, King of Hazor. (Josh. 1 1.) Very pathetic 
are the letters of Ribadda, the brave and 
warlike King of Gebel, whose entreaties for 
aid are observed to grow less obsequious and 
more businesslike as his enemies prevailed 
against him, robbing him eventually of his wife 
and children, whom he was powerless to protect. 
But the greatness of Egypt was waning 
under the nineteenth dynasty; enemies were 
pressing her at home, and the chariots and the 
horsemen went not forth. 



Remittances from foreign countries should 
be made by Foreign Money Order. From 
Canada by International Money Order. 

Please remember that Canadian and all 
other Foreign stamps are useless to us. 



R1652 : page 147 

VOL. XV. JUNE 1, 1894. NO. 11. 

CAST NOT AWAY YOUR CONFIDENCE. 



"But call to remembrance the former days, in which, after 
ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions; 
partly, whilst ye were made a gazingstock, both by 
reproaches and afflictions; and partly whilst ye became 
companions of them that were so used. For ye had 
compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully 
the spoiling of your goods, knowing in yourselves that 
ye have in heaven a better and an enduring substance. 
Cast not away therefore your confidence, which 
hath great recompense of reward; for ye have 
need of patience, that, after ye have done the will 
of God, ye might receive the promise. For yet a 
little while, and he that shall come will come, and 
will not tarry. Now the just shall live by faith; 
but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no 
pleasure in him. But we are not of them who 
draw back unto destruction, but of them that believe 
to the saving of the soul."— Heb. 10:32-39. 

WITH very many of God's people, as well 
as with the world's people, the ideal 
Christian life is one of constant peace and 
tranquility. They have never learned that 
"the peace of God which passeth all [worldly] 
understanding," promised to the Christian, is 
to rule in and keep his heart (Phil. 4:7; Col. 3:15), 
and does not apply to his outward life. 
They forget, or perhaps never learned, that 
our Master's words were, "In the world ye 
shall have tribulation," but in me ye shall 
have peace (in your hearts). "If the world 
hate you, ye know that it hated me before it 
hated you." "If they have called the Master 
of the house Beelzebub, how much more them 
of his household?" "Yea, and all that will 
live godly in Christ Jesus, [in this present evil 
world or dispensation], shall suffer persecution." 
It is of a wicked class, and of the 
saints, that the Prophet declared, "They are 
not in trouble as other men."— John 16:33; 
15:18; Matt. 10:25; 2 Tim. 3:12; Psa. 73:5. 

Only to those who have some knowledge of 
God's great plan is this, his dealing with his 
people, understandable and readable. The 
world marvels that those whom God receives 
into his family, as sons by redemption and 
adoption, should be required or even permitted 
to suffer afflictions. But to the well-instructed 
saint the Apostle says, "Think it not 
strange concerning the fiery trial that shall try 
you, as though some strange thing happened 
unto you." And this one may now clearly 
discern the object and utility of present trials, 
afflictions and persecutions. He sees that 
these are in fullest accord with his high calling, 
his heavenly calling,— to be an heir of 



God and a joint-heir with Jesus Christ our 
Lord, "if so be that we suffer with him, that we 
may be also glorified together."— Rom. 8:17. 

R1653 : page 147 

But why should a share in the coming glory 
be made dependent and contingent upon present 
sufferings? We answer, for two reasons. 

(1) Because severe trials and testings of 
our love for God and his truth, and of our faith 

in him and his promises, are only a wise provision 
on God's part, in view of the very high 
honor and responsibility of the great office to 
which he has called us. If it was proper that 
our Lord and Redeemer should be tested in 
all points as to faith and obedience prior to 
his exaltation to the excellent glory and power 
of his divine, immortal nature, much more so 
it is fitting that we, who were once aliens and 
strangers, far from God, and children of wrath 
even as others, should be thoroughly tested; 

R1653 : page 148 

not tested as to the perfection of our earthen 

vessels, for God and we well know that in our 

fallen flesh dwelleth no perfection, but tested 

as to our new minds, our consecrated wills, 

whether or not these are fully consecrated to 

the Lord, firmly established in the love of 

truth, purity and righteousness in general. 

And also to see whether we would compromise 

any of the principles of righteousness for 

worldly favor, selfish ambition, or for any of 

"the pleasures of sin for a season." Those 

who love righteousness and hate iniquity, who 

develop positive characters, these are the "overcomers' 

who shall, as members of Christ, inherit 

all things. The undecided, the luke-warm 

—neither cold nor hot— are far from having 

the spirit of the Kingdom class, and will surely 

be rejected— "spewed out."— Rev. 3:16. 

(2) A share in the coming glory is dependent 
upon present sufferings, for the reason 

that the coming glories are to be bestowed 
only upon those who have the spirit of Christ, the 
spirit (disposition) of holiness. And whoever 
has received this holy spirit or disposition and 
been transformed by the renewing of his mind 
or will, so that no longer selfishness but love 
shall rule over his thoughts and words and 
deeds, that person, if in the world at all, could 
not avoid present suffering. His love for God, 
his zeal for God's service and people, his faith 
in God's Word and his uncompromising attitude 



respecting everything relating to these 

would be so greatly in contrast with the prevalent 

spirit of doubt, selfishness and compromise 

that he would be thought peculiar, called 

an extremist and fanatic, if not a hypocrite. 

Evil surmisings, out of hearts not fully consecrated, 

will attribute every good deed to some 

selfish or evil motive, and therefore, "Ye shall 

be hated of all men for my [Christ's] name's 

sake;" for "the world knoweth [understandeth] 

us not, because it knew him not." (Luke 21:17; 

1 John 3:1.) The reason for all this 

is evident: it is because "the god of this world 

hath blinded the eyes" of the vast majority 

of men; because the faithful, who appreciate 

the truth, who have new hearts (wills) and the 

right spirit on these subjects, are but a "little 

flock." 

And these conditions will not be changed 
until the testing of the "little flock" is finished. 
God will permit evil to be in the ascendancy 
until that testing, sifting, refining 
and polishing of the Bride of Christ is fully 
accomplished. Then Satan shall be bound for 
a thousand years, and not be permitted to 
further blind and deceive the nations during 
that Millennial age of blessing; but, on the 
contrary, the little flock of overcomers, with 
Christ, their Lord and Head, will bless all the 
families of the earth with a full knowledge 
of the truth. 

Therefore, dear brethren and sisters, let us 
give heed to the Apostle's words, and not cast 
away our confidence. Confidence in God, and 
in the outworking of his great plan, and confidence 
in all who trust in the precious blood 
and are bringing forth the fruits of the spirit 
in their daily lives— meekness, patience, brotherly-kindness, 
love. 

The Apostle here clearly shows that there 
are two ways of enduring the afflictions of 
Christ: (1) to be made a gazingstock both by 
afflictions and reproaches, and (2) by avowing 
our sympathy for the reproached ones and thus 
sharing their reproaches and afflictions. For 
if one member suffer, all the members of the 
body of Christ suffer with it. 

"Call to remembrance the former days," 
and note that your afflictions and trials came 
principally after you had been illuminated with 
the light of the knowledge of God, shining in 
the face of Jesus Christ our Lord; and that they 
have increased as the light of present truth has 
increased with you. It is not difficult to discern 
the reason for this. The great Adversary 
is not interested in disturbing those who are 



"asleep in Zion;" but he is ever on the alert 
to mislead and entangle those that are awake. 
And the more active we become in the service 
of the Lord and the truth, and consequently 
the more actively opposed to Satan and error, 
the more he will fight against us. And the 
more faithfully and vigorously we fight the 
good fight of faith, as good soldiers of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, the more we will have of the 
Master's approval now, and the greater will be 
our reward in the Kingdom. 

R1653 : page 149 

No doubt there are many and more severe 
trials just before us. From God's standpoint, 
having been blest with great light, we should 
be able to endure greater trials and afflictions. 
From Satan's standpoint, we, as a Gideon's 
band, armed with the truth, are more injurious 
to his cause than all others combined. The 
only wonder to us is that he has not assailed 
us still more fiercely in the past. Perhaps he 
was hindered; perhaps he will be granted yet 
more liberty to buffet us, as the night draws 
on. Such is our expectation, based upon the 
direct statements and the types of Scripture. 

But such reflections should bring us no sadness, 
no fear; for he that is on our part is more 
than all that be against us. (1 John 4:4; Rom. 8:31.) 
The Lord of hosts is with us. His 
promises, as well as his providences, are walls 
of salvation and protection on every hand. 
What shall separate us from the love of God 
in Christ? Shall tribulation? No! it shall 
but cause us to draw closer to him; and under 
his protecting care we shall rest. His grace 
is sufficient for us. His strength is made 
manifest in our weakness. When we feel weak 
in ourselves, then we are strong in him. He 
will never leave us nor forsake us. 
"Watchman, what of the night?" 
"The morning cometh, and a night also." 

See Poems and Hymns of Dawn, pages 62 and 286. 



R1653 : page 149 

THE RETRIBUTIVE CHARACTER OF DIVINE LAW. 



"Be not deceived: God is not mocked; for whatsoever 
a man soweth, that shall he also reap."— Gal. 6:7. 



THE Apostle Paul here, addressing the Church, 
announces a principle of divine law which 
is applicable not only to the Church, but to all 
men everywhere. Hosea expresses the same 
truth, saying that if we sow to the wind we 
shall reap the whirlwind; Solomon says, if we 
sow iniquity, we reap vanity; and again Paul 
says, if we sow sparingly we reap sparingly, 
and if we sow bountifully we reap bountifully; 
which is equally true, whether we sow wild oats 
or good wheat.— Hosea 8:7; Prov. 22:8; 
2 Cor. 9:6. 

And it is in view of the harvest of the world's 
sowing, that we are informed that "the eyes 
of the Lord are in every place, beholding the 
evil and the good;" that "God shall bring 
every work into judgment, with every secret 
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be 
evil"; and that "there is nothing covered 
that shall not be revealed, neither hid that 
shall not be known;" that "whatsoever has 
been spoken in darkness shall be heard in the 
light"; and that "spoken in the ear, in closets, 
shall be proclaimed openly." And again we 
read, "Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith 
the Lord."-Prov. 15:3; Eccl. 12:14; Luke 12:2,3; 
Rom. 12:19. 

But when will this reckoning time come? for 
now, as saith the Prophet Malachi (3:15), men 
"call the proud happy; yea, they that work 
wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt 
God are even delivered." With the Psalmist 
(94:3,4) we inquire, "Lord, how long shall 
the wicked triumph, and all the workers of iniquity 
boast themselves?" and the Apostle 
Paul answers that the Lord "hath appointed 
a day in which he will judge the world in 
righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained," 
--the Christ. (Acts 17:31.) And 
"then," says the Prophet Malachi to those 
that fear the Lord and whom he hath chosen 
as his jewels, "shall ye return and discern between 
the righteous and the wicked, between 
him that serveth God and him that serveth him 
not."-Mal. 3:18. 

But take heed: the same prophet raises a 
suggestive question, which all would do well to 
ponder; saying, "Who may abide the day of 
his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? 
for he is like a refiner's fire and like 
fuller's soap. "..."And I will come near 
to you to judgment, and I will be a swift 
witness against the sorcerers, and against the 
adulterers, and against false swearers, and against 
those that oppress the hireling in his wages, 
the widow and the fatherless, and that turn 



aside the stranger from his right, and fear not 
me, saith the Lord of hosts."— Mai. 3:2,5. 

The reference of these Scriptures is to the 
great judgment of the day of the Lord— the 

R1653 : page 150 

day of trouble with which this Gospel Dispensation 

is to close,— variously described as the 

day "of wrath," "of vengeance," "of recompenses," 

and as a "time of trouble such as 

was not since there was a nation." 

But while this great judgment will have to 
do with the world in general—with nations 
and corporations and all civil, social and religious 
organizations of men; and while it will 
touch the cases of all the individuals living at 
that time, we naturally inquire where retributive 
justice came or is to come in, in dealing 
with all the generations of the past? 

Our Lord answers the question when he says, 
"The hour is coming in which all that are in 
the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of 

R1654: page 150 

man and shall come forth; they that have done 
good, into the resurrection of life; and they 
that have done evil, unto the resurrection by 
judgment." (John 5:28,29.) The whole Millennial 
age is thus set forth as a "day" of reckoning, 
of trial, of judgment. And in that searching 
judgment there will be a reckoning, even 
for every pernicious word (Matt. 12:36); and 
by submission and learning obedience under 
those judgments, the masses of mankind who 
will to obey are to be gradually raised up to 
perfection of being, as well as of knowledge. 

WHERE COMES IN FORGIVENESS OF SINS? 



But here a philosophic and important question 
arises as to the extent to which the justification 
of a sinner, through faith in the precious 
blood of Christ, may intercept the course of 
the above law, that a man must reap what he 
has sown. In other words, Will his justification 
save him from the miserable harvest of a 
former sowing of wild oats? 

We answer, yes, in one sense it will. The 
just penalty for all sin is death— the severest 
penalty that can be inflicted. And from this 
penalty his justification freely exonerates him; 
and the terms of the new covenant (Jer. 31:31-34; 



Heb. 8:10-12) assure us that the forgiveness 
will be so full and free that his past iniquities 
and sins will be remembered no more. 
That is, they will no more rise up in judgment 
against him, demanding their just penalty- 
death; for blessed are those whose iniquity 
is forgiven and whose sin is covered; blessed 
is the man to whom the Lord will not impute 
[reckon] sin. (Rom. 4:7.) All who, by 
faith in Christ's sacrifice for sin, and by consecration 
of heart and life to God's service, 
come under the covering provisions of the New 
Covenant are thus blessed. The iniquity (or 
legal sentence) of such is passed or forgiven 
entirely: and while their sins and their results 
(the harvest of their misdeeds sown before they 
came to a realization of the exceeding sinfulness 
of sin, or to an appreciation of God's 
mercy in Christ) are still painfully with them, 
they are assured that these are covered; that 
God does not regard them as they really are, 
but imputes their sins to Christ who already has 
paid their penalty, and imputes of his worthiness 
to their account. They are further assured 
that God's provision under the New Covenant 
is, that they may be healed or cured of the 
weaknesses brought on them through sin and 
now reckoned as "covered" from the divine 
eye.-Rom. 4:7,8; Acts 3:19. 

These sins or actual defects are to be blotted 
out or wiped out when the times of restitution 
shall arrive, at the second advent of Christ. 
The result of this blotting or wiping out of sin 
will be new bodies, new beings,— free from sin, 
from imperfection and every consequence and 
evidence of sin. With the Church this cleansing 
and blotting out process begins with the 
present life, and will be completed early in the 
Millennial dawning (Psa. 46:5) by a share in 
the first resurrection. The world's cleansing 
time will be the entire Millennial age, or "day 
of judgment," when those who then shall learn 
of and accept Christ and the New Covenant 
may gradually be cleansed and healed; and, at 
the close of that age, if faithful to their opportunities, 
they may be presented blameless and 
perfect before God, needing no further healing 
or cleansing, but being again, as was Adam, 
the human image of the divine Creator,— perfect 
men. 

The Scriptures, as well as observation, assure 
us that our justification before God does 
not remove at once and without our co-operation 
all the results of previous transgressions. 
The harvest comes like the sowing, but the 



R1654:page 151 

penitent and forgiven one has promise of grace 

to help him in the battle with his inherited as 

well as his cultivated weakness; and so we read 

(1 John 1:9): God "is faithful and just to forgive 

us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." 

It is in this cleansing process, 

which follows the legal justification, that the 

justified believer must, of necessity, experience 

some of the baneful results of a past course of 

sin,— reap the reward of his former sowing. 

While the Lord will be very merciful in dealing 

with him, nevertheless, as a wise physician, 

he will not spare the necessary discipline to 

eradicate the deep-seated evil propensities of 

long cultivation in the past. 

Here the retributive character of divine law 
is specially noteworthy. Men often make a 
distinction between the law of nature and the 
moral laws, calling the one natural and the other 
divine. But the fixed principles of both are 
divine in their origin, and accomplish the divine 
will in their operation. Both operate on 
the basis of retributive justice. All divine law, 
whether of nature or of morals, is but the operation 
of certain fixed principles of righteousness, 
having for their object the peace and 
happiness of all intelligent creatures under its 
jurisdiction. Obedience to this law brings 
its reward of happiness, while any interference 
with it incurs its certain penalty. 

If you put your hand into the fire, it will be 
burned, and you will suffer pain; if you hold 
your hand before the fire it will be warmed 
and your comfort and happiness will be thus 
ministered to. Thus the law of nature— which 
was designed to comfort and bless us, is also 
prepared to punish us if we violate its proper 
use. And not only so, but it is also prepared 
to grade its penalties in proportion to the aggravation 
of the offense against it. If you put 
your hand into the fire for a very short time it 
will scorch it; persist a little longer, and it will 
blister it; and a little longer still, and it will 
consume it. Apply it properly in the cooking 
of your food, and it will reward you with a 
savory meal; but applied improperly the food 
may be rendered undesirable or unfit for use. 
Water, also one of our greatest blessings, becomes, 
if the law of nature be disregarded, an 
agent of death and destruction. And so throughout 
the laws of nature we might trace retribution. 

In the realm of moral law the case is the 
same. If you violate the principles of righteousness 
you deface the image of God in your 



being. Impure thoughts write in clearly legible 
signs upon the countenance the dark lines 
of a bad character; while pure, just and noble 
thoughts illuminate the countenance and render 
the pure character transparent to beholders. 
And the operations of moral law are as 
sure and reliable as are those of natural law. 

The fact that the retribution— the reward or 
the penalty—is often delayed is frequently 
presumed upon by the foolish, who vainly 
think that they can sow their crop of wild oats 
and never realize their harvest. Both individuals 
and nations have long presumed to act 
upon this hazardous and vain hypothesis; and 
well indeed would it be if they would even 
now hearken to the Apostle's warning:— "Be 
not deceived: God is not mocked; for whatsoever 
a man soweth, that shall he also reap." 

The operations of this law are most manifest 
upon classes and nations— first, because their 
prominence gives them world-wide publicity; 
and, second, because their harvest must of 
necessity be in the present life, since beyond 
the present life they will have no existence. 
A glance at the pages of history reveals the fact 
that all the nations of the past have reaped a 
bitter harvest, and amid harrowing scenes have 
breathed their last. They had their rising, 
struggling periods and then their flourishing 
eras; and then pride and fulness of bread 
caused them to rest in fancied security, and to 
sink in the scale of morals, until their decline 
was followed by their fall:— they reaped what 
they had sown. 

Just now all the nations of the world are fast 
approaching the terrible crises of their national 
existences. In a great time of unparalleled 
trouble, which is even now imminent, they are 
about to reap what they have sown. They 
have sown to the wind the seeds of selfishness, 
and now they are about to reap the whirlwind 
of anarchy and terror and the destruction 
of all law and order and national and social 
organization. 

R1654: page 152 

The operations of this law in individual cases, 
though not so prominent, are none the less sure. 
Every thought harbored, and every disposition 
exercised and cultivated, is woven into the 
fabric of individual character; and this character, 
which is more or less plastic in early life, 
becomes fixed and fossilized in the course of 
years. If the cultivation has been along the 
lines of righteousness and truth, according to 



the light possessed— whether of conscience 

merely, or of revelation also— the ripened fruit 

of an established, right-preferring and benevolent 

character is a blessed harvest in comparison 

with others, the reverse. If the cultivation 

has been along the lines of depravity, self-gratification 

and degradation, the terrible fruits 

are a fearful penalty. 

Even though such a one be freely forgiven 
upon repentance and faith in the Redeemer— 
fully absolved from legal condemnation through 
Christ, who bore its divinely pronounced penalty, 
death, nevertheless, the fruits of his sowing 
are manifest in his character, and must all 
be rooted out and a proper character formed 
at a considerable cost of painful but valuable 
experience; for God is just, not only to forgive 
us our sins, but also to cleanse us from all 
unrighteousness. The eradicating of these evil 
dispositions, propensities and appetites, deep-rooted 
and long-cultivated, will cause great 
disturbances of the soil in which they have 
grown; and pain as well as joy will attend 
their removal, and their replacement with the 
graces of the spirit. The Lord, as a wise physician, 
will be as merciful and tender with his 
patient as the necessities of the cure will permit. 
All will be shown their need of his aid, but no 
patient will be treated further except with 
his own consent and co-operation. With the 
Church this treatment takes place in the present 
life and is a treatment of the will rather than 
of the body; for although the body will be 
greatly helped by the treatment, it is not the 
Great Physician's purpose to cure these marred 
"earthen vessels," but to give to this class 
perfect spiritual bodies early in the Millennial 
dawn. In these the consecrated will is being 
transformed and renewed to perfect harmony 
with the will of God, the mind of Christ. The 
"overcomers," the true Church, passing through 
discipline and cleansing and trials of faith and 
afflictions now, and being approved of the 
Lord, will not come into the judgment (trial) 
of the Millennial age (1 Cor. 11:32), but, with 

R1655 : page 152 

the Redeemer their Lord, will be kings and 
priests of God who shall judge the world and 
recompense to them good or evil, impartially, 
under the terms of the New Covenant.— 
1 Cor. 6:2. 

Another feature of retribution upon the 
world during its Millennial trial will be the 
publicity which will then be given to the reaping 



and to the deeds of the past. Our Lord 
has so intimated, saying, "There is nothing 
covered that shall not be revealed; neither hid 
that shall not be known," etc. (Matt. 10:26; 
Luke 12:2,3.) This also will come about in 
a natural way, when in that day all that are in 
their graves shall come forth— when the murderer 
and his victim, the debtor and his creditor, 
the thief and his dupe, the defamer and 
the defamed, must face each other and the facts 
which, with even the secret motives, will be 
discerned. The terms of their reconciliation 
to each other and to the judge will be equitable, 
and will be known to all. 

Past history will have proclaimed to the 
world the character of many a Nero; but in 
addition to that, there will be the necessity of 
facing the former victims of their ignoble cruelty; 
and that in the light of a new and healthy 
public sentiment that will manifest crime in all 
its horrid deformity. Truly such "shall awake 
to shame and lasting [Heb., olan] contempt," 
even in their own eyes; for as their renewed 
manhood begins to assert itself, they will the 
more fully realize the depth of the pit of degradation 
whence they were digged; and even 
the generous forgiveness of formerly injured 
and outraged fellow-men will be a great humiliation. 
It will truly be, as the Scriptures suggest, 
the heaping of coals of fire on their heads 
(Prov. 25:21,22; Rom. 12:20), so great will 
be their shame and confusion.— Jer. 20: 1 1 . 

It should be borne in mind, too, that the 
only standard of judgment in public sentiment, 
then, will be character. None of the false 
standards— e.g., of wealth, of noble (?) birth, 

R1655 : page 153 

or of an aristocracy of power, by which men 
are often measured now, and under which 
cloaks the wicked often take shelter— will then 
avail anything; for, under the new dispensation, 
men will come forth shorn of all their 
former possessions. They will have neither 
wealth nor power; and, in the light of that 
age, heredity will be nothing whereof to boast. 

The same conditions which will thus expose 
the evils of the past life and thus, in the natural 
operations of moral law, bring about a measure 
of retribution to the evil-doers, will also make 
manifest the good deeds of the righteous, so 
that even the slightest favors done for others 
(which at the time blessed the characters of the 
doers) will then be recognized and appreciated. 

In this view of the matter we can see how, 



in a perfectly natural way, a man must reap 
the harvest of his sowing of wild oats, even 
though he has been freely forgiven, absolved 
from guilt and its penalty, death, and legally 
justified through faith in Christ. He will reap 
it, both in the difficulties he will have piled up 
for himself in the hardening of his own character, 
making the steps up to perfection more 
painful and slow, and requiring severer discipline 
and also in the just disapproval or indignation 
of a righteous public sentiment in that 
Millennial day of judgment. Such will be the 
natural and inevitable results of present wrong 
doing, though one consolation will be the fact 
that this humiliation, in some measure at least, 
will be shared by all; "for there is none righteous 
[none perfect], no, not one" (Rom. 3:10); 
and all must pray, "Forgive us our trespasses 
as we forgive others." It will indeed be a time 
for melting and mellowing all hearts. Thus 
the Lord will take away the stony heart and 
give to all who under the New Covenant shall 
become his people (typified by Israel) a heart 
of flesh, according to his promise.— 
Ezek. 36:22-25-28. 

In some instances a portion of the reaping 
is experienced in the present life; and in some 
it will be in the life to come, as the Apostle 
intimates in 1 Tim. 5:24,25. And so also the 
good works are sometimes manifest now, and 
rightly appreciated and rewarded. But whether 
now or hereafter, our Lord's assurance is that 
even the gift of a cup of cold water to one of 
his disciples, because he is his disciple, shall 
have its reward (Matt. 10:40-42); so minute 
will be the Lord's cognizance of character and 
works, and his rewards therefore; and none 
the less his because accomplished in the natural 
operation of retributive laws. 

A murderer may be one who has little or no 
knowledge of God, whose hereditary disadvantages 
may be great and whose environment 
may be very unfavorable: he may meet with a 
just recompense for his crime at the hands of 
his fellow men, and yet in due time come forth 
from his grave unto [the privileges and opportunities 
of] a resurrection [lifting up— all the 
way up] by judgment [trial, discipline], and if 
obedient reach the height of perfection and 
life everlasting, although the sins of his past 
life may have made mountains of difficulties in 
his character for him to clamber over during 
that judgment age. For some such wicked 
murderers the Lord who will be the judge himself 
prayed forgiveness upon the ground of at 
least a large measure of ignorance.— Luke 23:34. 



On the other hand, a man may be a moral 
man, who has "tasted the good Word of God, 
and the powers of the age to come" and who 
has been made a partaker of the spirit of holiness 
through faith in Christ; yet he may permit 
envy and strife to take possession of his 
heart, and he may hate his brother though he 
outwardly violates no law and is esteemed 
among men. Yet such a one is a murderer at 
heart (1 John 3:15), restrained from outward 
violence by the respect for the opinions of others 
or by fear of the consequences. Who will 
deny that such a one, because of light enjoyed, 
may not have even greater difficulties to overcome 
in the reformation of his character than 
the grosser but ignorant murderer. To whom 
much is given in the way of knowledge, opportunity, 
etc., of him will much be required. 
(Luke 12:48.) That judgment will be according 
to knowledge and ability to do right— a 
just recompense of reward. 

Only the idiotic and insane are in total darkness. 
All have had at least a conscience, and 
few have been without some hope of reward in 
following its dictates, though, as Paul says, 

R1655 : page 154 

they had no hope and were without God 
in the world— they were without the only real 
hope of the gospel. (Eph. 2:12.) Previous to 
the announcement of the gospel hope of everlasting 
life, and its foreshadowing in Israel, 
the hope of the world in general was only for 
the present rewards of righteousness. And no 
other hope was clearly held out, even to Israel, 
although there were hints and foreshadowings 
to them of the gospel hope, as there was also 
in the promise given in Eden— that the seed of 
the woman should bruise the serpent's head. 
These hints of hope were doubtless treasured 
up and reasoned upon by the more thoughtful 
minds; but the masses of men discerned only 
the simple lesson that honesty, righteousness, 
was the best present policy. 

But when Christ came he "brought life [everlasting] 
and immortality [clearly] to light 
through the gospel" (2 Tim. 1:10); and, proportionately 
as men have come directly or indirectly 
in contact with this gospel, their responsibility 
has been increased, whether they 
accepted or rejected, opposed or ignored it. 
As it is written, "This is the condemnation, 
that light is come into the world and men loved 
darkness rather than light, because their deeds 
were evil."— John 3:19. 



The divine arrangement regarding retribution 
seems generally to be that of sequence, so 
that under it rewards and punishments follow 
naturally, as the results of obedience or disobedience 
to law. Yet in the cases, both of rewards 
and of penalties, God sometimes steps 
beyond this order, as, for instance, when he 
brings upon Satan and his followers swift destruction 
at the end of the Millennial age, and 
when he exalts his Church with Christ their 
head, to the divine nature and Kingdom and 
glory. His extraordinary methods have also 
been occasionally manifested in the past— viz., 
in the destruction of the world by the flood, 
in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, in 
the confusion of tongues at Babel, and other 
instances of minor note. But these are special 
and exceptional exhibitions both of his wrath 
and of his grace. A just estimate of the Lord's 
dealings in the future judgment of the repentant 
of the world may be approximated by a 
careful observance of his dealings with his justified 
and consecrated children now. Though 
justified, we are not liberated from all the consequences 
of our past ignorance or waywardness. 
If in youthful ignorance and waywardness 
bad habits were contracted which have 
impaired health and weakened moral and 
physical powers, we have all the difficulties to 
struggle against now, though we realize the 
divine forgiveness and assistance. This is our 
judgment day; and the judgment of the world 
will proceed upon the same general principles. 
They will first be brought to a knowledge of 
the truth, and will then be judged according 
to their use or abuse of that knowledge after 
they receive it, as worthy or unworthy of life, 
the good and bad actions of their first life previous 
to their knowledge of the truth entering 
into it only in the natural order of the retributive 
character of moral law, as above 
described. 



R1667 : page 154 
"IN MY NAME." 



There were only two or three of us 

Who came to the place of prayer- 
Came in the teeth of a driving storm; 

But for that we did not care, 
Since after our hymns of praise had risen, 



And our earnest prayers were said, 
The Master Himself was present there 
And gave us the living bread. 

We noted his look in each other's face, 

So loving, and glad, and free: 
We felt his touch when our heads were bowed, 

We heard his "Come to Me!" 
Nobody saw him lift the latch, 

And none unbarred the door; 
But "Peace" was his token in every heart, 

And how could we ask for more? 

Each of us felt the relief from sin, 

Christ's purchase for one and all; 
Each of us dropped his load of care, 

And heard the heavenly call; 
And over our spirits a blessed calm 

Swept in from the Jasper sea, 
And strength was ours for the toil of life 

In the days that were yet to be. 

It was only a handful gathered in 

To that little place of prayer. 
Outside were struggle and strife and sin, 

But the Lord himself was there. 
He came to redeem the pledge he gave— 

Wherever his loved ones be, 
To give his comfort and joy to them, 

Though they count but two or three.— Sel. 



R1656 : page 155 

THE TEST OF ENDURANCE. 



"Let not him that girdeth on his harness boast 
himself as he that putteth it off."— 1 Kings 20: 1 1 . 

THE test of endurance is certainly one of the 
severest tests of faithfulness to which the 
elect Church, the body of Christ, is subjected. 
It is the test which gauges and registers the 
strength of every other virtue and grace, and 
no soldier of the cross will be crowned with 
the laurels of victory who has not stood this 
test. The Christian life is a warfare, and the 
above words of one of the kings of Israel to a 
boastful enemy of the Lord's people are applicable, 
not only to every new recruit in the 
Lord's army, but similarly to all who have not 
yet finished the good fight of faith. 
The first gush of enthusiasm in the Lord's 



service, much as we may and do appreciate it, 

may be but the hasty production of the shallow 

soil of a heart which immediately receives 

the truth with gladness, but having no root in 

itself, endures but for a time; and afterward, 

when affliction and persecution ariseth, immediately 

they are offended. (Mark 4:16,17.) 

Such characters cannot stand the fiery tests of 

this evil day, whereof it is written— "The fire 

[of that day] shall try every man's work, of 

what sort it is."— 1 Cor. 3:13. 

Therefore, says the Apostle Peter, "Beloved, 
think it not strange concerning the fiery trial 
which is to try you as though some strange thing 
happened unto you." All of the elect Church 
must be so tried; and blessed is he that shall 
endure unto the end. The sure word of prophecy 
points to severe conflicts and great trials 
in the closing scenes of the Church's history. 
Elijah, a type of the body of Christ, finished 
his earthly career and went up by a whirlwind 
in a chariot of fire— strong symbols of storms 
and great afflictions. John, another type of 
the Church, was cast into prison and then beheaded. 
And we are forewarned of the great 
necessity of the whole armor of God, if we 
would stand in this evil day.-M. DAWN, VOL. 
II., Chap. 8. 

It therefore behooves every one who aspires 
to the prize of our high calling to brace himself 
for the severer conflicts and trials of faith 
and patience that may suddenly and without 
a moments warning be sprung upon him. In 
the battle of this day, as in all other battles, 
the effort of the enemy is to surprise and suddenly 
attack and overwhelm the Lord's people; 
and the only preparation, therefore, that can 
be made for such emergencies is constant 
vigilance and prayer and the putting on of the 
whole armor of God— the truth and the spirit 
of the truth. 

"In your patience possess ye your souls." 
No other grace will be more needed than this 
in the fiery ordeals of this evil day; for without 
great patience no man can endure to the 
end. All along the Christian's pathway, ever 
and anon, he comes to a new crisis: perhaps 
they are often seemingly of trivial importance, 
yet he realizes that they may be turning points 
in his Christian course. Who has not realized 
them? There comes a temptation to weariness 
in well-doing, together with the suggestion 
of an easier way; or there springs up a 
little root of pride or ambition, with suggestions 
of ways and means for feeding and 
gratifying it. Then there comes, by and by, 



the decisive moment when you must choose 
this course or that; and lo, you have reached 
a crisis! 

Which way will you turn? Most likely you 
will turn in the direction to which the sentiments 
you have cultivated have been tending, 
whether that be the right way or the wrong 
way. If it be the wrong way, most likely you 
will be unable to discern it clearly; for your 
long cultivated sentiments will sway your 
judgment. "There is a way that seemeth right 
unto a man; but the end thereof is the way of 
death." (Prov. 14:12.) How necessary, therefore, 
is prayer, that in every crisis we may pass 
the test successfully. Nor can we safely delay 
to watch and pray until the crisis is upon us; 
but such should be our constant attitude. 

The life of a soldier ever on the alert and 
on duty is by no means an easy life; nor do 
the Scriptures warrant any such expectation. 
On the contrary, they say, "Endure hardness 
as a good soldier of Jesus Christ;" "Fight 

R1656 : page 156 

the good fight of faith," etc. And yet many 
Christian people seem to have the very opposite 
idea. Their ideal Christian life is one 
without a breeze or a storm: it must be one 
continuous calm. Such a life was indeed more 
possible in former days than now, though the 
world, the flesh and the devil always have opposed 
themselves, and always had to be resisted 
by every loyal soldier of the cross. But now 
the opposition is daily becoming more and 
more intense; for Satan realizes that his time 
is short, and he is determined by any and every 
means to exert his power against the consummation 
of the Lord's plan for the exaltation 
of the Church. 

Consequently we have had within this harvest 
period many and severe storms of opposition, 
and still there are doubtless more severe 
trials to follow. But those who, with overcoming 
faith, outride them all— who patiently 
endure, who cultivate the spirit of Christ with 
its fruits and graces, and who valiantly fight 
the good fight of faith, rather than withdraw 
from the field, such will be the overcomers to 
whom the laurels of victory will be given when 
the crowning day has come. 



R1656 : page 156 



BUYING AND SELLING. 



THE Scriptures instruct God's people to sell 
or dispose of what they have and to buy 
something else,— even though at a great cost. 
The inference is that what we possess naturally 
is not of lasting value, while that which we 
may obtain instead is of priceless value and 
everlasting. 

"Buy the truth and sell it not; also wisdom, 
and instruction, and understanding. "-- 
Prov. 23:23. 

Sell that which thou hast, and give alms- 
dispose of your natural abilities and talents, 
wisely of course, for the benefit of yourself, 
your family, and all who have need of such 
service as you can render— and thou shalt have 
treasure in heaven. Thus should we take up 
our cross and follow Christ our Redeemer and 
Pattern.-Luke 12:23; Matt. 19:21. 

The "foolish virgins" were instructed to 
go and buy "oil,"— the light, the spirit of 
the truth. But they were "foolish" in that 
they did not buy in the proper time to get the 
greatest blessing in return. Because of tardiness 
they failed to enter into the Marriage Feast, 
thus losing a great privilege and blessing. 

The value of a share in the Kingdom of God 
is likened to a choice pearl, to purchase which 
the dealer who rightly estimates its value 
will sell or trade all of his other wares;— 
realizing that possessing it alone he would be 
wealthy indeed.-Matt. 13:45. 

Again, the value of the Kingdom is likened 
to a mine of wealth discovered in a field. The 
real value of the mine is generally unappreciated, 
but the appreciative discoverer would 
hasten to purchase the field; and to do so 
would give all else that he possesses.— 
Matt. 13:44. 

The Lord in symbol points out to the Church, 
in its present Laodicean period, its really 
naked and poor and miserable condition; that 
its own righteousness, in which it trusts, is 
filthy rags which cannot cover its shame; and 
that its boasted riches of knowledge is of a 
spurious sort. He says: "I counsel thee to 
buy of me gold [heavenly wisdom], tried in 
the fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white 
raiment [the covering of Christ's righteousness 
—purity] that thou mayest be clothed, and 
that the shame of thy nakedness do not 
appear." 

All who have learned that during the 



present Gospel age God is selecting the little 

flock, foreknown in his plan, and that all 

whom he predestinated must possess the characteristics 

of his firstborn,— must be copies of 

his only begotten Son, our Lord— have some 

conception of the great treasure of priceless 

value which their knowledge puts within their 

reach. Those who realize the value of the 

treasure most accurately are gladly selling off 

all that they have— time, influence, reputation, 

voice, strength, houses, lands, carriages, ease, 

comforts, luxuries,— and are investing the proceeds 

of all in the purchase of this field, which 

they know contains the treasure mine. Their 

R1656 : page 157 

conduct sometimes seems strange to those who 
do not know of the mine, or who, knowing 
something of it, have no real conception of its 
priceless value. 

To one of these a king once said, "Paul, 
thou art beside thyself; much learning doth 
make thee mad." But Paul answered, "I 
am not mad, most noble Festus, but speak 
forth the words of truth and soberness." And 
again he declared, "What things were gain 
[valuable] to me, those I counted loss for 
Christ. Yea, I count all things but loss 
for the excellency of the knowledge of [the 
treasure hid in] Christ Jesus my Lord (Col. 1:26; 
2:3), on account of whom I have 
suffered the loss of all things, and do count 
them as dung, that I may win Christ, and 
be found in him [a member of his body, one 
of his joint-heirs in the promised Kingdom]: 
that I may know him and the power of his 
resurrection [a resurrection to immortal and 
spiritual condition] and the fellowship of his 
sufferings, being made conformable unto his 
death; if by any means I might attain unto 
the [chief] resurrection." (Phil. 3:7-11.) "For 
I reckon that the sufferings of this present 
time are not worthy to be compared with the 
glory that shall be revealed in us." (Rom. 8:18.) 
"For our light affliction, which is but 
for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory; while we 
look not at [and labor not for] the things that 
are seen, but the things which are not seen 
[the hidden treasure]: for the things which are 
seen [and which we are selling off] are temporal, 
but the things which are not seen [the 
treasures of God's gracious plan hid in Christ, 
which we are giving our little all to possess] 
are eternal."-2 Cor. 4:17,18. 



R1657 : page 157 

Beloved, it is appropriate that each of us 
search his own doings, and his own heart's 
motives, and see whether we are fully awake 
to the value of the great wealth of God's love 
and favor and honor hidden in Christ, of 
which we are invited to become joint-heirs. 
God has given to us, and to all, a great gift 
in Christ, in that eternal life is secured for all 
of Adam's race who will accept it under the 
terms of the New Covenant, when fully enlightened; 
but in addition to that gift is the 
present offer to sell to us a share in the 
glorious Millennial Kingdom at a price "not 
worthy to be compared" to the glories and 
blessings which, as heirs of God and joint-heirs 
with Christ, we may receive in exchange. 

The price is small, but it is all that we each 
have to give— ourselves, our all. Whether our 
all be more or less than another's all, it is 
nevertheless our all, and God graciously proposes 
to accept the little all of each, whatever 
it may be, the sufficiency of Christ's all compensating 
for the deficiency of our alls. The 
chance to buy is now, and very "foolish" are 
those virgins (pure ones) who neglect or refuse 
to give the price. 

To buy we must consecrate and give— time, 
energy, study, to gain even a knowledge of the 
mystery (the secret mine of wealth) hid in 
Christ. (1 Cor. 2:7.) Each day will bring to 
the consecrated opportunities for giving something 
to the Lord, either directly, or indirectly 
to his people or others in his name. Each 
day will bring opportunities for giving up 
something precious to the selfish, carnal nature. 

All such gifts presented to God (by those 
who have already been reconciled to God, 
through faith in his precious blood) are acceptable 
in the Beloved, and are treasures laid up 
in heaven, of two sorts: (1) the service rendered 
to God which, although in itself imperfect, 
he accepts as perfect through Christ; 
(2) the character thereby developed in our 
own hearts is a heavenly treasure acceptable 
to God by Jesus Christ; for every time we give 
anything to the Lord's service or give up 
things highly esteemed among men for the 
sake of the Lord, or his Word, or his people, 
or even for humanity's sake, we to that extent 
overcome the fallen disposition or spirit of 
selfishness, and cultivate the spirit of love and 
benevolence, the spirit of God, the spirit of 
Christ, the holy spirit or disposition, without 



which none will be acceptable as joint-heirs 
with Christ in his Kingdom;— for "if any man 
have not the spirit [disposition] of Christ he 
is none of his."— Rom. 8:9. 

Let us see to it that, having made the contract, 
we pay over the price in full.— Acts 5:1-11. 



R1657 : page 158 

"THE TRUTH SHALL MAKE YOU FREE." 



"And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the 
Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. 
Wherefore, thou art no more a servant, but a son; 
and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ." 
-Gal. 4:6,7.- 

IN writing this epistle the Apostle is endeavoring 
to defend the Church in Galatia against 
certain Judaizing teachers who were seeking 
not only to undermine his teaching and personal 
influence, but thereby to bring believers 
under bondage to the Jewish law;— giving the 
inference that faith in Christ was only efficacious 
for salvation when supplemented by the 
keeping of the law. 

The Apostle (Chap. 1.) expresses his surprise 
that these Galatian Christians should so soon 
become entangled in this error, when the gospel 
of the Kingdom had been so clearly set 
before them. Then (Chap. 1:10-24; 2:1-10) 
he reproduces the evidence of his apostleship, 
and in a masterly way sets forth the strong 
foundation of the hope of the gospel, the entire 
freedom of both Jews and Gentiles from 
the bondage of the Law Covenant, and the 
glorious liberty and peculiar privileges of the 
sons of God. 

These Gentile Christians had never been 
under the Jewish law. They were "aliens from 
the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers 
from the covenants of promise." But, through 
the preaching of the Apostle, they were brought 
nigh to God "by the blood of Christ" (Eph. 2:12,13); 
i.e., through faith in his blood they 
had been freely justified. "This only would 
I learn of you," said he, "Received ye the 
Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing 
of faith? Are ye so foolish? having begun 
in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by 
the flesh?"-Gal. 3:2,3. 

Then he proceeds to show further that while 



the Gentiles were not to be brought under 
bondage to the Jewish law, neither were the Jews 

R1658 : page 158 

justified by it; for it proved to be unto condemnation 
to every one that ever was under 
it, save the one perfect man, Christ Jesus, who 
fulfilled all its conditions, and, being blameless, 
rendered himself an acceptable sacrifice 
to redeem those who were under the Jewish 
law (3:10,11,13), as well as all of the Gentile 
world who were under the curse of the Edenic 
law, which was the same law written originally 
in the heart of the first perfect man, Adam. 
Thus "by one offering he hath perfected forever 
[made complete in his righteousness] them 
that are sanctified [fully consecrated to God]," 
whether Jews or Gentiles.— Heb. 10: 14. 

In the words of our text, he then bids them 
mark the fact that the witness of the holy Spirit 
with their spirits is to the effect that they are 
the recognized sons of God, and that they 
came into this grace without the works of the 
law. He says, "Because ye are sons [i.e., 
because you have believed on Christ alone for 
salvation and have consecrated yourselves to 
him and therefore been adopted into God's 
family], God hath sent forth the Spirit of his 
Son [the seal of your adoption— Eph. 1:13] 
into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Wherefore, 
thou art no more a servant, but a son; 
and if a son, then an heir of God through 
Christ." Blessed privilege! why then go back 
to the beggarly elements whereby the Jews so 
long and so vainly sought to find salvation? 
(Gal. 4:9.) In Christ alone is full salvation for 
both Jew and Gentile; and in him there is no 
difference, for we are "all one in Christ Jesus." 

Thus the way of salvation is set forth as the 
way of simple, confiding faith. Men in all 
ages have sought to complicate the way and to 
hedge it about with forms and ceremonies. 
They have added penances and prayers and 
fastings, and monastic rules and regulations 
and numerous and varied superstitions, but the 
simplicity of the true way they stumble over. 
To keep the perfect law of God was a thing 
impossible for imperfect men; but if it had 
been possible, verily, says the Apostle (3:21), 
that would have been the way of salvation. 
But God had mercy upon our weakness, and, 
through Christ, offers us salvation upon the 
terms of simple faith and of loyalty and obedience 
to his will to the extent of our ability — 
the terms of the New Covenant. 



To thus accept the favor of God through 
Christ— the evidences of sonship and the present 

R1658: page 159 

and prophetic inheritance of sons— is to 
enter into the blessed rest of faith. This rest 
of faith is something which the world can 
neither give nor take away. It brings with it 
peace and happiness and joy in the midst of 
all the shifting circumstances of the present 
life. To those who have entered into this rest 
of faith penances are seen to be of no avail, 
and prayers are occasions of sweet communion 
with God; feasting from the Lord's bountiful 
table take the place of fastings, active zeal in 
the Master's service supplants the gloomy and 
useless life of the solitary and self-tortured recluse; 
and the glorious sunlight of truth chases 
away the shadows of human superstitions. 

O how blessed is this rest of faith! Would 
that all who name the name of Christ might 
fully enter in! True, there are self-denials and 
sacrifices and disciplines and trials, and often 
persecutions in the way; but in the midst of 
them all there is rest and peace. Such, though 
in the world, are not of it. They are in the 
world as the Lord's representatives and ambassadors. 
They are here to tell "the good 
tidings of great joy" to all people who have 
ears to hear, and to make known among men 
the unsearchable riches of Christ. They are the 
light of the world, and if obedient to the 
Master's voice they will not hide their light 
by retiring from the world and shutting themselves 
up for religious meditation. 

Some in times past have gained a reputation 
for great sanctity by secluding themselves from 
the world and devoting themselves to a monastic 
life; but how strangely their lives contrast 
with the active, zealous devotion of the Lord 
and the apostles and the early Church, before 
this superstition was promulgated. Let us 
mark the footprints of our Lord and those who 
followed him, and strive to walk in them. As 
sons and heirs of God let us rejoice in our inheritance 
with thanksgiving, and let our zeal in 
service manifest our love and devotion to God. 

Whom the Son makes free is free indeed; 
for he is made free by the Truth. -- 
John 8:32,36. 



page 159 



STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1657 : page 159 

THE PASSOVER INSTITUTED. 



II. QUAR., LESSON X., JUNE 3, EXOD. 12:1-14. 

Golden Text— "Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. 
-1 Cor. 5:7. 

The term Passover signifies to pass by or 
spare from an affliction. When the last 
plague was visited upon Egypt, the houses 
of the Israelites were all marked with the 
blood of a slain lamb, that the destroying 
angel might not cut off the first born of Israel 
with the first born of Egypt. These 
first born ones were afterward represented 
in the priestly tribe of Levi, to which 
Moses belonged (Exod. 13:2; Num. 3:11-13), 
and through this priesthood all Israel 
was brought into covenant relationship 
with God. The Gospel Church, is the antitype. 
These alone of all people are now 
in danger of everlasting death— the second 
death— because these only have the knowledge 
sufficient— if rejected or abused— to 
bring condemnation to the second death. 

The first born of Israel represented those 
who now by faith abide in Christ, under 
"the blood of sprinkling"— the precious 
blood of Christ, our passover lamb, slain 
for us. And these shall be delivered, 
spared, passed over, being counted worthy 
of life through the merit of the precious 
blood of Christ. But if any abide not under 
this covering, he must surely perish, as 
any of the first born of Israel would have 
perished had they ventured out, beyond the 
protection of the blood of the typical lamb. 
How forcibly does the type thus illustrate 
the value of the precious blood of Christ, 
our Passover Lamb ! 

The typical feast, commemorative of the 



typical Passover, was celebrated ever after 
by Israel. Our Lord and his disciples observed 
it, as all Jews were required to do, 
yearly on the fourteenth of Nisan. The 
Lord's Supper was instituted just after this 
Passover supper, and to take its place, on 
the last night of our Lord's earthly life— 

R1657 : page 160 

the same night in which he was betrayed, 
the same day on which he was crucified, 
the Jewish day beginning the evening preceding 
at sunset. This annual remembrancer 
was to be to Christ's followers what the 
Passover had been to the Jews. They were 
to see Christ Jesus as their lamb, and rejoice 
in their justification through his precious 
blood. And they were to celebrate it 
yearly— as the Israelites had done— but now 
in remembrance of the reality and not of the 
type. "Christ, our passover, is sacrificed for 
us; therefore, let us keep the feast"— as often 
as the season returns, until fully delivered 
from death to life in his likeness. 

R1657 : page 160 

PASSAGE OF THE RED SEA. 



II. QUAR., LESSON XL, JUNE 10, EXOD. 14:19-29. 

Golden Text— "By faith they passed through the Red 
Sea."-Heb. 11:29. 

This chapter in the history of God's ancient 
people is an illustration of the power 
and wisdom and love of God. And it is a 
warning to all who are disposed to heed it, 
to beware of undertaking to contend with 
the Almighty. No matter how weak or 
insignificant or poor or despised among men 
may be the subjects of his care, the hand 
that is lifted against them defies the power 
of Jehovah, and shall surely come to grief. 

This deliverance of typical Israel from 
Egypt illustrates the deliverance from sin 
and its bondage of all who desire to be 
God's servants and to have the promised 
blessing as it shall be fulfilled after the 
plagues (Rev. 16), in the utter destruction 
of all the systems born of sin and selfishness 
which would hinder human prosperity 
and advancement toward God. The 



overthrow of Pharaoh's army by the sea, 
corresponds to the fact that many of the 
present enslaving agencies will be overthrown 
by anarchy in the great "time of 
trouble," now so near at hand. Already 
the storm is approaching which will eventually 
overthrow all evil-doers; but a way 
of escape is provided for all who seek God 
and put their trust in him, following the 
course which his wisdom has marked out. 
It is important to note in this connection 
that the terms "borrowed" and "lent" in 
Exod. 11:2; 12:35,36 are improper and misleading 
translations of the Hebrew word 
shaal, giving the impression of a command 
to dishonesty on the part of God and a dishonest 
transaction on the part of the Israelites. 
The Israelites did not borrow, but asked for 
(as in R.V.) jewels of silver and jewels of 
gold and garments. And the Egyptians 
did not lend, but allowed their request. 
Thus the Israelites had some reward for their 
long service, though it was only granted by 
their oppressors under fear to refuse them. 

R1658 : page 160 

THE WOES OF THE DRUNKARD. 



II. QUAR., LESSON XII., JUNE 17, PROV. 23:29-35. 

Golden Text— "Look not thou upon the wine when 
it is red."— Prov. 23:31. 

The significance of this lesson is too manifest 
to need special comment, but is worthy 
of the careful consideration, not only of 
those who are liable to the temptations of 
strong drink, but also of all who have any 
influence over others in this respect. The 
principles and practices of all God's people 
should be specially clear and pronounced 
upon this and every other question of morals 
and conduct. 

R1658 : page 160 

REVIEW. 



II. QUAR., LESSON XIII., JUNE 24, SCRIPTURE 
READING, PSA. 105; HEB. 11:17-29. 



Golden Text— "The Lord's portion is his people. 
Deut. 32:9. 

A careful review of the lessons of this 
quarter in connection with the Scripture 
readings suggested will be found very profitable. 
The Old Testament worthies surely 
command our deepest respect and admiration; 
and their faith and faithfulness is 
worthy of our study and imitation. And 
all the steps of divine providence so clearly 
marked in Old Testament history are such 
as to establish and confirm our faith in the 
goodness and power and love and wisdom of 
God. Let us not forget that these blessed 
lessons are recorded, not to satisfy mere 
idle curiosity, nor to furnish entertainment, 
but to acquaint us more fully with the works 
and ways and will of our God. 



R1658 : page 160 

TO BRING THE GREEK CHURCH UNDER 
VATICAN CONTROL. 

Mgr. Satollistates, through Father O'Gorman, 
his interpreter, that there are pending diplomatic 
negotiations to bring the Greek church 
of all Russia, now under the personal control 
of the Czar, into the keeping of the Vatican. 

Churchmen take it for granted that if the Czar 
is to place the state church under control of 
Rome it is in the interest of Leo's hope to effect 
the disarmament of the great nations of the 
world, and for securing the ultimate universal 
peace and arbitration of international quarrels. 



page 162 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 



"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1668 : page 162 
EARTH'S LABOR PANGS. 

"As travail upon a woman with child" 
is the inspired description of the forty-year 
day of trouble, by which the Millennial age 
is commenced. The panic of 1873, which 
affected the whole world, was the first spasm, 
and since then at irregular intervals the 
labor-pains of earth have been experienced. 
Just now, we of the United States are in the 
midst of one of these throes of the groaning 
creation. 

In this land of bountiful crops, many, because 
of strikes, are almost destitute of food. 
In this land of liberty thousands of armed 
and unarmed men in half a dozen states are 
in a state of war. It is a war of labor 
against capital, and is the natural result of 
the competitive system of business, which 
evidently will hold on until spasm after 
spasm of increasing severity, resulting in 
anarchy will ultimately give birth to a new 
order of society based upon the new-old 
teaching of Christ. 

RABBI HIRSCH PREACHING JESUS. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-My mind has been 
enlightened by reading MILLENNIAL DAWN. I 
hope the truth therein revealed will reach every 
thinking Christian who asks, seeks and knocks 
for the true meaning of the Bible. 

I received a circular from the conspirators, 
but was unmoved by it; and last Sunday I had 
the pleasure of hearing your wife faithfully and 



thoroughly defend her husband and the truth, 
in the presence of one of the deluded men. 

Enclosed find a "straw" that tells which 
way the wind blows. It is from the pen of 
Rabbi Hirsch of this city. I heard him preach 
a series of sermons in his synagogue recently, 
which were highly in favor of Jesus and Paul, 
and he read each time a chapter from the New 
Testament. Once, after giving utterance to a 
sentiment similar to that of the clipping [below], 
he said to his Jewish hearers: "Crucify 
me if you will for saying it." Yours in the 
Master's service. Loftus Frizelle. 

"We quote the rabbis of the Talmud; shall 
we then not also quote the Rabbi of Bethlehem? 
Shall not he in whom there burned, if it 
burned in any one, the spirit and the light of 
Judaism, be reclaimed by the synagogue? Yea, 
he hath been reclaimed. Happy this day, when 
Judaism again finds her son, the son comes 
back to the mother laden with the rich reward 
of his quest. The New Testament in the gospels 
presents Jewish thought, Jewish religion, 
Jewish universalism. Not an advance beyond 
Judaism, but a correspondence with Judaism, 
we have in the doctrine of Jesus, who was Jew 
and man; and because man, son of God." 
—Reform Advocate (Jewish). 



R1659 : page 163 

Pentecost Memorial Issue. 

JUNE 11, 1894. 

--(TRIPLE NUMBER, 48 PAGES.)- 



O! GIVE THANKS UNTO THE LORD; FOR HE IS GOOD. 

--PSA. 106:1-5.-- 

PEACE, TROUBLED SOUL, THOU NEED'ST NOT FEAR.-THE 
"EXPLOSION" NOISY, BUT DID LITTLE INJURY.-THE WHOLE ARMOR 
NEEDED, NOT THE HELMET MERELY.-NEW TACTICS OF 
THE CONSPIRATORS.-THE NIGHT COMETH.-REPORT 
OF SISTER RUSSELL'S TOUR.-A PENTECOSTAL 
MEMORIAL.-LETTERS FROM EVERY QUARTER. 

THE remarkable circumstances which called 
forth the WATCH TOWER EXTRA, dated 
April 25, now call forth this Triple Number; 
but for a very different purpose. The former 



awakened in some a fear that the cause we love 
had received some serious injury from the attack 
of the great Enemy, at the hands of the 
conspirators, who sought the death of our influence, 
and the disruption of the present harvest 
work. This issue, on the contrary, is a 
Thanksgiving Number, and to inform the 
Church of the wonderful way in which the Lord 
has overruled in the recent troubles, and is 
making the wrath of men to praise him. A blessing 
to all of the faithful is evidently coming out 
of this great evil. In it we also lay before you 
some extracts from a few of the hundreds of letters 
we are now continually receiving. 

We cannot answer all these welcome letters 
personally, except as the writers will accept this 
Thanksgiving Number as a reply. Be assured 
that your expressions of warm brotherly love are 
fully reciprocated by us. You thus give evidence 
of having attained a growth in grace 
mentioned by the Apostle (1 Pet. 1:22), "Seeing 
ye have purified your souls in obeying the 
truth in its spirit UNTO UNFEIGNED LOVE OF THE 
BRETHREN,— love one another with a pure heart 
fervently." 

While we herewith publish extracts from many 
letters, that the voice of the Church may be generally 
heard for mutual encouragement, yet do not 
consider the omission of others as a lack of appreciation, 
for we can publish only a few in 
comparison to the number received. But be 
assured that all such letters are prized and will 
be preserved. And as soon as circumstances 
will permit we will have our office helpers make 
an alphabetical list of the names of the writers, 
—for an everlasting remembrance of God's 
grace and your steadfastness in this trial. 

From these letters we have already expunged 
considerable that might be construed as personal 
laudation; but we have allowed more to 
remain than our modesty would permit under 
other circumstances. For the sake of them 
that stand by (John 1 1 :42), we feel it to be 
duty to permit our friends to express themselves 
with considerable freedom, as an offset to the 
calumnies of the "false brethren" before the 
minds of the newer readers. But let none esteem 
this as our victory. We may truly say: 
"This is the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous 
in our eyes." 

R1659 : page 164 

The effect upon the Church is the very reverse 
of what the Enemy designed: it is, as they express 
it, drawing nearer than ever to their hearts 



the WATCH TOWER publications and the general 
interests of the harvest work. The true sheep 
are being awakened to fresh zeal in the Master's 
service, as this storm indicates to us all that the 
weight of trouble, which is to usher in the Millennial 
morning, is fast approaching. They are 
beginning to see what we have repeatedly 
sought to impress upon all; viz., that the favorable 
period of quiet for study and for fitting on 
the whole armor of God, is to be followed by a 
severe "battle," in which every piece of that 
armor will be needed and will be thoroughly 
tried; a time in which there will be less and less 
opportunity for putting on the armor, because 
of the severe and repeated conflicts which our 
great enemy will be permitted to wage against us. 

All this is clearly shown by the Apostle's 
words, "Take unto you [put upon you] the 
whole armor of God [beforehand], that ye may 
be able to withstand in the evil day; and, having 
done all [that you can do, in the way of armoring, 
etc.], stand [firmly and valiantly in the battle, 
defending yourself and those of the household 
of faith within your reach]."— Eph. 6:13. 

Those who have put on the helmet only, who 
have merely a theoretical or intellectual knowledge 
of the Truth, are in great danger. They are 
far more exposed than those who have only a 
large shield of faith. But none are ready for 
the conflict, already beginning, except those 
having on the complete armor. No more armor 
is provided than will be needed in this evil day. 
All need the "HELMET" of intellectual appreciation 
of God's great plan. All need the 
"BREASTPLATE" of righteousness; not only 
of Christ's imputed righteousness, but also of 
the actual righteousness of heart,— of will or intent 
—which alone can appreciate and appropriate 
the imputed righteousness of Christ. All 
need the "SHIELD" of faith,— a trust in God 
which will protect from all the fiery darts and 
trials of the enemy. All need to have and to 
know how to use the "SWORD" of the spirit, the 
Word of God, so as to defend themselves and 
others from the insidious attacks of the foe. 
And all need the "SANDALS,"— consecration, 
patience and fortitude in order to keep the narrow, 
rugged way and not become weary and 
faint of heart. 

Our chief joy in this connection, dear 
friends, was to find that the great Enemy's 
effort to shatter the body of Christ and to disturb 
the harvest work had so signally failed. 
The body of Christ is not divided. The true 
sheep heard the Master's voice, saying, "He 
that is not for me is against me, and he that 



gathereth not with me scattereth abroad;" and 
many have been awakened by the noise of this 
"explosion," and are more than ever on the 
alert to note the very tones of the Master's voice 
and to watch to be "guided by his eye." 

A few, no doubt more than we yet know of, 
will fall by the way, "offended" by the trial 
which the Lord's providence permitted for this 
very purpose of "sifting." As yet, however, 
more than six weeks after their attack, we do 
not know of a dozen in all who have been injured 
by the falsehoods and "bombs" of this 
wicked plot,— aside from the conspirators and 
about ten of the German congregation here who 
do not understand the English language and 
for whom we cannot speak. And of that dozen 
we regret to say that three were in our office 
and of our household, and were for some time, it 
now appears, directly and indirectly under the 
influence of the conspirators. The special and 
cunning attack made by the great Enemy upon 
those closest to us, in these three cases took 
effect; but believing them all to be true children 
of God, we have hope for their speedy recovery 
from this snare of the fowler. Indeed, we already 
have intimations from two of these that they are 
beginning to see matters in their true light. 

However, the "Extra," with our complete 
refutation of all the false and wicked charges of 
the conspirators, was just in time; for, not content 
with printing the falsehoods, two of them, 
who had no money with which to pay their 
accounts, had suddenly plenty of it to spend in 
railway fares traveling east and west to see the 
sheep and personally "rub in" upon them their 
slanderous charges. Wherever they went we 
heard from them through faithful ones, who 
discerned their spirit, that it was far from the 
spirit of Christ, and backed by envy and ambition; 

R1659 : page 165 

and who thereby were put on their guard 
against believing such absurd slanders. 

Wherever they were well received and got 
subscriptions to their proposed paper, they were 
mild and bland, and stroked only with the "fur;" 

R1660 : page 165 

but they let out "claws" upon any who refused to 
subscribe and who said they would wait until 
they heard from Brother Russell, before coming 
to any conclusion. In their anxiety to get 
subscriptions and donations— "money from the 
fish"— they resorted, it seems, to almost any 



kind of misrepresentation and falsehood. 

But even this partial success lasted but a short 
time,-until the WATCH TOWER Extra reached 
the "sheep." Then their work was at an end: 
the answer being quite sufficient to satisfy all 
who rejoice not in iniquity, but who take 
pleasure in righteousness and truth. 

As nearly as we can learn they received only 
about a hundred subscriptions, and many of these 
by personal misrepresentations and on the plea 
of sympathy and friendship, before our Extra 
appeared. And since then many have written 
them canceling those subscriptions and telling 
them in substance that they had been obtained 
by misrepresentations, and that as they could 
expect only error and darkness from teachers 
with such a spirit they would rather lose the 
money paid than have their paper for nothing. 

Not only so, but of the about six hundred 
subscribers to the German paper published by 
Mr. O. von Zech, about one-third or two hundred 
are TOWER readers, who have taken his 
paper chiefly to encourage the work amongst 
the Germans, and who have donated money for 
the work as well as paid their subscriptions. 
These have seen the ambition and treachery, 
and many are indignant and have concluded to 
stop those donations and subscriptions. Some 
have sent us copies of the letters they sent to 
Mr. Zech. They reason rightly, that to do anything 
to encourage people with such a spirit is 
not gathering with the Lord, but scattering 
abroad. (Matt. 12:30.) They reason further, 
that if, as these men profess, they have felt themselves 
in bondage for years, then that would account 
for their keeping in line with the truths 
presented in the WATCH TOWER, and that, to be 
consistent with their own profession of new-found 
liberty, they will necessarily try now to 
publish something different, just to prove to 
themselves and others that they are free. The 
fact is, however, they never were in any bondage 
to us, except that they well knew that any deflection 
from the foundation principles of divine 
truth would mean a break of Christian fellowship 
with us. Our loyalty to the Lord demands 
of us that all his friends be ours, and that our 
Christian fellowship be with none others than 
those he fellowships. 

But some of them, evidently, were under 
bondage to those foundation principles of God's 
word, as will be seen from Sister Peck's and 
Brother Mitchell's letters, which tell how Mr. 
Rogers favored the no-ransom views, and how 
he introduced the TOWER and DAWN readers in 
Rochester to Mr. Barbour, one of the most bold 



in denying that a ransom was necessary or given, 
and who, as a consequence of that repudiation 
of the precious blood, "the wedding garment," 
was, as long ago as 1878, cast out of the light 
of present truth into the outer darkness which 
is upon the whole world,— on the subject of the 
time and manner of our Lord's presence and 
Kingdom. Thus quickly we behold the effect 
of their freedom. Would it not have been far 
better for Mr. Rogers and all these conspirators 
had they STAID WITH US in bondage to the 
word of the Lord? However, while enjoying 
their freedom, they need to be assured that it is 
from this, the Lord's bondage, and not from 
ours, that they have escaped. 

However, the conspirators now find that they 
made a great blunder in their effort at assassination. 
It is far less successful than their former 
method of administering slow poison by confidential 
"whisperings" and insinuations. As 
a consequence, without any change of heart, 
they are changing their methods and are now 
endeavoring to entrap by smooth words those 
whom they alarmed and put on guard by the 
venomous spirit of their first libelous circular, 
which, however, represented their real sentiments. 
They will, of course, endeavor to bring 
forth some "new light," to justify their claims 
as great teachers, and this will be the open door 
by which they will go into "outer darkness;" 
for we cannot expect that those who have so 

R1660 : page 166 

lost the spirit of the truth will be allowed to 
stay in its light. 

Indeed, one of the conspirators recently interviewed 
said that for his part he would rather 
die than retract. This only confirmed what we 
had feared,— that their jealousy, envy and 
malice had eaten as doth a canker, into their 
hearts, so that they loved as well as made their 
lies and slanders. Alas! Who can say but that 
their course persisted in would indeed result in 
death-the Second Death? (Rev. 22:15.) 
What we have recently experienced was quite 
evidently only the outbreak of the venomous 
disease which for a long time has eaten at their 
very hearts. Such virulent diseases do not develop 
suddenly. Not for all the world would 
we occupy their places. 

Of course, if they would fully confess their sins 
and heartily repent of them, we would rejoice, 
and would freely forgive them. But such a course 
is scarcely supposable in the cases of those who 
have been plotting and scheming this attempted 



assassination for so long a time; and who meanwhile 
have been writing such letters as the Zech 
letters published in our last Extra. We certainly 
would be stupid dupes if we allowed ourselves 
to be again deceived by professions of 
love and friendship without requiring the least 
evidence of a radical change of heart. And to 
reinstate such men in the confidence of the 
Church without the most thorough evidence of 
a radical change of heart would only be to 
expose the Lord's people to new dangers. 
Even should they repent, it would be far from 
wise for the Church to recognize them as teachers 
or leaders in any sense; nor would the humility 
which would necessarily accompany such repentance 
expect or desire such an office in the 
Church after such conduct. 

The result of this storm will undoubtedly be 
beneficial to quite a number like Brother Thorn, 
whose letter shows that the slow poison of whispered 
slander had been administered to him; 
and Sister Hamilton's letter tells the same 
story. Surely this experience must work for 
good to all who love righteousness and are 
called according to God's purpose. One lesson 
will be, not to tolerate "back-biters," "whisperers" 
and "busybodies," who bear false witness 
against their neighbors. Keep no confidence 
with such. Expose them at once to those 
they seek to defame. 

But praise God for the deliverance which he 
has brought about, for his truth and for his people! 
Never did we see more markedly than in 
this experience the wonderful leadings of his 
Providence. The simple statement in our issue 
of April 1st, of the facts relative to "The Work 
in England" (and in the light of recent developments 
all can see that its treatment of Mr. 
Rogers was very fair and very kind), served to 
prepare the minds of all for something to come; 
—especially the statement that Mr. Rogers left 
us in an angry mood, expressing his intention to 
influence as many of the colporteurs as possible 
to his new mendicant method. In the same issue 
appeared the article entitled "Lest ye enter 
into Temptation." That article was written 
about a month before the conspiracy broke 
forth, and it was the subject of the Sunday discourse 
to the Allegheny church after it was 
written. We do not wonder now, in the light 
of what we see must have been their murderous 
condition of heart, that some of the conspirators 
who were present and heard that discourse 
said they did not like it. We are confident 
that Satan did not like it either. But we 
are sure that under God's providence it was 



"meat in due season" to many, and that in the 
spirit of watchfulness and prayer which it helped 
to awaken lay the safety and preparation of many 
of the sheep and the lambs of the Lord's fold. 

The only portion of those TOWERS written 
after the conspiracy had shown itself was the 
brief statement in the April 15th issue, entitled 
"Watch With Me One Hour." Yet these 
providential safe-guards were enough, apparently, 
and all the dear sheep were prepared for 
something. How evidently our present Lord 
had provided that the enemy should not pluck 
any of the true sheep out of his hand. 

Before our "Extra" was issued, Sister Russell 
received a letter from Sister Peck, saying that 
Mr. Rogers had visited her on his course eastward 
from Cleveland to New York City, and 
that at the various points along the way, where 
he knew of interested readers of the TOWER, he 
was stopping to accomplish, if possible, his work 

R1660 : page 167 

of destruction. He represented Bro. Russell as 

in a "deplorably sinful state"— dishonest, traitorous, 

a liar, etc. And all this he did in such 

a smooth and deceptive way that some seemed 

influenced by it; for only when he was boldly 

and persistently opposed, did his evil spirit 

manifest itself. 

My loyal and dearly beloved helpmate said 
at once: This is a slander which I alone can 
refute for you and the Lord, and it should be 
done personally. If you will consent, I will 
start at once, meet Mr. Rogers and his shameless 
falsehoods, and silence him forever on that 
score. Then I will go over the route he has 
just been over and meet the friends and expose 
his malicious untruths. I consented, knowing 
that her visit would be specially profitable to 
those Mr. Rogers had met and personally influenced 
and prejudiced before they got the 
Extra exposing the conspiracy. 

Sister Russell's journey of nearly three weeks 
was specially blessed of the Lord. She went 
from New York City, stopping at various places, 
through New York and Ohio, to Chicago and 
back to Allegheny. The result is everyway encouraging 
to the truth. 

"Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not 
all his benefits!" "Rejoice in the Lord, ye 
righteous, and give thanks at the remembrance 
of his holiness !--Psalm 103:2; 97:12. 

Sister Russell arrived home on the last day of 
May, and to a surprise party of about fifty of 
the church friends who, notwithstanding the 



rain, met at our home to welcome her back, she 
related the experiences of her journey, and the 
Lord's favor in connection therewith. During 
her eighteen days absence she traveled two thousand 
miles, visited the congregations of the 
Church in ten cities, spoke nine times, on an 
average over an hour at each place. We have 
requested that she write out a little account of 
her journey for the benefit of the Church in 
general, and it follows:— 

R1661 : page 167 

REPORT OF SISTER RUSSELL'S TOUR. 



To the dear friends who bade me Godspeed as 
I left them at various points along the route 
from New York to Chicago, and also to those 
at home and abroad elsewhere, who are anxious 
to learn what I have observed of the condition 
of the church since the late storm has 
passed over it, I will report as briefly as possible 
as follows:— 

First, in a general way. Though I have frequently 
met with various companies of those of 
this precious faith and hope, and have seen 
them rejoicing in hope and patient in tribulation, 
never before have I seen them awed with 
such a feeling of deep solemnity and serious 
consideration. This is manifest not only from 
my visit, but also from the many letters received; 
and while we greatly feared for the stability 
of the household as we entered into this 
storm-cloud, we come out of it now rejoicing 
to realize that the spirit of the Lord is so manifest 
in our midst. Our Lord predicted that the 
fiery trials of this evil day would try every man's 
work of what sort it is; and now the Church 
has passed through a most severe ordeal, and 
the confidence one in another has grown stronger 
as we have seen each other tested and proved. 

Indeed, the spirit of moderation and kindly 
judgment and patient waiting for sure testimony, 
of slowness to impute evil, etc., which 
has characterized the Church everywhere, has 
been a matter of almost surprise to us; for we 
would surely have supposed that more would be 
caught in the snare of the fowler. As an illustration 
of this spirit of caution and moderation I 
cite the case of the Church in London. The 
circulars of our enemies were sent there in three 
packages, to three different parties, to be distributed 
to the Church in London. Sister Home, 
who received one of the packages, after reading 



the circular and being very much shocked by 
it, as all have been, soon came to the conclusion 
that it must be the work of the great enemy, Satan; 
and she accordingly decided that she would 
not distribute her package. But presuming that 
the other two would do so, she at once wrote letters 
to the various members, urging all to reserve 
their judgment for the present and wait until 
they should have time to hear from America from 
Bro. Russell, who, she felt confident, would be 
able to clear himself from those charges. After 
she had mailed her letters the two brethren who 
had received similar packages called upon her to 
consult together as to what would best be done. 

R1661 : page 168 

They had not distributed their packages either, 
and desired to wait for further testimony on the 
subject. Then Sister Home wished she had not 
sent her letters, as the London Church were still 
in ignorance of the trouble. However, as they 
would now be inquiring to learn what had happened, 
the three decided to call a special meeting 
of the London Church and to read to them 
the circular letters and give their own impressions, 
—that it looked like the work of the great 
enemy,— and to urge all to patient waiting and 
prayer that the Lord might in due time vindicate 
his own cause and keep his own people. 

Sister Home then wrote to us a kind letter of 
sympathy and comfort, informing us of these 
facts and of their waiting and prayerful attitude. 
On receiving this and similar testimonies from 
other companies in various parts, we thanked 
God and took courage, and said, surely the spirit 
of the Lord is in the midst of his people. He 
knoweth them that are his, and no weapon that 
is formed against them shall prosper. Yes, we 
greatly rejoice in this; for although the late 
troubles have revealed the workings of Satan, 
and made us to realize painfully that some whom 
we had esteemed as true brethren in Christ and 
partakers with us of the high calling and of this 
ministry of the truth, were actually false brethren 
and bitter secret enemies, they have also manifested 
in a most remarkable way that the spiritual 
condition of the Church at large was a 
healthy one, and capable of resisting the virulent 
pestilence that was abroad, which, like a 
great tidal wave, suddenly and unexpectedly 
swept over the whole Church. 

But now for the occasion and facts of my recent 
visit: Learning from letters received the 
purpose of Mr. Rogers to meet with the Churches 
of New York and Brooklyn on Sunday, May 



13th, and of the object of his visit there, which 

might be judged from the reports of his course 

all along the line from Cleveland eastward 

through central New York, I proposed to my 

husband that if he would allow me to go to New 

York City I would attend the meeting, let him 

make his false statements to my face and challenge 

him for proof of his assertions. The object 

of his tour was to get as many subscriptions 

to their new paper as possible before our defense 

—"A Conspiracy Exposed"—should appear, 

and as far as possible to nullify the effects of that 

pamphlet in advance, as they knew it was in 

course of preparation, it having been announced 

to the Allegheny Church. To do this, Mr. 

Rogers falsely represented Mr. Russell as a liar, 

and his wife and all his household— the office 

helpers— as compelled by him, by force of circumstances, 

which he very specially and falsely particularized, 

to lie for him. He stated that he 

had seen Sister Russell weep bitter tears over 

Bro. Russell's sins, though he never saw me in 

tears in his life; and for ten days previous to 

this despicable business he had been a witness 

of the peace and tranquility of our home, the 

hospitality of which he has so grossly abused. 

I left Allegheny for New York City on Saturday 
night, May 12th, and arrived there on Sunday 
morning, where I was met by Bros. Mott 
and West, the leaders of the New York and 
Brooklyn meetings. They told me that Mr. Rogers 
was in the city, and that Mr. Zech was also 
expected. Later I learned that Mr. Rogers had 
endeavored to have a meeting on Saturday evening, 
but that as it was a failure, no one attending, 
there was no hope for his holding a meeting 
on Sunday, though they supposed he would 
attend their regular meetings. It was therefore 
arranged that I should speak to the New York 
company in the afternoon and to the Brooklyn 
company in the evening. 

I chose for the subject of my remarks to the 
New York company 2 Cor. 4:5-9 and 1,2, and 
called attention to the very similar experiences 
of the Church now and in the harvest of the 
Jewish age, and particularly of those engaged 
in the special ministry of the Word of Truth 
then and now. We take our stand with the 
Apostle Paul preaching, "not ourselves, but 
Christ Jesus, the Lord, and ourselves your servants 
for Jesus' sake. For God, who commanded 
the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined 
in our hearts," etc. And this glorious shining 
in our hearts has impelled us to let our light 
shine out upon others. And, thank God, the 
blessed radiance has illuminated many hearts, 



and as one after another receives it and in turn 
becomes a luminary to others, the glory of God 
is seen more and more in his Church. 

R1661 :page 169 

Like the Apostle, we well realize that we have 
this treasure in imperfect earthen vessels; but, 
thank God, the very frailness of the vessels only 
manifests the more clearly that the excellency 
of the power is of God and not of us. To ourselves 
we take none of the glory of the power 
which is now accomplishing the great harvest 
work of sealing, separating, ripening and perfecting 
God's own elect for the high office to 
which they are called. The power is of God, 
and we are glad to be counted worthy to be his 
servants in any capacity that he can use us, no 
matter how much of reproach and persecution 
may be the present reward of such service. 

True, in the midst of persecution for the sake 
of the truth and righteousness, like some of the 
early Church, "we are troubled on every side, 
yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not 
in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast 
down, but not destroyed." Yet, notwithstanding 
all this, and yet more that may be in store 
for us in the future, seeing we have this ministry, 
we faint not; nor will we handle the Word 
of God deceitfully, nor make any improper use 
of our stewardship as servants of God, to gain 
the favor of men or to abate the persecution 
from the enemies of the truth and of its faithful 
service. To our Master we stand or fall, and 
we desire the approval, sympathy and co-operation 
of those only who are in fullest accord 
with the spirit and Word of God. 

I then told the friends there of the object of 
Mr. Rogers' visit to their city, and read to them 
the letters telling of his miserable work elsewhere, 
and particularly how he was representing 
me as in actual opposition to my husband's 
course, but in enforced co-operation. I told 
them of his barefaced falsehoods and refuted 
them with indubitable testimony to the contrary, 
being able in some cases to produce the 
written testimony of friends about whom he had 
falsified, they having written to us to the contrary 
of his statements, though not knowing of them. 

In the evening I spoke to the Brooklyn meeting, 
on the Bible warning, "Beware"— "Beware 
of the concision" [the dividing spirit, the 
spirit of contention, which genders unholy strife, 
etc.], "Beware of false prophets," of "evil 
men," of "the leaven of the pharisees," of 
"covetousness," of "philosophy and vain deceit;" 



"beware of dogs," of quarrelsome, snappish 
dispositions, always selfishly seeking their 
own advantage; and finally, "Beware, lest ye, 
also, being led away with the error of the 
wicked, fall from your own steadfastness." 
"And be ye not as the horse or as the mule, 
which have no understanding, whose mouth 
must be held in with bit and bridle," but in 
the legitimate use of our intellectual endowments, 
let us apply our hearts unto instruction. 
--Phil. 3:2,3; Matt. 11:15-20; 10:17; 16:6,12; 
Luke 12:15; Col. 2:8; 2 Pet. 3:17; Psa. 32:8,9; 
Prov. 23:12. 

The divinely inspired words of warning are 
very explicit, instructing us all to be ever on 
the watch that we be not caught in any snare of 
the adversary. We stand in the midst of perilous 
times. Let us beware: the Church militant 
has well nigh accomplished her warfare, 

R1662 : page 169 

and her great foe, seeing that his time is short, 
is exceedingly industrious to foil the purpose of 
God in her completion, exaltation and establishment 
as his Kingdom. His efforts in this 
will, of course, be futile; but they will surely 
serve the Lord's purpose in gathering out of his 
prospective Kingdom all things that offend. 
Therefore, take heed, let no man take thy crown. 
--Rev. 3:11. 

Like Gideon's band, only the few who prove 
loyal and strong and true to the end will share 
with Christ the honor of bringing forth judgment 
unto victory by the Millennial reign of 
righteousness. And let all who value the prize 
of their high-calling beware of all the snares 
and temptations of this evil day. Do not 
aspire to be some great one now: be contented 
to wait for the glory that is to be revealed in 
us, remembering that he that humbleth himself 
shall be exalted, and he that exalteth himself 
shall be abased. Surely all who have a true 
faith can afford to wait and patiently bear the 
cross, especially seeing that the time is short— 
oh, so short; for only a score of years will see 
the Kingdom in both its spiritual and earthly 
phases established. 

I then rehearsed to the Brooklyn friends the 
object of my visit and of the present necessity 
for calling attention specially to these words of 

R1662 : page 170 

warning, telling them of the object of Mr. 
Rogers' visit there and stating that I was there 



for the express purpose of meeting his assertions 
with the truth, which he was so unwilling to face 
that he had not appeared at either meeting. His 
absence, under the circumstances, was a quite 
sufficient refutation of his false statements, so 
boldly made elsewhere in our absence. 

Having set the truth of these matters fairly 
before the New York and Brooklyn companies, 
and assured them fully of my personal liberty, 
as being in no sense fettered by my husband, 
etc., I was fully assured by them that they were 
a unit in their condemnation of the whole conspiracy, 
that they recognized it as the work of 
Satan whose tools these men had become, and 
that nothing they could say or do would move 
the Church there; that Mr. Rogers' past course 
while in the colporteur work thereabouts had led 
them to rather expect such a fall, so that they 
were much less surprised by it than we had been. 

Bro. Mott handed me, with privilege to use as 
I saw fit, a copy of a letter sent by him to Mr. 
Rogers before the conspirators had issued their 
slanderous circular, but after we had learned 
something of the plot and had sent word of it 
to a few of the Churches. It reads as follows:— 
New York. 

BRO. ROGERS:-Your first letter was followed 
by one from Bro. Russell, since which 
I have seen Bro. West and others of the 
"household" in this vicinity. In reference 
to this matter, which has intruded into the 
Church, I voice the sentiments of at least a 
majority— all to whom I have talked— in 
stating that it is shocking and most inopportune. 
At a time when all are preparing for 
one of the most solemn observances of the 
year [the Memorial Supper], you come and 
propose a meeting, which, if permitted, 
would absolutely spoil the whole spirit of 
the occasion. You say you will "try to be 
well pleased with any arrangements which 
have been or may be made." Let me say 
plainly that no arrangements have been or 
will be made by us with reference to your 
coming here; we do not want to see or hear 
you under present conditions. If you come 
here, you can make your own arrangements 
and introduce your peculiar views in any 
way you see fit; but understand that the channels 
through which the truth is being distributed 
among us will not be at your service. 

In regard to your last letter: I am disgusted 
that any one claiming to be of the Lord's 
people should so far forget himself as to pry 
into and seek to make public any of Bro. 
Russell's family affairs. Has Sister Russell 



applied to you for aid? Until she does, her 
domestic relations should be held sacred. I 
may as well tell you frankly that, while I 
have always esteemed you for the sake of 
your usefulness in the colporteur work, your 
course in other matters has displayed deplorably 
bad judgment, and I have only one 
opinion on the subject in hand; viz., You 
have erred sadly; and although the cause of 
the truth will not suffer eventually you will 
see the results of your recent movements in 
the downfall of those whom possibly you 
may persuade to think with you. "It must 
needs be that offences come, but woe unto 
him by whom the offence cometh." 

What you have written is not new to me, 
as you suppose. A long time since certain 
rumors reached me; but those who gave them 
currency have lived to be ashamed of the injustice 
done to the victim of what seems to 
be but jealousy and ambition for leadership. 

Yours sincerely, EDWIN C. MOTT. 

On my journey westward I spoke on the same 
and kindred topics, and always with the same 
results; viz., the hearty assurance of the friends 
that the TOWER Extra had been quite satisfactory, 
and that the personal, gauzy misrepresentations 
of these men, which they had only slightly 
credited anyhow, were now fully dispelled. 
A few special incidents, connected with my 
journey, will, no doubt, be of general interest. 

I found that Mr. Rogers had advocated no-ransom 
views, and introduced no-ransom literature, 
to a Presbyterian minister, who, for over a 
year, has been a reader of ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 
making good progress toward the fulness of 
light and liberty in the truth. Mr. Rogers had 
also misrepresented my husband to alienate this 
gentleman's sympathy and esteem. And evidently 
he had been successful in at least confusing 
his ideas on both subjects. I am specially 
glad I met this brother, as I was able to clear 
away all his doubts. He expressed himself as 
greatly relieved of a heavy burden which had 
been oppressing him, and as now able to help 
some interested ones in his congregation who 
had been similarly disturbed. He rejoiced in 
the full vindication of Bro. Russell's character. 

R1662 : page 171 

This brother remarked, I am preaching these 
truths and with good effect on my congregation, 
and I have not yet been interfered with. A number 
in his congregation are readers of the TOWER 
and DAWN. 



At Rochester, in addition to the misrepresentations 
of my husband and all connected with 
the TOWER office, Mr. Rogers had introduced 
Mr. Barbour, an old enemy of the cross of Christ 
and of Bro. Russell, its fearless champion (See 
TOWER Extra pages 104-109), thus endeavoring 
to put the flock there under the influence of 
a bold and relentless enemy and his blasphemous 
teaching. On reaching Chicago I was grieved 
to find additional testimony that Mr. Zech and 
Mr. Adamson were pursuing a similar course of 
misrepresentation, but on different lines. 

There I learned that the conspirators, realizing 
that they had failed to accomplish their terrible 
scheme, are now planning a change of tactics, 
but without repentance. Mr. Adamson told 
that at a recent emergency-meeting of the four 
in Allegheny they had cast Mr. Rogers out of 
their combination— I suppose because he still 
persisted in the bolder course which they by this 
time see is a failure. Mr. Rogers wanted the 
others to hire a hall for him in Pittsburgh, and 
to advertise that he would "expose the errors 
of Millennial Dawn and Zion's Watch Tower." 
In the light of their recent experiences no wonder 
the others voted that such a course would be 
insanely suicidal to their cause, and dropped him. 

But nothing can be more evident than that 
they are as full as ever of the murderous spirit, 
and that any "reconciliation" would only mean 
another opportunity to "blow Mr. Russell and 
his work sky-high;"— an opportunity to do and 
say things privately as before, so that they could 
not be caught and exposed. As evidence of 
this, Mr. Adamson has a type- written letter from 
Mr. Zech, which I have seen and read. This 
letter he is loaning around amongst the Chicago 
Church (which no longer tolerates him as a 
teacher), on condition that they first promise 
that they will make no copy of it, nor allow 
it to pass out of their hands;— evidently 
fearing that its false presentations, if copied, 
would come to my husband's eyes and be exposed. 
Verily, they love darkness and secrecy, 
because their deeds are evil. Alas! how hard it 
is to realize that we have been so grievously deceived 
in these men. 

Mr. Zech furthermore is evidently in a private 
way seeking to give the inference that if he 
should fail in his business it would be my husband's 
fault. I am told that he says "I don't 
know what I may be obliged to do if Mr. Russell 
should push me." He does know, however, 
that such words are very deceptive to most people, 
who know little about business matters. I 
explained to the German sister who told me this, 



that if either one got pushed by the other, it 
would be my husband who would be pushed by 
Mr. Zech. My husband, having indorsed thirty-two 
hundred dollars of Mr. Zech's notes without 
one cent of security, will surely be pushed 
by the banks who hold those notes, if Mr. Zech 
does not pay them. 

Mr. and Mrs. Adamson are at the same business 
of misrepresentation. A Norwegian sister, 
with whom I took tea in Chicago, said to me 
before I left, Oh! Sister Russell, I am so glad 
that you visited us, I am so glad to get personally 
acquainted; for Mrs. Adamson has been 
telling us lately that you are very haughty and 
proud, and I am so glad to know that it is 
not true. And Mr. Adamson said to us 
recently— "The Church in Allegheny is rotten." 
I answered, "How is that Mr. A.? You 
told us not long ago of the Church there, that 
they were such noble Christians, and all so harmonious. 
How is it now that you have suddenly 
changed your mind and say they are all 'rotten?' 
In what respect are they 'rotten?'" 
"Well," said he, "I mean to say that they are 
only 'babes.'" "But," I replied, "are babes 
rotten?" 

R1663 : page 171 

I assured the sister that while some false 
brethren have recently disclosed themselves and 
removed the sheep's clothing they formerly wore, 
yet we have some as noble hearts in the Allegheny 
Church as are to be found on earth. And 
as for their being "babes," I could tell her that 
some here who are "babes" in "malice" (1 Cor. 14:20), 
compared with Mr. Adamson, could 
instruct him on the proper interpretation of parables, 
as well as show him that some of his recent 
Chicago preaching is very unscriptural. I refer 

R1663 : page 172 

to his telling the Church there that if they found 
the narrow way of the high or heavenly calling 
too difficult, they could turn aside and run for 
the restitution prize of human perfection, and 
that the ancient worthies may be looked for any 
day now— before the "first resurrection," of the 
Church, is completed. 

This sister also told me of a very remarkable 
dream of another of the Norwegian sisters, a 
near neighbor. A short time ago, she said, 
Sister W. came over to my house in the morning 
to tell me that in her dream, which made a 
very deep impression on her mind, she had seen 



and heard Bro. Russell preaching these precious 
truths "in our own beautiful Norwegian language"; 
and while she listened enraptured with 
it, some one in the congregation hurled a stone 
at the head of the preacher, which struck him 
in the mouth, from whence the blood flowed 
profusely. She ran to his aid and tried to wipe 
away the blood, which only flowed the more. 

Then the scene suddenly seemed to change, 
and she held in her hand an open Bible, whose 
pages were mirrors. On one page was reflected 
a great and venomous serpent, which caused her 
to fear and tremble so that she could scarcely 
hold the book. Yet she feared to let it fall, lest 
it might break. But as she tremblingly held it, 
she glanced at the opposite page, where she 
read,--"The God of peace shall bruise Satan 
under your feet shortly." Then she awakened 
in great excitement. It seemed at the time 
prophetic; and when the late storm broke over 
Bro. Russell and the Church, she at once recalled 
its peculiar impressions. Several others 
have mentioned similar dreams preceding this 
trouble, and they seem strangely prophetic. 

Mr. Adamson also told that my husband forbids 
people to marry, and as a proof of this related 
how he once sent Mr. Bryan a three days' 
journey into the country at an expense of twelve 
dollars, in order to prevent a wedding. I answered 
that this statement is as untrue as the 
others; that Mr. Russell never forbade any one 
to marry, and that not a living being could 
truthfully say that he or she had been forbidden; 
but that I knew that when his opinion was specially 
asked he gave the Apostle Paul's advice, 
and as nearly as possible in his words, citing 
them. (1 Cor. 7:25-35.) And when I had given 
a truthful explanation of his proof, above referred 
to, all saw that it was to my husband's credit 
that he spared neither trouble nor expense in 
order to let a sister in Christ know something of 
what he knew of the character of the man she 
was about to marry; that, thus informed, she 
might the better judge for herself whether or not 
he would make a desirable husband. Mr. Bryan 
who took that letter, and who brought it back 
undelivered, because too late to be of service to 
the sister, knows the truth of the matter, while 
conniving with Mr. A. at its misrepresentation 
of my husband's character and teachings. Anything 
to down Mr. Russell's influence,— seems 
to be their motto. 

In the same connection, Mr. Adamson is telling 
that Mr. Russell wrote to him shortly after 
he was married, telling him that he should make 
his Will so as to give what money he had to the 



Tract Fund, and to be sure not to let Mrs. A. 

see that letter. They affirmed this story in my 

presence, and said they had the letter in hand. 

I denied it emphatically, well knowing my husband's 

disposition to the contrary. I asked them 

to read the letter aloud to us all, but they refused 

to do so, and this clearly showed to all 

present that the statement was not worthy of 

credence. Only since my return home have I 

learned the truth on the subject, as follows: 

Shortly after Mr. A's marriage, Mrs. A., it 
seems, declared that she "was not going to race 
over the country after him, like a mad dog." 
In writing to Mr. Russell on the subject, Mr. A. 
said, in substance, "What money I have was 
all consecrated to the Lord before I married; 
and in the event of my death I do not intend 
that any of it shall go to Mrs. Adamson or her 
folks: it shall go to the Tract Fund." 

In his reply to that letter, my husband urged 
that Mrs. Adamson be not ignored; that as a 
wife she had a just claim upon him;— that on 
general principles any woman he would call his 
"wife" deserved consideration as such, even if 
out of harmony on religious subjects, as Mrs. 
A. then was, according to his representation. 
But he advised that if Mr. A. decided to will 
any portion of his effects to the Tract Fund, 
it would be wise, under the circumstances he 

R1663 : page 173 

described, and to the interest of his domestic 
happiness, not to inform Mrs. A. respecting it. 
That is probably the letter they had in hand, 
and were afraid to read lest their misrepresentations 
should be made manifest. Thus do falsehoods 
force the truth to view.— Matt. 10:26. 

As illustrating the depth of wickedness to 
which these men would stoop, under the influence 
of envy and ambition, I told the Church 
how Mr. Adamson had written to Bro. Wright 
(and we know not to how many others), citing 
1 Cor. 5:1-6 without comment, as applicable to 
my husband. Mr. Adamson could not deny the 
fact, under the evidence, but protested that he 
had not intended any reflection upon Mr. Russell's 
moral character. But Bro. McPhail, of 
the West Chicago meeting, spoke up and said 
that Mr. Adamson had made the same citation 
before that congregation, and reminded Mr. A. 
that he had challenged the reference then and 
there. Some of the brethren present remarked 
that such a charge would have no weight with 
anyone who knew Mr. Russell or who had ever 
looked into his face. In telling what inference 



he did wish to give by the citation named, Mr. A. 
replied that he meant to say that Mr. Russell is 
a "railer." But since railers are not mentioned 
at all in the citation, but five verses further down 
in the chapter, I showed that this is only one of 
the many cunning methods of misrepresentation 
resorted to by these wicked men—because they 
do not know any real crimes to lay to his charge. 

I mention these items here, because no doubt 
they have been similarly misstated orally or by 
letter to others; and to show that the same spirit 
that prompted the misrepresentations of their 
first attack still controls them, and that reconciliation 
with such people, under such conditions, 
would neither be possible, nor desirable, nor 
right, nor Scriptural. Better, far better off, is 
the Church without these men and all who have 
sympathy with such unscrupulous conduct. Indeed, 
while I was speaking at Chicago upon the 
duty of the Church as laid down in Matt. 18:15-17 
and 2 Thes. 3:6 (See TOWER Extra, page 
66), and showing that such men were not to be 
accounted again as "brethren" unless they 
first make full confession and give evidence 
of a heart repentance by as industriously attempting 
to undo the wrong as they exercised 
themselves in doing it, Mr. Adamson spoke up 
and said, "I do not repent. I would do the same 
thing again to-morrow." I replied, You are 
unto me, therefore, under the instruction of the 
Scriptures, as a heathen man and a publican;— 
as "a heathen man" in that I can no longer 
have any Christian fellowship with you; as "a 
publican" in that I can no longer respect you 
as I could respect an honorable man of the world. 

On the whole, my visit among the Churches 
gives reason for great encouragement; for surely 
if the Lord were not in the midst of his people 
such a virulent attack of the Adversary to destroy 
and scatter the flock would have done great 
damage. But I found everywhere a noble spirit 
of patience, faith, moderation and zeal. With 
deep sorrow and often with suppressed emotion 
the course of the conspirators was referred to, 
and earnest solicitude for the young of the flock 
was manifested. In every place the sentiments 
expressed were that these sad and painful experiences 
only served to draw their hearts nearer 
to God and nearer to all his faithful people, who 
stand shoulder to shoulder and heart to heart in 
the conflicts of this evil day. 

All such— and that is all that I met from 
New York to Chicago, with perhaps a single exception, 
or possibly two,— having stood this 
shock so bravely and well, feel only the stronger 
for the probably more severe conflicts yet to follow. 



The necessity for prayer and communion 
one with another and with the Lord is also more 
fully realized; and thus the body of Christ will 
be the more closely knit together in the bonds 
of mutual sympathy, love and helpfulness. 

Many who have already endured much for the 
truth's sake are now reproached with the words, 
Oh, you are no better than other people; you 
call yourselves the "little flock," "the saints," 
and have as much contention and strife as may 
be found anywhere; etc., etc. And this is, alas! 
only too true, and the dear, faithful ones have 
felt the reproach keenly, and many scarcely knew 
what reply to make. But the answer is plain and 
Scriptural; for where did the Lord promise that 
his "little flock" of consecrated and faithful 
followers should be exempt from all intrusions 
of false prophets, false teachers, false brethren, 

R1663 : page 174 

yes, and of wolves in sheep's clothing? Nowhere 
is any such assurance left us. 

On the contrary, we are distinctly forewarned 
that, as in olden times there were false prophets 
among God's people, so there will be also false 
teachers among us, who privily (privately) will 
bring in damnable heresies, and that many will 
follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom 
the way of truth shall be evil spoken of, and that, 
through covetousness (ambition, etc.) shall they 
with feigned words endeavor to make merchandise 

R1664:page 174 

ofyou.--2 Pet. 2:1-3. 

Again, we are forewarned of "false apostles, 
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into 
the apostles of Christ." "And no marvel," 
says the Apostle Paul, "for Satan himself is 
transformed into an angel of light; therefore it 
is no great thing if his ministers also be transformed 
as the ministers of righteousness; whose 
end shall be according to their works." And 
Paul also tells of his own "perils among false 
brethren. "--2 Cor. 11:13-15,26; 1 Tim. 1:20; 
2 Tim. 2:17,18; 4:14-18. 

The Lord also bids us, "Beware of false prophets, 
which come to you in sheep's clothing, but 
inwardly they are ravening wolves;" saying, "Ye 
shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather 
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so, 
every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but 
a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good 
tree cannot bring forth evil fruit; neither can a 
corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. ...Wherefore, 



by their fruits ye shall know them."— 
Matt. 7:15-20. 

Here, then, is the answer to all such reproaches: 
We were forewarned by God of the very conditions 
that now surround us; and that such conditions, 
while they were quite prominent in the 
harvest of the Jewish age and beginning of the 
Gospel age, would more especially characterize 
this harvest period; for "in the last days" many 
will have a form of godliness, but deny the power 
thereof, and such deceptions will make the 
"perilous times" of this "evil day." (2 Tim. 3:1,5.) 
If there were a Judas among the apostles, 
a Hymenaeus, a Philetus, an Alexander and 
a Simon Magus and others such in the early 
Church, and if there was a great conspiracy of 
two hundred and fifty of the princes of Israel, 
famous in the congregation, men of renown, 
against the meek and humble instruments which 
God had chosen wherewith to accomplish the 
deliverance of his people (Num. 16:2,3), that 
through the very weakness of the earthen vessels 
his own glorious power might the more be realized; 
and since we are distinctly forewarned of 
God that thus it must be here also— in the last 
days of the Church's warfare— why should any 
of his people be dismayed to find it even so? 
Surely here is an abundant answer for all who 
would take up a reproach against the anointed 
body of Christ. 

The Church has not yet accomplished her warfare, 
and her foes multiply on every hand; and 
their attacks are the more bold, persistent and 
determined as she approaches the end of her 
course. They are vigilant, energetic, subtle and 
relentless; but greater is He that is for us than 
all them that are against us. 

In the bonds of the gospel, Your servant in 
Christ, MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 

R1658 : page 174 

A PENTECOSTAL MEMORIAL. 



It occurs to us as fitting, that as the Adversary's 
murderous plot against the Lord's work 
reached its height on the anniversary of our 
Lord's betrayal and death, so this thanksgiving 
issue of the TOWER should be dated just fifty-three 
days after,— corresponding to the Pentecostal 
blessing which came upon the faithful ones 
just fifty days after our Lord's resurrection,— 
"when the day of Pentecost was fully come, and 
they were all with one accord in one place." 



We rejoice, dear friends, that this anniversary 
of Pentecost finds so many of us of one accord 
(of one mind in the truth) and in one place 
(abiding in the secret place of the Most High, 
under the shadow of the Almighty). As the 
early disciples rejoiced and were begotten again 
to a living hope by the evidences of God's continued 
favor, manifested in the resurrection of 
Christ and evidenced on the day of Pentecost, 
so let us, while rejoicing as they did in the 
same, additionally recognize the Lord's continuing 
favor and protecting care over all that are 
his. Let us rejoice for ourselves and for each 
other that we still stand; that another sifting 
has passed, and has not separated us from the 
Lord and his people. 

And let us pray and seek that we may have 
more and more of the holy spirit of our Master, 
that more and more we may be about our 
Father's business— co-workers together with 
God, ambassadors of the truth, fervent in spirit, 
serving the Lord. And as the early Church 
after Pentecost went everywhere preaching the 
gospel, so let us be renewedly earnest in our 
fidelity to the truth, to the Lord and to his 
"brethren." We cannot continue "fervent 
in spirit" except as we serve the Lord; and we 
cannot long serve the Lord except we do it 
from a pure heart fervently. Hence the necessity 
of activity in the service of God, on the 
part of all who would stand in this evil day. If 
our hands be not full of the Lord's service and 
our mouths full of his praise, it is because our 
love lacks fervency— heat. And it is into the 

R1658 : page 175 

luke-warm hearts that the great Adversary gains 
admission with his spirit of envy, malice, evil-surmisings, 
strife and every evil work. Such 
are all to be sifted out as even less esteemed by 

R1659 : page 175 

our Lord than the coldly indifferent worldly 
class. He says to such, "Because thou art 
neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of 
my mouth." Let our love— 

"Pure, warm and changeless be, 
A living fire." 
Thus, turned to good account, our recent 
sad experiences will become to all of us rightly 
exercised thereby a Memorial of Divine favor 
and blessing. And as such it will strengthen 
us all, cause us to walk still more circumspectly, 
and prepare us for future trials and siftings. 



For these no doubt will become more virulent 
and severe as the remaining years of the Church's 
pilgrimage roll on. Indeed, as often before 
noticed, but always well to be remembered, the 
close of the Church's course, as represented in 
various types— Elijah, John the Baptist and 
John the Apostle— is to be one of very severe 
trial, possibly including physical persecution. 

Let this Memorial, and the blessed influences 
and recollections of faith rewarded and prayers 
answered, be a landmark for our encouragement 
and strengthening in future trials. 

"Who helped thee last will help thee still; 
Be calm, and sink into his will." 

Dear Brethren and Sisters, as you prayed for 
us when you knew we were in the midst of the 
trouble, so render thanks for us now that it has 
passed away; and ask for us grace and strength, 
and humility, to endure whatever trials the Lord 
may yet see best to permit to come upon us. 

And we, here, who prayed for you that the 
Lord would keep you from being stumbled by 
the Adversary's snares and deceptions and that 
your faith fail not,— we will render thanks on 
your behalf that the God of all grace and comfort 
has kept his own and not suffered them to 
be plucked out of his hand, nor to be tempted 
beyond what they were able, but that with the 
temptation he provided a door of escape. And 
we will ask for you that these light afflictions, 
which are but for a moment, may work out for 
you and for us all a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory. 

As ever, your servant in the Lord, 
-THE EDITOR. 

R1668 : page 175 

"My soul, with humble fervor raise 
To God the voice of grateful praise; 

And all thy ransomed powers combine 
To bless his attributes divine. 

"Deep on my heart let memory trace 
His acts of mercy and of grace; 

Who with a father's tender care 

Saved me when sinking in despair. 

"He led our longing souls to prove 
The joys of his abounding love. 

And when we did his grace request, 
He led our weary feet to rest." 



R1664:page 175 



THE VOICE OF THE CHURCH. 



"WHETHER ONE MEMBER SUFFER, ALL THE MEMBERS SUFFER WITH IT: 
OR ONE MEMBER BE HONORED, ALL THE MEMBERS REJOICE WITH IT." 

--1 COR. 12:26.-- 

[Bro. Letterman's was the first reply to 
the Extra received. We therefore give it the 
first place. It was doubly encouraging because 
he is a new reader.] 

Pennsylvania. 

MY DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:-- Your favor, 
A Conspiracy Exposed, to hand. I cannot wait 
until I read it all before offering you my congratulations. 
"Whom the Lord loveth he 
chasteneth;" "his grace is sufficient for us," 
his own, in all trials; and all things work together 
for good to those who love the Lord. 
My sympathy I reserve for those poor, misguided 
ones, who have lent themselves, I am 
afraid, the too willing tools of Satan. My 
prayer for you and Sister Russell is that the 
Lord may prosper you in every good work and 
word. Your brother in Christ, 

G. W. LETTERMAN. 

[The following letter is from the editor's 
aged father, who received one of the slanderous 
circulars. Step by step he has been interested 
in the present truth since 1872— being one 
of the Bible class mentioned in the Extra.] 
Virginia. 

MY DEAR SON:-It is with love and sympathy 
in my heart that I write you at this time, 
after having read the full account of your 
trials and troubles amongst those whom you 
accepted as your brethren in Christ. It does 
seem almost incredible that those people 
could be guilty of such mean and despicable 
conduct towards you, from whom they had 
received so many marks of kindness. But, my 
dear son, these are some of the trials we all 
may expect— especially those engaged in the 
"harvest" work. I am proud of the noble 
defence you make in vindication of your 
conduct, and especially in the cause of the 

R1664:page 176 

Truth we all love so dearly. I feel confident 

that you will come out of this trial 

brighter and more appreciated in your character 



and works than you ever were before. 
The good Lord, who has been testing your 
works, will promote you to still higher honors 
in his Kingdom; I pray that he may bless you 
always and sustain you in every good word 
and work; and to him we will ascribe all the 
praise forever. Amen. 

But while confident that the result will be a 
final victory for the truth, it is very trying on 
one who has labored late and early for the last 
twenty years for the cause of truth, to have his 
supposed friends turn against him and brand 
him as a liar and a hypocrite. Oh! it is terrible! 
I am most surprised at Mr. Bryan: to 
my mind he is the most deceitful one of them 
all. If I had known his true character when 
he came to our house in Richmond, I should 
have treated him very differently. 

I often think of you and your many trials, 
which you seem to meet very courageously. 
But with an approving conscience a man can 
stand considerable, especially if the Lord is on 
his side to help and strengthen. 

Please extend to your dear wife my hearty congratulations 
on her noble defense of her husband 
and the cause of truth during this trying ordeal. 

With love and congratulations from us all, 
I remain, your loving father, 

JOSEPH L. RUSSELL. 



Pennsylvania. 

[Another brother who was a member of the 
early Allegheny Bible Class writes as follows:] 

MY DEAR BRO. IN CHRIST:-I have read carefully 
pages 92 to 1 19 of A Conspiracy Exposed 
and Harvest Siftings with special interest, and 
must say my recollection of events named by 
you are very much like your own; and while 
there are details, in some cases, of which I 
know nothing, and hence cannot speak as to 
them, yet I do know there were such transactions 
as you name, and at the dates given. I 
am quite conversant with some of the dealings, 
and am surprised at the very merciful manner 
in which you speak of those with whom you 
were associated. "The servant is not greater 
than his Lord." "If they have done these 
things in a green tree, what will they do in 
the dry?"— "Perils among false brethren," 
etc., etc. 

As to myself, you can rely on one thing; viz., 
All reports stating that I deny the ransom are 
absolutely false. The no-ransom people may 
talk, but they "have nothing in me." 



As ever, Yours in Him, W. H. CONLEY. 



page 176 

Kansas. 

DEAR BRO. AND SISTER:--We have copy of 
Extra, and take much pleasure in answering. 
I know the trial is hard for you to bear; but 
we are praying earnestly "that your faith fail 
not." "Think it not strange concerning the 
fiery trial." "Be patient, therefore, brethren." 
"Count it all joy." 

The Devil uses the best men and women for 
his work if he can secure them. "Stand fast, 
therefore;" "For we wrestle not against flesh 
and blood." One of my favorite Scripture 
texts is 1 Cor. 16:13,14. "Watch ye, stand 
fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong. 
Let all your things be done with love." 

We shall wait in prayerful suspense until we 
know the outcome of this very unexpected 
development. 

Having had a little experience in colporteur 
work, and also in preaching orally, we have long 
ago become convinced that circulating the 
printed page is almost the only way to reach 
the hungry and interested ones. I am satisfied 
in my own mind that you are entirely 
correct in your views on this matter. We enjoyed 
the colporteur work, and it was and is 
one of our hardest trials to be compelled to 
give it up. Pray for us. 

Give our love to all the brethren at Allegheny, 
and remember us as yours in Christ, 

E. R. WEST AND FAMILY. 



R1664 : page 176 

Massachusetts. 
DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL: 
A Conspiracy Exposed and Harvest 
Siftings reached me safely. I praise the dear 
Lord for this, the other side of the question. 
I have heard the rumblings of the present 
storm for quite a long time. As I love you 
dearly (and often pray for you), it grieved me 
very much to hear all these things. But I 
would be surprised if "all men spoke well of 
you;" for our dear Master was very cruelly 
spoken against; and if they have misunderstood 
and condemned and betrayed him, the 
"holy" and the "just one," how much more 



we should expect, who are imperfect— yet, 
praise God, our intentions are perfect. I am 
delighted to find in your "Exposure" that 
your course has been highly commended by 
the intelligent and consecrated ones, and for 
myself I would say, Rightly so, indeed. 

The dear brethren with whom we meet here 
appear to be in a good, healthy condition, all 
praise to our dear Father, and his adorable Son 
Jesus, who careth for the dear sheep. 

When I received A.B.R. and Z.'s letters 
containing the blasphemous charges against 

R1664: page 177 

your character, I was surprised. I see one of 
them even went so far as to criticise your views 
respecting Jacob's dealing with his father in 
the matter of obtaining the blessing. 

See what a different effect the truth on 
the subject had on a consecrated heart. My 
heart responded in praises to the dear Lord, 
for another clear vindication of his glorious 
character. Truly, "Light is sown for the 
righteous, and gladness for the upright in 
heart." Many are the afflictions of the righteous; 
but the Lord delivereth him out of them 
all. Praise his dear name for such comforting 
assurances. May the God of all peace comfort 
your hearts, is the prayer of your humble 
servant and brother in the Lord, 
W. J. THORN. 



[We give, by permission, extracts from a 
personal letter to one of our office-helpers.] 
Indiana. 

DEAR BRO. HENNINGES:--I received A Conspiracy 
Exposed. We have read it carefully and 
are thoroughly satisfied. 

I heard a rumor of this trouble about a year 
ago, and just after the convention heard another. 
Neither was very definite, only a hint 
that "Some of the colporteurs felt that Bro. 
R. was attempting to lord it over the heritage." 
In the light of his writings, however, we knew 
perfectly that the man would never dream of 

R1665 : page 177 

such a thing; and we concluded that his strict 
business principles were not appreciated by 
those persons who had loose ideas of business. 
There are many well-meaning people who 
mistake justice for cruelty. A schoolma'am 



appreciates that fact very thoroughly. Our 
experience in Chicago strengthened our ideas 
on the "whispers"— you recall how some had 
to be kept in their place to enable others to 
hear what was profitable. 

Mother and I feel that Bro. Russell is a 
"chosen vessel" of the Lord, and we hold 
him in great esteem for his works' sake. We had 
two ideas in mind when we went to Chicago; 
viz., to be baptized, and to see Bro. R. face 
to face. We were satisfied. His face is one to 
inspire confidence and we studied it carefully. 

When I received those circulars ["bombs"] 
last April, I was stunned, for Mr. Zech was one 
of the last persons whom I would have suspected 
of perfidy. Of course, I know nothing about 
him except what I have learned through the 
TOWER. Bro. R. has always spoken so kindly 
of Mr. Z. that I supposed he was faithful. 

After the others retire, Mother and I usually 
read and talk. That evening I gave her one 
of the circulars, and we discussed the matter. 
We decided that Bro. R. would never have 
been honored by the Lord, had he done the 
things of which he was accused; that you, Bro. 
Henninges, would never stay in an office 
where such things were done; that we would 
hear the other side of the story before we decided 
what was the real trouble. We laid the 
matter before the Lord and told him that we 
were following him and not any earthly leader; 
that our sympathy was with Bro. R., for we 
felt that he was a faithful servant; that we 
wanted the Lord's help to decide the matter 
justly, for we had esteemed those whose names 
were signed to the circular highly for their 
work's sake, also. So we left the matter. The 
next afternoon, we compared the letter signed 
S. D. Rogers with "The Work in England" 
in the April TOWER. The conclusions were 
not flattering to Mr. Rogers. We knew that 
his ideas would not work in our house, for my 
father and brothers would not tolerate his ideas 
for a single day. We concluded that he was 
tired of colporteur work, and wanted an excuse 
for leaving it. Since we had seen that one of 
the four was to be blamed, we felt that the 
other three were in bad company to say the 
least, and again left the matter. 

The "Conspiracy Exposed" is a full reply 
to every point raised. It is an awful warning 
to those who neglect to cultivate the fruits of 
the spirit, for these people seem to have been 
content with head knowledge rather than heart 
practice. Mr. Bryan must be a most miserable 
person. I pity him. That any one could be in 



daily communion with such people as Bro. and 
Sister R. and profit so little by their presence is a 
mystery to me. What manner of man can he be? 

We have felt that it will not do to depend 
upon any "arm of flesh," for it will fail us. 
So we have long urged our little company here 
to search the Scriptures and make the truths 
we love a part of themselves. While honoring 
Bro. R. and his work, we have used his writings 
as outlines of Bible study; so that should 
any difficulty arise, we would not easily be 
moved or shaken. We think this to be a wise 
course. God's Word is sure, and when our 
hope is based upon that alone, we are safe. It 
is not always an easy matter to study out these 
things; it is far easier to take Bro. R's word, 
for we have great confidence in him; but we 
know that we shall not be permanently benefited 
unless we appropriate these things to ourselves. 
Hence we test everything he says to 
the best of our ability. May the Lord keep 
us all from falling! With love and sympathy 
for the friends in the office, I remain 

Yours in Christ, Louise Hamilton. 

page 178 

Ohio. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER IN CHRIST: 
At our Bible Class meeting on last Sabbath, 
I was requested by the congregation 
unanimously, and with my most hearty 
concurrence, to convey to you by letter the 
information, that, after a full examination 
of charges against you and your reply to 
the same, our confidence in and love for 
you both are greatly increased, and we feel 
doubly assured that you will not be shaken 
or moved in the defense and promulgation of 
the truth, but rather prompted to increased 
vigor and activity in your noble work. May 
the Lord who has delivered you from the 
claws and mouths of the lions be ever with 
you to direct, strengthen and protect you 
as his faithful servants. 

Your brethren in the Lord, 
THE CHURCH AT EAST LIVERPOOL, 
W. A. WALLACE, Leader. 



Indiana. 
DEAR SISTER RUSSELL-BELOVED IN THE 
LORD:— Husband has intended to write Bro. 
Russell before this, but has been very busy 
(has in mind to care for some German brethren 



in L who desire to have this trouble 

interpreted to them), and he is absent now for 
a few days. 

Our confidence that dear Bro. Russell would 
be able to clear himself of those vile charges, 
is amply rewarded, and now he only shines 
brighter in our estimation then before. We 
praise the dear Lord for his sustenance of you 
both and all the faithful in this severe trial, 
and that you know the peace that abides at 
such times. All who have stood this shock 
will certainly put themselves yet more firmly 
on their guard, and realize more and more 
how dangerous it is to permit a moment 
of carelessness or indifference. How necessary 
to pray without ceasing! for otherwise we 
know not but we may be caught unawares by 
the enemy, and our feet slip. How perilous 
are these times; and who shall stand? 

The letter written by your office workers, 
telling of the ways in which they are bound, 
I am trying to make my own in sentiment; 
for while I am not yet an active worker, I am 
trying to prepare myself for whatever the Lord 
may have in store for me. 

"Seemeth it a small thing unto you that the 
God of Israel hast separated you from the congregation 
...to minister unto them?" (Num. 16:9.) 
The honor which these terribly deceived 
brethren once had of dispensing the 
meat provided in due season, is oh! how great; 
and one (is it wrong?) that I covet. 

We contemplate holding a special meeting 
having for its subject the Ransom; some desiring 
to understand it more fully. Please remember 
us especially in your prayers, that we 
may be strengthened with might by his spirit. 
God bless you both and continue his upholding 
of you in his arms. 

Yours in our Redeemer, 

MRS. F. J. BOURQUIN. 



Kansas. 
DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-- When I 
first received the circular of B.A.R. and Z. I 
confess I was greatly surprised, as I had learned 
to hold them in high esteem because of their 
active zeal for the truth, and I prayed earnestly 
that if their charges, or any portion of them, 
were true, God would give you grace and humility 
to confess your error; but that if they were 
not true, you might be more and more used of 
him to feed the household of faith with stimulating 
and strengthening strong meat. At all 



events, I felt sure that the teachings of the 
DAWNS were in harmony with God's truth, and 
I meant to hold fast to them. Yet I assure you 
I was not inclined to believe the charges, having 
many reasons for not believing them; and since 
you have exploded their bomb more thoroughly 
than they could, it shows plainly what an infernal 
machine it was. It may cripple some of the 
weak sheep, but it will prove fatal to many wolves 
in sheep's clothing. 
Faithfully, Yours in Christ, A. B. PERINE. 



Ontario. 

MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--The exposure 
of conspirators in the very heart of 
Christ's laborers has been the greatest surprise 
to us since we came to a knowledge 
of God's plan. Their conscience must be 
completely asleep, or they could not be 
compelled to retain such a spirit, which a 
little consideration would prove to them is 
of Satan. I fear they are in a most dangerous 
position, that vanity and pride are 
causing them to sin against the power of 
God, which I consider brings on the second 
death. I think if they could see their 
condition they would be frightened and 
humbled by it, and return to the Lord in 
meekness. 

The outside world and the nominal 
church have truly more sense of justice than 
they, as they are too honest and just to pick 
flaws where there are none. I know of a 

page 179 

man here who is a great enemy to you, who 

wrote to a Presbyterian minister in your 

city to know who you are and what kind 

of a man you are, that he might air your 

bad qualities. But, praise the Lord, I understand 

the answer came that you are a 

nice enough man, but very far astray in 

your religious opinions. This shows how, 

far and wide, others have been looking for 

flaws in your character. Oh! how guarded 

we always ought to be that none may find 

occasion to stumble over the truth on account 

of our unworthiness to carry it to 

them. Trusting you to the care and guidance 

of the holy power of Jehovah, 

Sincerely, Your brother and sister in 
Jesus, T. AND HARRIET BAKER. 



New York. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--The TOWER Extra 
received and read with a great deal of 
interest. We felt on reading the letters of 
others, as well as on realizing more fully 
the severity of this trial to you and Sister 
Russell, that our expressions of confidence 
and sympathy, as given in a former letter, 
have very partially expressed our mind. 
We do praise him for this thorough vindication 
of the cause of truth and yourself, 
and the evidence of the Lord's gracious 
overruling to the honor of his name. While 
our faith has in no degree been shaken, we 
have been led to a firmer determination as 
well as a greater nearness to our dear Lord 
and head. 

We realize in it a sad warning: that if 
the enemy can find in us any vulnerable part 
he will surely exercise himself. It has 
called forth from us quite a searching of 
heart and an examination of the armor. 
Your article, "Personal Liberty," had a 
similar effect with the result of my discovering 
a degree of the same contagion in 
myself— undervaluing to some degree the 
talent already blessed by Him and reaching 
out for other talents not given. How I 
thank him for the timely rescue! I for one 
shall not give place to the least entrance of 
Satan's shaft. The example before us of 
presuming upon talent not given by the 
Lord is too clear an indication of the Lord's 
will to be lost. He shall find me faithful in 
the one talent placed in my hands. We are 
more than ever convinced that the colporteuring 
of DAWN, with the distribution of 
TOWERS and tracts on subjects requiring explanation, 
is our means of largest service. 

All with whom I have communicated express 
the same thought: That this is but 
another of Satan's efforts to deflect the 
course of the harvest laborers and a prompting 
of the flesh, individual heart-searching 
being necessary in order to be amply defended 
against the adversary and to prevent 
his gaining any degree of advantage. Our 
trust is firm in Him who is able to keep 
us from falling; and you may be sure that 
you are daily remembered by us before the 
throne of grace. We are in this yet more 
fully reminded of the burden of responsibility 
that rests upon your shoulders; but 
we know that, with us, you realize that our 



sufficiency is of God, that the power of God 
may be made manifest. With much love 
in Christ to you, Sister Russell and all the 
faithful ones of the dear household, 

MR. AND MRS. M. L. HERR. 



Nevada. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-With great joy 
I received M. DAWN, VOL. I., in Danish, 
and the tracts for the introduction of the 
same. So far as I have examined it, it is a 
very able and faithful translation. Praise 
be to the Lord and thanks to you and Bro. 
Samson, now the glad tidings can be sent 
to Denmark. You will find enclosed check 
for $50. Please see business slip. I am 
working hard to fix my home affairs, so as 
(if the Lord will) to go to Denmark and do 
some colporteur work there. 

I am very sorry to see from the Extra the 
trouble and trials you have with false 
brethren. It is liable to make some stumble, 
but will make others stronger: for true 
members of the body of Christ will not be 
deceived by a strange voice, but will be 
more closely bound together in watchfulness 
and prayer. I have much sympathy for 
you and Sister Russell. I know that your 
trials are severe, because these are men in 
whom you have had confidence. So far as 
character is concerned, I have but a short 
personal acquaintance with you, but in my 
best judgment you have an uncommonly 
well-balanced mind and good business capacity; 
moreover, the Lord has intrusted 
to you a knowledge of his Word (a key to 
his storehouse), that he has granted to no one 
else; and this is proved by your writings. 
Now if the Lord, who is acquainted with 
your heart, has placed so much confidence 
in you and made you his instrument to 
bring meat in due season for the household 

page 180 

of faith, in this day of the Lord, we also 
should have confidence in you. This conspiracy 
will only bring you, with Jacob's 
earnestness, closer to him. Therefore, 
brother and sister, be strong! Fear not! 
The deadly arrows are only passing by! 
The Captain of our salvation will bring 
you through more than conquerors. 
Remember me in your prayers. Your 



brother in Jesus, HENRY LARSON. 



Illinois. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--I take this opportunity 
to assure you of my heartfelt sympathy 
for you and Sister Russell in the 
fiery trials you have both passed through 
in the past few weeks, and which you have 
been able, by God's grace, to endure. 

I rejoice to say, dear brother, that the 
little company in this city has never 
doubted your allegiance to the truth; and 
that the sweet incense of our prayers has 
reached our Heavenly Father, we feel assured, 
in that you have acquitted yourself 
so honorably. The last TOWER was joyfully 
received, and doubly assures us that 
the Lord still permits you to serve the meat 
in due season, the second article in particular 
being strong meat indeed. 

Yours in fellowship and love, 
J. H. HAYES. 



New York. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Just a week ago 
to-night, we had the rare pleasure of seeing 
and hearing Sister Russell. All enjoyed 
her remarks very much. Again we 
assure you of our love and confidence. 

I trust that your prayer, viz.: "May we all 
walk faithfully and humbly in Christ's 
footsteps— even unto death," will be true of 
us. Our meetings continue good. The canvass 
fair. Some newly interested ones constantly 
coming in, while others move or 
grow careless. 

With gratitude and love, I am, as ever, 
Your brother in Christ Jesus, 

JAMES A. WEST. 



Oregon. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-- When our little 
flock gathered together to-day to read and 
pray and study God's Word, this severe 
trial of yours was uppermost in all our minds; 
and we desire to write you a word of condolence 
and comfort. 

We all feel sad that so many having received 
kindness at your hands should turn 
about and be so cruel; we are thankful 



that you have passed successfully such a 
severe trial; and we more than ever believe 
the truthfulness of your teachings. 

We pray that the Lord will comfort you 
greatly by giving you the help of truer and 
nobler men, will preserve you and us all, 
and make us more than conqueror through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. 

THE CHURCH AT SALEM. 



New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--I had a letter 
from you in the early months of this year, 
which I have not answered for many reasons, 
chiefly that I did not know what to 
write, being torn with conflicting emotions; 
but now I will hold my peace no longer, for I 
wish to place myself (in the late unpleasantness) 
on your side, which I think is also the 
Lord's side. You have acted a Christian 
part, and all of the Christian friends should 
let you know their stand. You remember 
how Moses said, "Who is on the Lord's 
side let him come to me." (Ex. 32:26.) 
I think this is another occasion when the 
Lord wants every one to show his colors. 

Let those who are not on the Lord's side 
beware of the sons of Levi ! 

Yours in his name, 

MRS. E. A. WHITE. 



Kansas. 

DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I 
drop you a few lines to inform you of the 
receipt of A Conspiracy Exposed, and to 
assure you of my sympathy and Christian 
love. I read it through with much interest, 
some amusement at the flimsy charges, 
and indignation at the attempt to divide 
husband and wife; but I experienced no 
surprise at the depths of infamy exposed. 
I am too old, and have had too much experience 
of "spiritual wickedness in high 
places," to be ever surprised at anything in 
that line. I remember being in great 
trouble once at seeing much of my work, 
through Christ, as I thought, pulled down, 
until that beautiful line occurred to me. 
"I left it all with Jesus, long ago." 

At once peace and rest came; and now I 
hope at all times to be able to say, "None 
of these things move me;" and I feel sure, 



dear brother and sister, that you are too far 

page 181 

along in the road to be much disturbed by 
a few "fiery darts." Thank God for the 
glorious truth! "Great peace have they 
that love thy law, and nothing shall offend 
them." Yours in Christian love, 

T. J. CHAPMAN. 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--I have just finished 
reading A Conspiracy Exposed. Surely 
you have acted the part of a Christian. 
I cannot here tell you how much I sympathize 
with you in this persecution. By the 
grace of God you have helped me into a 
light more clear than I ever hoped to realize 
in this life. May God continue giving 
strength and courage to overcome. 

Your brother in Christ, 

J. M. BLOSE. 



Missouri. 

DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:- 
We, the undersigned, followers of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, with confidence in his all-sufficient 
sacrifice for our redemption, 
would hereby tender our sympathy, also 
our sentiments, in regard to your recent 
sharp experience of the power of the adversary 
in your midst. 

It is highly gratifying to us to know of 
your ability to stand in the evil day— 
though the powers of darkness cast their 
shadows even in your very household. 
True, we should expect nothing less from 
such as you, with your experience, strength 
and profession; but we remember that 
even such may be in danger of discouragement 
under such rude shocks, and we would 
at least make known our love and esteem 
in support of the tired hands. 

We would not further strife by unnecessarily 
taking up a line of criticism of the 
false brethren; but to such we would say 
that the throwing of "bombs" is of itself, 
to say the least, nihilistic, anarchist, devilish 
—infernal in conception, development 
and results, unworthy soldiers of the cross. 
And we offer our prayers that such offenders 



may have the error of their ways 

brought home to them in such manner as 

to lead to their repentance— that they may 

learn a better way of service than by self-exaltation 

and the overthrow of brethren 

more advanced, earnest and active in the 

service; that they may learn to train their 

weapons, not upon brethren in the front 

ranks, the fore-front of the battle, but upon 

the adversary and the powers of darkness— 

the strongholds of the enemy opposite. 

But is even this work all we have to do? 
We should say not! For what of the time? 
We rely on the Scriptures for answer, believing 
that God is his own best interpreter, 
and find that an all-important work is to seal 
the servants of God in their foreheads, that 
they may be able to withstand in the evil 
day, and having done all to stand; and we 
should be about our Master's business. 

But, dear brethren, the sower soweth the 
word, and, as in the case of these false 
brethren, it sometimes occurs that the lusts 
of other things, entering in, choke the word 
and it becometh unfruitful. But we realize 
that you and yours are such as hear the 
word, receive it and bring forth fruit; and 
for our mutual encouragement it is written, 
"There is nothing hid that shall not be manifested; 
neither was anything kept secret, 
but that it should come abroad;" and coupled 
with this the fair warning: "Take heed 
what ye hear. With what measure ye mete, 
it shall be measured to you." "For he that 
hath, to him shall be given; and he that 
hath not, from him shall be taken even that 
which he hath." (Mark 4:22-25.) And, 
in fact, we find the good old Word full of 
help, encouragement and blessing for those 
who press along the line of duty; merciful 
admonitions for the offending, the erring, 
the unfaithful. "And this also we wish, even 
your perfection."— 2 Cor. 13:9-13. 

"Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect, 
be of good comfort, be of good mind, live in 
peace, and the God of love and peace shall 
be with you." 

Grace be with all them that love our Lord 
Jesus Christ in sincerity. 

THE CHURCH AT WEST PLAINS. 



Indiana. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have read A 
Conspiracy Exposed and hasten to express 



my sympathy for you in your severe trial. 
Oh, how I wish I could grasp you by the 
hand and make you feel that you had one 
more friend for yourself and the truth. 

While I am very much grieved that such 
able workers for the Lord, as the conspirators 
have once proved themselves, should 
turn and pursue the course that they have, 
and while their loss to the cause and the injury 
such wolves may do among the sheep 
is painful to contemplate, I rejoice and am 
thankful to God that every single charge of 

page 182 

each individual was satisfactorily refuted 
and made to be as chaff to the wind. I rejoice 
that while their every effort in the 
conspiracy has been to wreck the progress 
of the work by so humbling you that you 
would not dare to hold up your head again, 
you seem to have a more earnest zeal for the 
cause, if possible, than before. I rejoice, 
too, that while it was endeavored to have 
the pestilence reach the faithful office-helpers 
they seem to have escaped unscathed, as 
instanced by their splendid letter to you. 
And I am hopeful that all the faithful will 
be drawn closer and closer together and be 
made to feel their own danger more, and to 
be more watchful and earnest. 

As for myself, I know that it has influenced 
me in that direction. I shall, by the 
help of God, make more earnest endeavor 
to spread the truth in every possible way. 
As to my little donations to the Tract Fund, 
I do not care to hear by certificate how 
much it is. I do not remember, nor do I 
care to know. It is sufficient for me to know 
that it has been properly applied. Only 
wish I could do a thousand times more. I 
would like to speak many words for your 
encouragement in your hour of sore trial, 
but I reflect that I could not say anything 
that would give you such cheer as the words 
of the Master, and I commend you to them; 
for they are able to build you up and to 
cause you to rejoice that you are able to 
suffer reproach and to have all manner of 
evil said against you falsely. May the Lord 
strengthen you, shield you and guide and 
use you to his further glory. 

Yours in the service of the Master, 
S. M. GAMBILL. 



London. 

DEAR SISTER RUSSELL:--My heart urges 
me to write, to express to you the loving 
sympathy I have felt for you and Bro. Russell, 
during this terrible testing-time. At 
first (being still weak in the faith) I was 
stunned by the four terrible letters, but 
gradually light came; and now I can see 
that this trial was meant to teach our "little 
flock" to rely on no one but our Father and 
the Master. Then, when we had learned 
the lesson, our sorrow was turned into joy 
by Bro. Russell's complete and truly Christian 
reply to all the cruel accusations evolved 
from envious and malicious hearts. The 
shadow to our joy is in hearing that some 
of those who call themselves followers of our 
Lord could be lead into such wickedness. 
This again is a lesson: "Let him that 
thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall." 

It is strange that, though I struggled 
against it, I had from the first a sense of 
discomfort in Mr. Roger's company, and 
thought it something wrong in myself 
which made me feel his preaching almost 
intolerably tedious. Now I can see it very 
differently. The man who could write that 
supplement must be devoid of love and 
kindliness in his heart. 

I can never feel thankful enough for having 
been led to read M. DAWN, and finding 
therein a satisfactory explanation of all my 
difficulties with regard to revealed religion. 
It seems to me now that what we all need 
most is "pure religion and undefiled" in 
our every day life. 

That our Father may bless and keep you 
and Bro. Russell in the "narrow way" to 
the end, is the prayer of your sister in Christ, 
ELLEN M. MAGRATH. 



R1665:page 182 

Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am sure 
that you will be anxious to know how the 
circular sent out by A., B., R. and Z. and your 
TOWER Extra were received by the Church 
in Chicago, and how they affected us. 

We were very sorry to receive such a venomous 
circular, and especially from men 
who had been held so highly by the Church. 
However, we discovered at once the spirit 



of envy, strife and jealousy which pervaded 

the whole circular, and decided that the adversary 

was at the bottom of it. 

The TOWER Extra came; and I am glad 
to tell you that the spirit in which you wrote 
is to be highly commended— being essentially 
Christian. Your answer was not only 
satisfactory, but it was noble and generous. 

We are glad that you remembered that 
vengeance does not belong to you, and that 
you did not attempt to take the rod out of 
God's hands. He (only) knows how much 
guilt is connected with their sin, and also 
what penalty to attach. You did what our 
blessed Lord would have done, and did do, 
under similar circumstances, "Who, when 
he was reviled, reviled not again, when he 
suffered, he threatened not; but committed 
himself to him that judgeth righteously." 
We are glad that the spirit of retaliation did 
not find a place in your answer, and that, 
while it was impossible for you, under such 
circumstances, to keep from getting angry, 

R1665 : page 183 

we are glad that you did not allow yourself 
to sin. Neither did you "give place to the 
devil" (Eph. 4:26,27), as the conspirators did. 

"No man is really dishonored except by 
his own act. Calumny, injustice, ingratitude 
—the only harm these can do us is by 
making us bitter or rancorous or gloomy: by 
shutting our hearts or souring our affections. 
We rob them of their power, if they only 
leave us more sweet and forgiving than before; 
and this is the only true victory. We 
win by love. Love transmutes all curses 
and forces them to rain down in blessings. 
Out of the jealousy of his brothers Joseph 
extracted the spirit of forgiveness. Out of 
Potiphar's weak injustice, and out of the 
machinations of disappointed passion, he 
created an opportunity of learning meekness. 
Our enemies become unconsciously 
our best friends, when their slanders deepen 
in us heavenlier graces. Let them do their 
worst; they only give us the God-like victory 
of forgiving them." 

Terrible as this thing has been, good will 
come out of it to all who are rightly exercised 
thereby. It will bring them nearer 
the Lord; make them more earnest and self-sacrificing 
in his service; and assist them to 
escape the "fiery darts of the wicked" in 
the future. 



Mr. Adamson— at one of the meetings- 
expressed himself as being "very sorry that 
this affair ever occurred." We sincerely 
hope that this sorrow is of a godly kind. 
"For," says Paul, "godly sorrow worketh 
repentance to salvation not to be repented 
of. "-2 Cor. 7:10. 

[We fear, however (in view of his words 
uttered in Sister Russell's presence, "I do 
not repent. I would do the same thing again 
to-morrow," and his course of continued 
misrepresentation), that his is not Godly sorrow, 
but merely that born of disappointment 
at the failure of their scheme.— EDITOR.] 

He (Mr. Adamson) said, also, that he 
could not see much love in the act of treating 
him "as an heathen man and a publican." 
All we have to say to that remark 
is this: God (who is love) could not and 
would not ask us to do an unloving act. 
We could not love God and at the same 
time disobey him. "If ye love me, keep my 
commandments;" "He that hath my commandments 
and keepeth them, he it is that 
loveth me;" "He that loveth me not keepeth 
not my sayings."— John 14:15,21,24. 

"Now here can be no mistake. Nothing 
can be love to God which does not shape 
itself into obedience." God counts nothing 
else as love. So we see that we are perfectly 
safe in following the instructions of 
our Lord, as found in Matt. 18:15-17; 
1 Tim. 6:4,5 and Rom. 16:17, without overstepping 
the limits of love or justice. 

The Church in Chicago (with but one or 
two exceptions) are on your side and on the 
side of the truth; and I am sure are more 
determined than ever to not only know the 
truth, speak the truth and defend the truth, 
but also to live the truth. 

May the Lord bless you and Sister Russell 
and all your household and all the body of 
Christ at this time; and may he give us all 
the necessary strength to overcome all temptations 
and trials in the future. 

Your brother, in Christ, 

M. L. McPHAIL. 

P.S. The above letter was read to both 
the West and South Chicago meetings and 
its contents were heartily approved by all. 



page 183 

Michigan. 



DEAR BROTHER:-- After reading the Extra 
I cannot refrain from sending you some words 
of encouragement. The charges brought against 
you have been conceived in ignorance if not 
malice, especially as relates to the sending of 
addressed wrappers. This you had a perfect 
right to do. I am first assistant Postmaster 
here, and know whereof I speak. 

Trusting that you will come out of the affliction 
like gold that is tried in the fire, and that 
those that would injure you may come to see 
the injustice that they have done you and yours 
and return to the Lord, I remain, 

Yours in Christ, J. F. O'Rorke. 



New York. 
DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-- Words fail 
me to express to you the state of my feelings 
while carefully reading through the pamphlet 
duly received: such a nefarious plot merits 
righteous indignation. My heart aches for 
you; but, dear Brother, do not let it vex you; 
but rather let it be an encouragement; for it 
should prove to you, as it does to me, the 
spiritual power and truth of your labors. 
Wherever one finds Satan most active, be sure 
it is because there is truth and purity in that 
which he is aiming to overthrow. Otherwise 
it would be beneath his notice; for he loves only 
a lie, and he never fails to make tools of weak-minded 
men to carry out his purposes. No 
man of sound mind and of a spiritual nature 

page 184 

would ever lend his name and influence to such 
a heinous scheme; and I am quite sure you will 
continue to hold the love and respect of all 
right-minded brethren. 

In my opinion there is more spiritual power 
in the reading of any one volume of the M. 
DAWN, to draw men to the proper study of the 
Scriptures (and thus, through the grace of 
God, to accept salvation through the ransom), 
than hearing one thousand sermons, let them 
be ever so spiritual and well studied— because 
what the ear receives the mind often fails to 
retain; but that which enters the eye is almost 
always permanently photographed in the chambers 
of the brain and thus is continually rerising 
before the mental vision. Such has 
been my own experience. 

Assuring you of the deepest love and gratitude 
for benefits personally received, I remain, 



dear brother and sister, Yours in the blessed 
hope, Edward Harris. 

P.S. How true is the Scripture word photograph: 
Man that is born of woman is naturally 
conceived in sin and shapen in iniquity. He 
is not righteous. His mind is enmity against 
God. The imagination of the thoughts of his 
heart (from his youth upwards) is evil and deceitful 
above all things. He neither understandeth 
nor seeketh after God, but out of his 
heart proceedeth evil thoughts, murders and all 
kinds of iniquity. He is blinded by Satan. 
His mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. 
The poison of asps is under his lips. His lips 
are like a burning fire. His tongue is a sharp 
sword, and his teeth are spears and arrows. 
He stretcheth out his hand against God. He 
conceiveth mischief, and bringeth forth vanity 
and falsehood; and if he repenteth not, his foot 
shall slide in due time; for the days of his 
calamities are near.— Job 14:1; Rom. 3:10; 
8:7; Gen. 6:5; 8:21; Rom. 3:11; Matt. 15:19; 
2 Cor. 4:4; Rom. 3:13,14; Prov. 16:27; 
Psa. 51:4,5; Job 15:25; Psa. 7:14; 
Deut. 32:35. 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I received TOWER Extra 
last night, and also the circular letter and paper 
from the opposers. I did not for a moment 
entertain a thought but that you could show 
their evil designs. To the true Church you 
are esteemed as a true brother and servant of 
the Truth as never before. 

I can say, after nearly five years of colporteur 
work, that I have found none but were 
brought into the Truth by reading DAWN 
and TOWER or tracts, which assisted them in 
understanding the Scriptures. 

The work, as I understand it, is to find the 
"wheat" class, and with the present Truth 
intellectually seal them and thus separate them 
from Babylon. In doing this, many DAWNS 
are sold to others who may not now appreciate 
them, but who thus assist in bearing the 
expense of the laborers; and they will be read 
by and by. I lecture some and quite acceptably, 
but have no ambition to make that a 
special work. 

Yours in the one hope, A. C. Wise. 



Ontario. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I 
write briefly, just to express my deep sympathy 
with you in reference to the severe trial 
through which you have been passing. We, 
as a little company of the Church, have been 
praying for you, and will pray that God will 
keep you faithful through it all. This trial is 
especially hard, because it comes through 
"chosen" ones. Our Lord, agonizing in the 
garden, looking to the cross, and sweating, 
as it were, great drops of blood, received 
so little sympathy from even the disciples 
that they could sleep; and after all Paul's 
faithful ministry to the Churches in Asia, he 
wrote "all they that are in Asia are turned 
away from me." Please read 2 Tim. 4:10,14. 
The trouble referred to seems to have existed 
at the close of Paul's ministry; and yet he 
writes with bold confidence. (Verses 6,8; 
Rev. 3:21.) We are engaged in the conflict 
now, surely; but the prize is yonder! 

I read the letters of the four conspirators before 
TOWER "Extra" came, and was able to 
read their condemnation between the lines so 
completely that if you had never written a word 
in defense I could not have condemned you. 
The charges as to your being a pope, and other 
action in the matter, show all the more clearly 
the necessity for a firm stand on your part. 
The TOWER is your ministry, and may God 
bless you and it more and more. 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, 
T. A. Ivey. 



Nova Scotia. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Yesterday 
I received the extra number of TOWER, 
and I can assure you I was both grieved and 
pained to find that their had been divisions in 
the body of Christ. Knowing as I do that 
you were continually sending out so many sound 
Bible truths, and every word breathed in the 
spirit of love and humility, I have sometimes 
thought that your fears as to a falling away 
were groundless; but, since reading A Conspiracy 

page 185 

Exposed, I have had to change my mind, 
and I now see clearly how Satan will assault 
the strongholds of present truth. But I cannot 
understand how any brother having a spark 
of honesty in his heart, or professing to have 
the love of Christ in his heart, could plot and 



endeavor for two whole years to injure a fellow 
worker for the Master. I have seen plenty of 
that kind of work amongst members of the 
nominal Church, but I did not expect it among 
the readers of DAWN and TOWER. Dear brother 
and sister, I feel deeply for your trouble, and 
tender you and your household my sincere love 
and sympathy; and my prayers are and will be 
that the dear Master will give you needed 
strength to overcome your enemies. I have 
no doubt that the injury intended for you will 
recoil with double force on themselves; and I 
firmly believe that God in his love will raise 
up ten friends and co-workers to one that has 
proved false. 

Again thanking you and dear Sister Russell 
for the joy I have experienced at your hands 
in being fed with meat in due season, and having 
perfect confidence in your love and honesty in 
the Master's service, 

I remain, your brother in Christ, 
P. Douglass. 



Massachusetts. 

BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-In the name 
of the Lord Christ, I greet you. "They departed 
from the presence of the council rejoicing 
that they were counted worthy to suffer 
shame for his name." "And they shall walk 
with me in white, for they are worthy." 

"For he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my 
name before nations; for I will show him how 
great things he must suffer for my name's sake." 

I have spent the afternoon carefully reading 
the "Conspiracy" number of TOWER, 
which I received this morning; and although 
I am so little acquainted with you and those of 
"like faith," and only partially see eye to eye 
with you, yet I have a heart fellowship far beyond 
the brain conception of the now due 
Truth, as you see it. [This brother has been 
acquainted with DAWNS for only four months.] 

I thought it best, at first, to write some words 
of sympathy to you in what I know must be to 
you both a great trial; but after considering 
the matter from the true overcomer's point of 
view, I have decided that instead of sympathy 
you should have congratulations. No, I will 
not weep with you over this, but rather rejoice. 
Why not? If God has seen fit to open your 
eyes to the real character of those brethren (?), 
you certainly ought to praise the Lord, as no 
doubt Gideon did to see his army diminish. 
I am very, very sorry for those whom Satan has 



blinded to become his tools in this matter, and 
I pray God they may be led to judge themselves, 
that they may not be judged. Numbers 
do not count with God; and, my Brother and 
Sister, I am quite sure that those children of 
God— followers of Christ—who determine to 
stand true to the Truth as the Spirit reveals it 
to them will certainly suffer much and walk 
very much alone— alone with him. Every 
honest Christian who is interested in the truth 
will suffer with you in this trial. 

May God bless you both and all the tried of 
God. Your brother in Christ, 

J. C. Young. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Have received 
and read A Conspiracy Exposed. I consider it 
a complete refutation of all the malicious 
charges brought against you; but I was just as 
well satisfied concerning your innocence two 
weeks ago as I am now. Notwithstanding the 
fact, I was very glad to receive the pamphlet. 
Surely, "no weapon that is formed against thee 
shall prosper." We believe that all who love 
the truth will be unmoved by Satan's "devices." 
Am still pressing on. There is much to overcome. 
Pray for me. Am doing what I am 
able to support and spread the truth. 

Yours in our Redeemer, 

Frank Draper. 



Indiana. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER, Extra was taken from the P.O. at 
sundown last night, and we did not leave it 
until we had found that every charge made 
by Rogers, Zech, et. al., had been entirely 
refuted, and yourself completely vindicated. 
For this outcome we feel to praise the Lord 
with full hearts, and at the same time extend 
to yourself and Sister R. our earnest sympathy 
and sincere congratulations. 

At first we were dumbfounded almost beyond 
expression— not that we believed any real 
offence could be laid to your charge, but that 
such a conspiracy could rise up against you 
from such an unforeseen source— from men who 
had been at the very front of the colporteur 
work, and (supposedly) your bosom friends. 
To us who had so recently come into the company 
of the "little flock," it seemed almost 



beyond comprehension that such a thing could 
occur. But we were not moved from the steadfastness 
of our purpose, or from our love and 
perfect confidence in you. Too long and too 

page 186 

often have we seen the venomous fangs of the 
evil-one striking at the very heart and citadel 
of the Church of God, not to know something 
of the fatal blow, that, if possible, would strike 
you down in the very hour of certain victory. 

What the purpose of these men was we may 
not fully know; but of the purpose and real 
interest of the arch-fiend of death we certainly 
cannot be ignorant. He knows that his time 
is short and that what he does must be done 
quickly. No instrument is too sacred for him 
to use, so he may accomplish his foul designs 
upon the little fold of selected ones. The surprising 
thing is that those who had been in the 
very front of the battle should become the 
shafts in the hands of him who is the chief instigator 
of all the sin and venom in the world. 
God pity them! would that they could go out, 
Peter-like, weeping the bitter tears of repentance 
and self-abnegation, till God could give 
them a new heart and a new life. My heart is 
grieved that such a sin could be found at the 
door of any who had come into the wonderful 
truth of God's Word, as made so plain in the 
Plan of the Ages; and after such protestations 
of love and loyalty, not to say of consecration. 
We cannot account for it, my dear brother, 
except to use your own words and say Satan 
must be the chief schemer in the whole plot. 

Thorns and thistles, sorrow and pain, temptation 
and trial, are the inevitable results of a 
life of consecration to such a service as yours 
and ours. But we have respect to the recompense 
of reward. God will not leave us comfortless, 
and his grace will be sufficient. "Thou 
shalt run and not be weary; thou shalt walk 
and not be faint, for in the Lord Jehovah is 
everlasting strength." "I will never leave thee 
nor forsake thee," is the sure promise of the 
Eternal Lord. "Great peace have they that 
love thy law, and nothing shall offend them," 
or become a stumbling block to those who are 
walking as the redeemed of the Lord— and as 
the smoke of battle is clearing away, how important 
that we begin anew to feed the bread 
of life to the hungering multitudes, and preach, 
everywhere, the undying love of Jesus to save 
a dying and helpless race. How rich, how 
full, how complete is the corresponding-ransom-price! 



Oh! how we need to hasten, in 
these, the last hours of our glorious privilege, to 
gather all the golden sheaves into the garner-house 
of God. Soon the night will come wherein 
none can work. 

If some are going from us, others are coming 
into this beautiful light and glorious privilege. 
Two ladies, formerly Catholics, were 
at our prayer-meeting last Wednesday evening. 
Their hearts are full of joy at this new-found 
truth. Our room was full to-day of anxious 
students of the Word, some old soldiers of the 
cross, some young men, but all seemingly in 
earnest to find the pearl of great price. Bro. 
Owen gave us a fine lesson on the two Covenants; 
and while a sorrow was brooding over 
us, yet a great joy was welling up from our 
hearts that so few had gone away, and there 
were so many faithful hearts. We need not 
ask that God will bless you. He will bless 
you and the little tender flock who have grown 
up around you, willing, if need be, to give 
their lives in your behalf. To yourself, Sister 
Russell and all the lowly ones, we send our 
earnest greetings in the Anointed One. 

Very truly your brother, Z. A. Ransom. 



Wisconsin. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I 
have read with mingled feelings of sorrow and 
joy your noble defense. Glad that you were 
so able to acquit yourselves of all blame, and 
sorry that you should be so sorely tried. 
Surely the devil has come down unto us having 
great wrath, because he knows that he has but 
a short time. I was also much pleased with 
the review of the history of the TOWER, back 
to the time of the Herald of the Morning; for 
I was a reader of it. From the days of Wm. 
Miller I have been deeply interested in the 
subjects of which the DAWNS and TOWER treat, 
with a steadily increasing interest; and I am 
thoroughly convinced that they teach the truth. 
I have received much comfort and instruction 
from them, for I have invariably compared 
them with the Scriptures and have not found 
them wanting. I heard Mr. Miller lecture in 
1842, and read his book, but could not receive 
his conclusions, for the reason that our Savior 
said that the Gospel of the Kingdom should 
be preached in all the world— to all nations— 
before the end could come; and I felt sure that 
was not then done; but he taught much truth. 
For you I have often prayed, that God would 



keep you from error. I send enclosed the balance 
on Good Hopes for this year. May send 
more before the year is out. 

H. Shoemaker. 



New York. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--I am glad I wrote to 
you last Friday, before I received your answer 
to the circulars sent out by the four former co-workers, 
because it is evidence that our confidence 
in you had remained unshaken; but 
now, after having read your defense, I rejoice 
to see how plainly and satisfactorily you answer 

page 187 

your accusers. I am sure that this affair 
will make all of us here love you the more. 
How I hope and pray that we may not be 
sifted through the sieve! 
Yours in love and sympathy, 
M. T. Lewis. 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--The Extra Z.W.T. 
reached me safely. After a careful reading of 
the whole book, I would say that I can find 
no fault in you at all. Dear Brother, we all, 
I hope, know you too well to believe such false 
reports. I have been with you in this precious 
faith while you were with the Herald of the 
Morning, and ever since the first issue of the 
TOWER; and I know I could not be convinced 
now to turn against you, or even to sympathize 
with those who have turned against you. My 
prayer is, that the dear Lord may give you 
strength and courage to overcome all evil, and 
keep you faithful. 

Yours in Christian love, S. M. Bond. 



Indiana. 

DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-We received 
yesterday the Extra number of WATCH 
TOWER and devoured its contents with a relish 
easier to imagine than to describe. 

When we first received the "Big 4" circular, 
I must confess— as one brother expressed 
it to-day— I was just simply paralyzed. For 
several days I could scarcely think of anything 
else; and while we did not forget the fact 



that there were two sides to the matter, and 
that we had heard but one side, we could not 
help thinking that "where there is so much 
smoke, there must be some fire." But it seems 
now that the smoke was caused by friction— 
the result of having a misplaced crank among 
the otherwise smooth-running machinery. 

I am satisfied that the libel sent out will do 
no harm here, and think I can safely pledge 
you the confidence, fidelity and unshaken devotion 
of the whole Church at Indianapolis, 
without a single exception. Sister Owen desires 
me to emphasize the fact that she is in 
full harmony with the spirit of this letter. 

With Christian love, I am, as ever, your 
brother in Christ, C. A. Owen. 



New York. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--You may think I 
have forgotten you, because I have not written 
for so long a time, but this is not so. I have 
been thinking a great deal about you and Sister 
Russell in view of the severe trial. When, 
about four weeks ago, one of those libelous 
circulars came to my attention, I was greatly 
shocked, and did not know at first what step 
to take. I could hardly believe that four of 
the oldest (and should have been the firmest 
established) brethren (?) could get up such a 
slander as that, so I determined to investigate 
thoroughly both sides of the question, and 
asked the Lord for strength and light. This 
is the reason I have not written to you before. 

As you know, Mr. Rogers has stopped at 
Rochester, Buffalo, and about all the places 
along the Hudson, where there are brethren, 
and tried to convert them to his idea; but I 
am glad to announce that he had very little 
success. I heard him say things I never expected 
to hear from him. Among other things 
he said that the Lord never revealed anything 
to Brother Russell, and he did not think the 
Lord would ever use him (Brother Russell) 
again. He said that he would go to New York 
(which he did), and try to have a meeting 
there; and that if possible he would get Mr. 
Zech to come and take part in it. (He sent a 
telegram to Mr. Zech to that effect.) So I 
went to New York last Saturday evening, and 
was gladly surprised not to find Mr. Zech 
there, but to hear that Sister Russell would be 
there Sunday. We all had a very blessed day 
of it. In the evening we gathered at Bro. Mott's 
house. For the opening we sang "Blest be 



the tie that binds"— which I have never before 
heard sung with such a spirit of oneness and 
love. 

I have now heard enough of both sides to 
convince me fully that all these charges brought 
up against you are without the slightest foundation; 
and can see that you have treated these 
conspirators very gently, notwithstanding the 
unchristian attitude they have assumed toward 
you. With much love, 

Yours in our Redeemer, 

J. G. Bahret. 



California. 

DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-- Words 
fail me to express fully my deep love and sympathy 
to you both. I want to assure you of 
my continued purpose with you in the forwarding 
of the work over which I believe the Lord 
has made you overseer. So I want to sustain 
you by my love and sympathy and co-operation, 
as well as by my prayers, and to give 
you every reason to believe that I am your 
brother. 

Happily I received the Extra TOWER to-day. 
I was so surprised and interested that I 
could not stop until I had read it through. At 
night, when I went home, to my surprise I 

page 188 

found the enclosed postal-card from one of the 
very conspirators, Elmer Bryan, wanting to 
get the names of the saints here. I at once 
understood his purpose. 

This trial will only bring us closer together. 
I am glad that you have let us know of it, so 
that we can be on our guard, that when the 
enemy comes we shall be able to stand. 

Your ever faithful brother, A. Foyen. 



Missouri. 
DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I take 
this opportunity of sending you a few words 
of encouragement and sympathy. Although 
I am not known to you by face, I trust we are 
of the same spirit. When I read your article, 
"Lest Ye Enter Into Temptation," and then 
your remarks upon it in next TOWER, I knew 
something was amiss; but I did not find what 
it was until I received the Extra Edition of 
TOWER a few days ago. As you express fears 



for those just receiving the truth, I think it 
but just to you to let you know that I for one 
pay no attention to such reports. I received 
the truth through reading DAWN, and can testify 
that like the two disciples that went to 
Emmaus— "my heart did burn within me" 
while I was reading; and I have always thanked 
God that he led me to the work. So while I 
am but a babe in Christ I know that such trials 
as you have passed through are common to all 
the faithful truth-givers. Let us trust that your 
trials will work for you "a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory." 
Your sister in Christ, 

Mrs. J. A. Hudson. 



Canada. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Explanation to hand. 
Good, better, BEST! The more we thought over 
the affair, the less we needed the explanation. 
Will write you fully very shortly. 

Accept love. F. B. Utley. 



Iowa. 

DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Many 
thanks for the Extra number of ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER. Have read the same with much interest 
(though sadly). When we read in the 
TOWER of this iniquitous plan we guessed correctly 
some of the unsteady and unbalanced 
minds that have turned from a good cause to 
a very bad one. When that quartet of trumpeters 
prepared to give their blasts, did they 
expect to see the walls of Zion tumble? It 
seems they are like men spitting against the 
wind: it has turned back with terrible force 
into their own faces. 

You will remember a few months ago, I 
wrote to know what the expense would be for 
you to come to our place. You replied that 
you could not come, but that you had sent 
the letter to J. B. Adamson; and he afterward 
wrote me stating his demands for himself and 
wife. Though I have not the letter now, I 
remember he wrote these words, That I would 
probably feel disappointed to hear of his offer 
instead of yours, because "Bro. Russell is not 
only a superior writer, but one of the greatest 
preachers on earth." Why he should so change 
his mind is strange to me. Yet this same 
thing has been repeated before. "They went 
out from us, because they were not of us." 



The body of Christ must be Christlike, or it 
can never reign over the world. Therefore 
none with such characters will appear in the 
Kingdom of God as rulers. May God keep 
you pure unto his Kingdom! 
Yours as ever, C. M. Rice. 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--We received the special 
issue of Z.W.T. yesterday morning, and 
have perused its contents with deepest interest. 
I hasten to make known to you and Sr. R. our 
conclusions, in the way of encouraging you. 

As we surmised, you have had no trouble in 
showing, to all unprejudiced minds, that all 
accusations brought against you are false. It 
seems strange that sensible men would even 
attempt to weave a net out of such flimsy material 
as has been used in all of the charges that 
have been set forth by your four assailants, in 
whom we have hitherto placed such implicit 
confidence. Then, too, it is strange that those 
whom you have befriended in so many ways 
and for so long a time should, at the very time 
they were engaged in spreading the truth that 
should separate the wheat from the tares, be 
engaged in concocting such diabolical schemes 
against an acknowledged friend in the harvest 
work, to try to break down his character, and 
influence, and thus hinder the cause of Christ. 
And another strange thing connected with this 
matter is, that they should expect us to believe 
such unreasonable things. 

Now, dear Bro. Russell, Sister H and I 

can testify that after reading both sides, we 
have suffered and sympathized with both you 
and Sister Russell in this severe trial. The 
"bombs" have not, however, accomplished 
what they were designed to do; nor will they. 
The truth is mighty and will prevail. God's 
work cannot be stopped by any power. The 
Lord will provide a way of escape for all the 
consecrated, who are faithful, from all their 

page 189 

trials, if they are rightly exercised by them. 

What hurts us most is that those whom we 
esteemed so highly heretofore have turned upon 
you that God has used so largely to make 
plain his great plan of the ages. But as all of 
their charges are so unreasonable, and you 
have proven them false, we can no longer consider 
them worthy of the cause, or of the name 



of brethren. 
As ever, your brother in hope, 
C. A. Hewes. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--I feel like striving to 
do anything I can for the sake of Christ Jesus; 
and anything I can do to hold up your hands, 
in advising and strengthening the younger 
brethren will make me glad. Never did anything 
shock me as much as your late trials and 
not only yours alone, but the whole Church's. 

Surely Satan is making great efforts to deceive 
if possible the very elect. I see that 
nothing unclean can enter the Kingdom. Paul 
saw it in his day; for though he preached this 
gospel to others he realized that he himself 
might, through unfaithfulness, be a castaway. 
Who shall be able to stand in this evil day? 
Oh! that I may be able to stand firm upon the 
rock, Christ Jesus, that my will, my life, and 
all that I am, may be fully immersed into his 
will, is the humble prayer of your brother in 
the harvest work, J. S. Bott. 



New York. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--Sympathizing with 
you in the trial and persecution which have 
been permitted to come upon you, I feel it my 
duty as a member of the body, to send you a few 
lines, saying that you have the sympathy, love 
and hearty, sincere approval of the whole 
Church at Newburgh; for if one faithful, true 
member of the body suffer, all like true members 
sympathize with that one. 

An evil spirit causes contentions, envy, strife, 
and evil suspicion, wrangling of men. They 
may think that they are brethren in Christ, 
but are deceived by Satan; for the Scriptures 
say if they do not restrain their tongue, they 
delude their own hearts, and their religion is 
vain. But to the pure all things are pure. 
The brother who is true to his consecration 
vows is pure in heart; loves the whole body 
of Christ; suffers long and is kind; does not 
envy his brother; is not boastful nor puffed 
up; does not act unbecomingly; and does not 
impute evil; but he rejoices in the truth, 
covers all things, and endures all things for 
the body's sake, which is the Church. What a 
wide difference between these two descriptions! 

From the position these men held, they hoped 



to destroy the whole body; but there is a 
mighty super-human power over God's little 
ones: they are chosen, "Elect according to 
the foreknowledge of God, through sanctification 
of the spirit and belief of the truth." 
What weapon formed against them can prosper? 
Will not all things work together for good to 
them that love God? He is testing and sifting 
the wheat. Let the good work go on. He 
knows his own. He has set his seal on them. 

I have no doubt but that this will try the 
Church intensely; but the faithful and true 
will cling more closely together. Even now 
I feel a more tender and close knitting together 
in love towards the true ones of the 
household of faith, and towards the tried and 
persecuted. Your brother in Christ, 
G. D. Woolsey. 



Wisconsin. 

DEAR BROTHER:--I hereby tender you my 
hearty sympathy. Your exposition was the first 
intimation I had of the painful subject. I believe 
you are an earnest worker for the truth, for 
how could God reveal to a very sinful person 
(as they are trying to make you out to be) his 
plans? He surely would employ cleaner hearts 
and hands. 

Before I reached that part of the Extra where 
you exhort all to a deeper interest in the truth, 
I had resolved to do more for the truth than I 
have been doing. While I believe that the truth 
will be spread without my assistance, I feel as 
though I ought to do part of it. I enclose a 
check. Please send DAWNS, Tracts, etc. 

Fraternally, G. W. Everts. 



Pennsylvania. 
DEAR BROTHER:-I received your pamphlet 
to-day. After reading it, I was not a little 
disgusted at the conduct of the parties that 
compose the unhallowed confederation. There 
is no telling what ambition will do. I have 
been a constant reader of M.D. and Z.W.T. 
for nearly eight years, being strongly imbued 
with the faith. Yet only twice was I permitted 
to meet with the Church at Allegheny. In 
those several meetings, lasting impressions were 
made on my mind. Some of these impressions 
I kept to myself. Being a reader of character, 
and known as such among many people, it was 
natural for me, without special effort, to note 



the peculiarities of many; and I mused on the 
out-come in the testing time. 

In my own estimation, I always feel the least 
among God's humble servants— otherwise I 

page 190 

would have troubled you more with scribblings; 

but I thank God for humility. How 

the conspirators can claim consecration to the 

truth, I am at a loss to know— especially when 

we consider the charges are preferred on pecuniary 

matters, self-interest, &c, at the sacrifice 

of the truth, and obedience to the same. 

[See 1 Sam. 9:21; 15: 17-23. -EDITOR.] 

But whether we are drenched with refreshing 
showers, or burned by the fires, let us be 
steadfast in the faith to the end; for both are 
necessary to the development of the man in 
Christ. J. Beaver. 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Enclosed 
find my "Good Hopes" for first quarter. I 
am sorry to have been so late in sending it to 
you; and in view of the "bomb," I am more 
sorry that I am unable to remit an equivalent 
in money of the confidence I have in you both. 
I wish to say that I have heartily approved of all 
that has appeared in WATCH TOWER since I have 
been a subscriber, and especially "The Responsibility 
of Liberty" and "The Work in England." 

Brother Russell's answers to the charges of 
the conspirators are satisfactory, and I am sorry 
that I cannot find words to express to you 
my exact feelings. I am glad, however, that 
you do not require words of sympathy from 
me; for I reckon that the sufferings of this 
present time are not worthy to be compared 
with the glory which shall be revealed in us.— 
Rom. 8:18. 

Joined by Sister Taylor in Christian love to 
you both, and hoping that you may be spared 
to labor for the Master until the end of the 
harvest, I remain, Yours in our Redeemer, 
J. E. Taylor. 



Indiana. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I am glad, so glad, 
that your character has been vindicated. To 
say that I have been anxious would be putting 
it very mildly; and now I hope we will have 



sunshine for a while. I could not more than 
half work for the last two weeks. 
Yours in the harvest and in Christ, 
M. C. VanHook. 



Kentucky. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--I have just finished 
reading A Conspiracy Exposed. Had heard 
nothing of the difficulty, and am glad I knew 
nothing of it until now. 

I drop you this line hastily to say that you 
have my deepest sympathy, as well as my constant 
prayer. It all looks to me so plain that 
it is only the necessary "sifting," and that you 
will come out of it triumphant. God sees, 
understands, leads and loves. 

Wish I could be with you. Remember me 
to Sister Russell. God will bless and strengthen 
you both. 

In Christian love, G. C. Snyder. 



Alabama. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Your exposition of 
the "conspiracy" came duly to hand. I am 
not surprised at the course of those men. We 
are now in the days of sifting and all that are 
not right at heart will fall. I hope you are 
not troubled about it. Your works speak for 
themselves. No man can do the work you are 
doing, unless God be with him. 

May you and Sister Russell grow in the 
knowledge of the truth, that you will be able 
to make it plain on tables, that the true Church 
may receive a blessing through you. 

Yours in the faith, L. C. Gaston. 



Indiana. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-"Extra" just received, 
and read with keenness and interest, 
urged on by a desire to see this trouble 
cleared up; and, praise the Lord, it is done. 
Well, dear Brother, you have come through 
without a scratch, and how thankful I am is 
beyond my power to express. You can hardly 
realize how these two weeks have been 
weeks of suspense and fears lest you would fail 
to vindicate yourself. I wondered what would 
become of the cause I so dearly love and what 
would become of all our efforts. I had faith 
in all these four men, since they all had been 



in the work longer than I; and you also seemed 
to give them so much credence and honor. I 
naturally supposed they were telling the 
truth in this case; yet I had my doubts in this, 
and hoped and prayed you would vindicate 
yourself. And so you have. I can now go 
forth feeling stronger for the trial and more 
determined to spread the truth against all 
opposition. 

I hope your explanation will be received by 
the brethren in general, but of course some 
will fall. The Lord's will be done; but let 
us go on fully trusting in his strength and 
power to carry his work to the finish. 

Yours in fellowship in Christ, 
A. H. Moore. 



Oregon. 
DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I have 
just received and read A Conspiracy Exposed, 
and feel much grieved at the trouble you have 

page 191 

been called upon to pass through, and also to 
find that those we esteemed faithful brethren 
"walk no more with us." 

I am sure you feel anxious to know the effect 
these things will have on each one of the 
"household of faith." The first intimation 
of the trouble I received from the TOWER; 
and with all the evidence before me, as laid 
down in the Extra, it is not difficult to judge 
who is on the wrong side. I rejoice with you 
that most of the dear brethren and sisters 
there in Allegheny stand firm, and it did me 
good to read the noble letters of others who 
are scattered in other parts. 

As to the present method of circulating the 
truth, I can say that I am more thankful every 
day that while engaged in the harvest work, 
we are enabled to "eat our own bread in 
quietness" and also to have something to give 
to those in need. I trust that the dear Lord 
will not permit any who remain faithful to become 
discouraged or unsettled in purpose. 

With warmest sympathy, I remain, 

Yours in Him, Jessie M. Way. 



Minnesota. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-In last evening's mail 
I received the Extra, thoroughly refuting the 



charges made by the conspirators. 

To-day I have again carefully read it, and I 
cannot refrain from sending you these few 
words expressing my continued love and sympathy 
for you and Sister Russell in this season 
of severe trial. 

I pray earnestly for the Master's blessing 
and strength for you and us all, that in this 
evil day we may draw nearer to him, and thus 
escape the many wiles of the adversary. 

Yours in Christian love, C. H. Dickinson. 



Maryland. 

MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--Your pamphlet, 
A Conspiracy Exposed, was received Saturday 
morning. I have read it through, all except 
"Harvest Siftings," which I am reading now. 

At the Church at my house yesterday, I 
learned that, as stated in my last letter, none 
of the brethren except myself and Brother 
Williams had received the libelous and slanderous 
circular sent out by Zech, Bryan, et al. 
To read this miserable stuff made me very sad, 
and I refused to believe that the charges preferred 
against you were true. I felt confident 
that you had been shamefully and outrageously 
misrepresented. 

Your reply has more than satisfied us. It is 
indeed a full and complete vindication of your 
character, and one which will redound to the 
glory and honor of God, and to the shame and 
dishonor of those who sought to "murder your 
character." 

The Church at Baltimore extend to you and 
dear Sister Russell their sympathy and confidence, 
and pray that the Lord may uphold 
you in this special hour of trial. 

The May TOWER came to hand, and was 
read with much interest. It is a good number. 
In fact, all the issues of the TOWER are good. 
In excluding the articles of vain-glorious and 
ambitious men, who are eager to have their 
names appear in print, you have followed a 
wise and just course, and one that the brethren 
here fully approve. 

Your suggestions under the title, "Fervent 
in spirit, serving the Lord," are timely, and I 
trust many will avail themselves of the privilege 
of engaging in this work. It has been 
a great blessing to both Brother Williams and 
myself to be engaged in it, and we feel much 
encouraged to know that some good is being 
accomplished. Mr. Pippen reports the sale 
of a dozen copies of M. DAWN since we commenced 



distributing tracts on Sundays, and of 
course we have no means of knowing how 
many have been or may be ordered direct from 
Allegheny. 

With the kindest regards and best wishes for 
yourself and Sister Russell, and all the dear 
friends at your house, I am 

Your sincere friend and brother in Christ, 
H. N. Rahn. 



London. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--It is with mingled 
feelings of joy and sorrow that I write you: 
joy to know that you have so grandly cleared 
your character against the late conspiracy (we 
thank God that he has brought forth your 
righteousness as the light): sorrow to hear of 
any falling away from the truth. 

And while you have had such a terrible 
struggle with the enemy, we here have not been 
left alone. Brother Turnbull, who, it appears, 
so largely influenced Mr. Rogers, is still here, 
and with some of his friends has been attending 
our meetings. In a very subtle way, and 
at every opportunity for conversation with our 
little company, they have been trying to prove 
that death to the consecrated is a thing of the 
past; that now they are actually passed out of 
death into life; and that if they are faithful 
they will be changed from glory to glory until 
like Christ. It is a smattering of evolution 
with other truths and errors. This is brought 
in subtly to win the flock; and at present I 
cannot say how many it will injure. 

page 192 

I have felt it necessary to show plainly to 
the brethren here, that if such were the facts 
the consecrated are no longer consecrated unto 
death, but to the gaining of life; and that this 
would be turning our backs upon the covenant 
we made,— symbolized by baptism— planted in 
the likeness of Christ's death, in hope that we 
might bye and bye reign with him. When 
Mr. Rogers left us, he desired that this Brother 
Turnbull should lead our meeting. 

[This was a very unwise arrangement; for 
whatever natural qualifications for leadership 
Bro. T. may have, as a "babe" of only two 
weeks' acquaintance with the Truth he was 
certainly not well qualified to act as leader of 
a class whose members have been DAWN and 
TOWER readers for years.-EDITOR.] 



With this error already in our camp, the letter 
of the four conspirators came like a heavy 
cloud upon some here, although I could not 
believe the charges. We have been passing 
through a searching time, such as I never before 
experienced; and, like all trials, it has 
caused me to look to my Father for the wisdom 
and guidance necessary. We have learned 
something of what it is to suffer with Christ. 

Yours in love and service of the truth, 
T. A. Hart. 



Manitoba. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--We read the 
Extra with mingled feelings of pleasure, pain 
and gratitude. It is just right. 

We feel indeed that we have past another 
"mile post," thereby gathering fresh courage 
to continue in the way, giving thanks with joy 
that we are not cut off as unfruitful branches. 
Though many prove unfaithful, yet shortly 
the beautiful Church will be complete, "without 
spot or wrinkle or any such thing." 

I have met all of the interested ones here 
since, and find that none are stumbled; and I 
think I can say the same for all in Manitoba. 
I have heard from some by letter, whom, 
though separated from others of like faith, the 
Lord has preserved and strengthened in their 
time of need. 

May the favor of God continue with you and 
with us all. Your brother in Christ, 
W. J. Webb. 



Virginia. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-After an absence of 
six weeks I am home again. In my bunch of 
mail I found several surprises, one of which, 
Elmer Bryan's letter, I will mail to you. As 
you see, I could not answer it in time to suit 
his purpose, though I could only have repeated 
Mr. Dubbs' business name for him, "skunk." 
My next surprise was that I did not find several 
numbers of the WATCH TOWER that I expected 
to be waiting for me. Could you have 
taken me for one of the conspirators (heaven 
forbid) and stopped it? I hope not. Next 
I found the Extra, which I have carefully 
read; and I am glad to see how nobly you 
have defended yourself. 

As to how Bryan conceived what he thought 
was a great sin of yours is a mystery to me. 



I consider your transactions with me in every 
way perfectly honorable, honest and Christian. 

Hoping this may find you all well, and that 
the Master may still bless you all more and 
more. As ever, Yours in the Lord. 
[See Extra page 51.] J. P. Sweet. 



Ontario. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have carefully read 
your expose and defence, and must say I esteem 
you more highly, if possible, than before. 
In reading the manifesto of the four, it is 
plainly to be seen from the spirit pervading it 
that their object was to destroy and not to 
build up. On the other hand, your expose of 
the conspiracy is written in a different spirit 
and seems calculated to defend the truth and 
to shield the weak ones from danger of stumbling, 
and shows a spirit or desire to suffer 
personally rather than give offence; yet for 
the truth's sake, and for the sake of the flock 
that is looking to you for guidance, you have 
nobly given a personal account of even some 
of your private matters for the benefit of the 
brethren. Surely none of the meek ones will 
stumble over the very paltry charges of the dissatisfied 
ones, which have been so signally 
exploded! 

Dear Brother, this only shows what manner 
of persons we ought to be. The adversary 
would not attack one of the feeble ones in such 
a manner, but the leaders must be on the alert 
for him at every turn. Had you been careless 
at any point, so that you could not have fully 
met every dart, then Satan would have scored 
a victory, and your usefulness would have been 
impaired. Clean hands and a clear conscience 
are a noble defense, and rout the enemy every 
time. Our God will not defend the unrighteous, 
but the humble and obedient servant he 
will sustain. May this attack of the adversary 
bring us all nearer together and nearer the 
Master, and eventually redound to the glory of 
God. May the erring ones see the folly of 
their course, return to the narrow path, humbly 
confess to God their weakness and fall, and 
seek to be re-instated in the household of faith. 

page 193 

It means something to be a leader in divine 
things. It is not all praise and joyfulness, but 
often comes the test when the leader must 
throw himself in front of the flock and meet 



the enemy single-handed and alone; but if he 

go out like David of old, trusting in the living 

God, he will kill the Goliath and save the flock; 

but if there be any Babylonish garment or 

wedge of gold in his defense, he will be discomfited 

before his enemies. A leadership is 

a deserving prize, but it should rather be thrust 

upon one than sought after; for it carries with 

it a great responsibility, and only if faithfully 

performed does it reap a rich reward. 

May you live near to the Master, may you 
and yours prosper in the service of the Lord, 
and may the cause of our God be greatly advanced. 
May we all strive to come to the 
unity of the Spirit and the bond of perfectness, 
and may God use us all in some way to his 
glory and our eternal welfare. 

Your brother in Christ, J. E. Anger. 



Kansas. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--I do not believe those 
false brethren will be able to do you any real 
harm, nor the cause either; and the latter is 
about all you are really much concerned about. 
I would pay as little attention to them as possible, 
and go on with the work of feeding the flock to 
which, I doubt not, you are divinely called. 

I see some good results from this trouble. 
Heady, envious, ambitious colleagues are no 
elements of strength; and the Lord's servants 
can better do his work without such. How 
any one can think of self in this most glorious 
work passes my comprehension. I am so glad 
to be allowed to serve in any capacity. 

We have some excellent and important articles 
from your pen, as "The Relative Claims 
of Love and Justice," "The Twelve Apostles," 
"Man and Woman in God's Order," 
etc., which we might not have received had 
not your mind been so stirred up. And, now, 
"Harvest Sittings" is of great value to me. 
I believe it would be well to send that Extra 
to every one of your readers. I have often 
wished to know how you came to write DAWN, 
etc.,— especially how you came by your interpretation 
of Tabernacle Shadows; and now I 
am satisfied. I am so glad you do not deal in 
trances, visions and the like. 

"Harvest Sittings" calls our attention to 
the importance of holding to the ransom, as 
scarcely anything else could, and gives most 
impressive warning to each to take heed lest 
he fall. This is an opportunity for your friends 
to testify their affection and sympathy. I believe 



you will be surprised to learn how many 
warm, steadfast friends you have. I presume 
there are hundreds who, like myself, never 
saw you, but who love and esteem you highly 
for your works' sake. 

The present editorial management of the 
TOWER suits me exactly. I am very glad you 
do not permit it to be filled with miscellaneous 
essays. Expositions of Bible truth, especially 
present truth as relates to present duties 
and privileges, are food to my soul, and 
helpful, as no essays on general subjects or 
mere exhortations could be. Do not take valuable 
time answering this letter. We are hungry 
for DAWN, VOL. IV., and the regular issues 
of the TOWER. 

With much love for all the dear flock, I remain, 
Yours truly, 

F. E. Hale. 



Indian Ter. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--Until I saw the 
TOWER extra I was unaware that a plan had 
been concocted to injure you and the cause of 
truth. I had not dreamed that such a trouble 
was brewing in the camp; and while I know 
that such a thing is possible, I did not expect 
it from that source. My heart was indeed sorrowful 
when I read the first few pages, because 
I feared it was something that would break us 
asunder, and thus destroy the source whence 
came to me so much joy and peace in the Lord 
Jesus, through the past eleven years of my 
life. I feared that the TOWER would cease to 
visit me. No paper on earth do I prize more 
highly; for it has done more for me than any 
other paper could do. Its utterances are so 
nearly like those of the Master that I have noticed 
the re-readings seemed as fresh as the 
first. I have for years anticipated its arrival 
as I would that of a friend; for verily I regard 
it as a message from him who sticks closer 
than a brother. It has wielded a most wonderful 
influence upon my life. I remember 
vividly how, when I was drifting into sin, 
though under the nurture of orthodoxy, I was 
lifted and borne away by its sweet influence 
and encouraged to live a better life. And yet 
all the while I never once believed the editor 
popish or infallible or dishonest in any particular. 
Neither do I believe it now. 

I am glad to see the staunch and Christlike 
stand you take in defending yourself and the 
truth. Long may you and Sister R. live to 



lead and encourage us, that we may be kept 
in the path for the crown! 
Yours in Christian sympathy, 
G. W. Dickson. 

page 194 

California. 

DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-The special 
issue of the TOWER and your welcome letter 
duly received. Thanks for both. The 
TOWER confirmed us in our judgment of the 
trouble and its cause, not only by the spirit 
manifested, but also by your statements relative 
to the charges and also the judgment of 
the brethren. 

"Their folly shall be manifest to all." 

The effect on our little Church here has 
been very good, as it has resulted in a self-examination 
and a drawing closer to Jesus and 
the glorious saints and to the "remaining 
members" such as we never before experienced. 
Our subject this morning was "The 
Oneness of the Body;" and it was a blessed 
subject, with all of Paul's wonderful epistles 
from which to draw. 

I am sure we all feel a more earnest desire 
to be found doing our own individual work, 
as the Spirit is divided to us. The contrasts 
of Phil. 2:5-11 and Isa. 14:12-20 are so strong 
and so obvious that the most humble follower 
cannot mistake the difference between Christ 
and Satan, and the spirits of each. The more 
we see of the spirit of those who went out, the 
less it seems like that of Christ, and the more 
like that of Satan. 

The Lord still gives us work, always plenty 
to whom to write and some to see. Knowledge 
and desire for more work are increasing, and 
we are abiding his time and way. 

Sister Bell joins me in Christian love and 
greetings to you both and those associated 
with you. Yours in love for Him, 
Charles C. Bell. 



Nebraska. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-The extra edition 
received: "How are the mighty fallen!" 
I am inclined to be more diligent in the service. 
No one knows what turn they will take 
now. May we be steadfast, immovable, always 
abounding in the work of the Lord. We 
have the promise that his grace will be sufficient 
for us. L. M. DeLaMater. 



Indiana. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--I am very busy to-day, 
but I cannot forbear writing you a few 
lines. We were glad to receive the Extra, 
and it justified our expectations fully. 

We believe that good will come out of it, 
though we regret that you should have suffered, 
as must have been the case, to be thus treacherously 
assaulted by those that had been 
brought by your kindness and indulgence, 
and even expenditure of money, to such a 
position as to make it possible. 

I cannot believe otherwise than that the 
flock is better off without them, and anyone else 
who, understanding the matter fully, endorses, 
aids and abets them in their nefarious work. 

All but one (and he a German) in our circle 
in the three Falls Cities, accept your full explanation 
as satisfactory. Your brother in the 
Lord, F. J. Bourquin. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--I wish to write just 
a few lines to you in regard to the charges 
lately brought against you (a circular was sent 
me) and your answer to them. I am glad to 
say that, instead of injuring your character, 
they have made it shine brighter than ever. 
It seems to me that we all have great reason to 
be thankful to our Heavenly Father for his 
loving protection in time of such trials. May 
the Lord sanctify it all to our good. The Lord 
will not suffer one of his faithful ones to be 
moved. Though the storms rage and beat all 
around us, we feel secure, because the foundation 
is sure and steadfast. 

May the Lord continue to be your comforter 
and use you yet more and more as a faithful 
worker in Zion. I assure you that you still 
have the love and confidence of myself and 
wife. Your friend and brother in Christ, 
M. H. Rogers. 



Pennsylvania. 
DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-A Conspiracy 
Exposed to hand. After a careful review 
of its contents, we cannot find words to 
express the deep sense of our sympathy for 
you and Sister R. Permit us to express our 



sincere approval of the resolutions which 
were unanimously adopted by the Church of 
Christ in Allegheny. Be encouraged and 
comforted by Paul's admonition to Timothy. 
(2 Tim. 4:1,2,5,18.) The Lord knows his 
own, and we are confident that sincere prayer 
and supplication will be made to the God of 
all grace for you and all the faithful co-workers, 
by those who hear the Master's voice. 
Yours in truth, 

Mr. and Mrs. J. J. A. Faunce. 



Texas. 
DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-We, the 
undersigned readers and believers in the doctrines 
of Jesus Christ as promulgated by you 
through the M. DAWN, and all other matter 
from your pen, sympathize with you in your 
present trouble, and will do all in our power 

page 195 

to counteract any and all issues taken against 
you, knowing that by so doing we are upholding 
the cause of Christ. Hoping that you 
may come through as did our Head and 
Master, we remain, Your brethren in Christ, 
E. L. Booth, H. F. Russell, E. Wallace. 



Tennessee. 
DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I have 
been waiting anxiously for the first of May 
number of the TOWER, in which I looked for 
an explanation of the troubles alluded to in 
former numbers. In my painful suspense I 
feared that some great calamity was impending 
over the little flock, that might scatter 
them as sheep without a shepherd. Imagine, 
therefore, my joy, when the Extra came, explaining 
the many frivolous charges that had 
almost frightened us into trembling. I had 
expected that the great enemy of truth would 
ere long give us a master-piece of his ingenuity 
in opposing the Prince and his Kingdom. 
With his more than four thousand years of experience 
in fighting against the truth, we had 
reason to expect something more fearful than 
a war of words. When the great battle of the 
Lord Almighty is impending over the world, 
this little skirmish with spys only warns us to 
put on the whole armor our commander has 
furnished us, and listen for his commands and 



watch for his signals. 

'"Hold the fort! for I am present,' 

Jesus signals still." 
Wave the answer back to him, 
'By thy grace we will!'" 

I often think of an expression I heard long 
ago. If God is with us and we are only one, 
we are a majority of the universe; and Jesus 
has said, Where two or three are gathered in 
my name, there am I in the midst. 

I will stop far, very far, short of what I 
would like to say of my own experience, suggested 
by your experience, as given in the 
Extra, in the beginning and gradual development 
of present truth. That itself is worth 
more to us than all the cost and trouble to 
you to bring it out; but I forbear. I pray the 
Lord to "preserve your souls from death, your 
eyes from tears and your feet from falling." 
Yours affectionately in Him whom we love and 
serve, S. G. Kerr, Sr. 



New York. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--As brethren and 
sisters in Christ, our hearts have been touched 
with sympathy toward you, in the trying ordeal 
through which you have passed during 
the past few weeks. None other evil is greater 
than that of fellowshiping false brethren. 
God has blessed and sustained you, and has 
greatly blessed us individually, through your 
works. As a token of respect, and confidence 
to you, we attest our names, and enclose a 
small amount taken as a collection on May 
13th, at our regular meeting, to be devoted by 
you in furtherance of the cause of Christ and 
his truth. Yours in Christian fellowship, 
The Church at Wappingers Falls. 



Washington. 
DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-We write, 
expressing our deep sympathy for you in the 
severe trial through which you have been, and 
are passing. In the words of the poet, "Our 
prayers and tears are all with thee." We are 
so glad to know, however, that through it all 
the Lord has been with you, cheering and 
comforting, blessing and supporting; and our 
most earnest prayer is that he may continue to 
do so. Truly, you need much of the grace of 
God to enable you to manifest the Christ-spirit 
in dealing with those who seem to be to 



such an extent under the influence of the 
spirit of Satan. 

You will be glad to know that so far from 
this having a detrimental effect upon the interested 
ones here, it appears to have been 
used in the opposite way; and several testify 
that the little book, sad and grievous as it is, 
has been a real blessing to them. 

And now, feeling assured that you can say 
with the Apostle (Acts 20:24), "None of these 
things move me, neither count I my life dear 
unto myself, so that I might finish my course 
with joy, and the ministry which I have received 
of the Lord Jesus to testify the gospel 
of the grace of God," we remain, 
The Church at Tacoma. 



Texas. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--I received A Conspiracy 
Exposed. I feel so many times since 
reading it how true is the sentiment contained 
in the following: 

"The flame shall not hurt thee, I only design, 
Thy dross to consume, and thy gold to refine." 
How victorious you have been in this battle! 
J. A. Currie, Jr. 



Washington. 

DEAR BROTHER:-- Although I am a stranger 
to you personally, yet I have been a subscriber 
to the WATCH TOWER over two years; and now, 
after reading the April Extra, I am constrained 
to write this line to wish you a loving God-speed. 

I would also like to let you know the peace 
of mind I am enjoying, amid the troublous 

page 196 

times, based on a faith in God and in his Son 
Jesus, our Savior, and which has been so 
greatly increased and fortified through the 
knowledge of present truths as set forth by you 
in the M. DAWN series and W. TOWER. Please 
allow me to express my grateful thanks to you 
as the honored instrument in the hands of our 
Master for the good and deep things from his 
Word therein made plain. 
Very sincerely, Your friend in Jesus, 
F. A. Acheson. 



Illinois. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--I take pleasure in adding 
my name to the list of those who trust 
you and sympathize with you. 

Sincerely yours, E. Demoulin. 



Massachusetts. 
DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-We, the 
undersigned, as members of the Church of 
Christ, of which the Lord Jesus is the Head, 
desire to communicate to you our heart-felt 
love and sympathy for you in the work of the 
Master, who has evidently chosen you as an 
honored servant to feed the dear sheep and 
lambs of his fold. Rather than hinder the 
work, our desire is to hold up your hands, by 
prayer and supplication for you at the throne 
of grace. We also further wish to assure you 
of our continued confidence in you and interest 
in the cause, which has become so dear, 
both to your and our hearts. 

The Church at Boston. 



Illinois. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Your Extra was the 
first intimation I had of the trouble or trial to 
which you have been subjected; but if I had 
heard the other side first, it would not have 
changed my judgment of your work nor of you; 
and I cannot understand how any one, in the 
face of the evidence of your life and work, 
could bring forth such charges. Speaking 
from my own experience, I have received many 
times my money's worth, from both a worldly 
and a spiritual standpoint. Your DAWNS were 
first read about half a year ago; and the whole 
aspect of life has been changed to a broader, 
fuller realization of the destiny of man. I 
could write pages, and then not express one 
tittle of what I feel since I know that God is so 
much better than we gave him credit for. I am 
spreading the glad tidings as I find opportunity. 

I write this, thinking it may be some comfort 
to you to know that your work has not 
been in vain as regards, Your sincere follower, 
(Mrs.) A. Solenberger. 



Kentucky. 
DEAR BRO. AND SISTER:-We have received 
the little book, entitled A Conspiracy Exposed, 



and to say it was a complete surprise to us 
would be putting it very mildly indeed. I 
know that this has been a trying test to you 
and the Church at Allegheny, as well as some 
others who are scattered abroad; and we are 
glad that the Lord did not permit the "bomb" 
explosion to do its intended work. Our sympathies 
are with you, first and last; and we 
trust none of God's children have been turned 
aside by this latest freak of Satan's ingenuity. 
Of course, we are troubled and sad after reading 
of Satan's cunning and boldness in laying 
so deep a scheme for the overthrow of the little 
flock, and we are forcibly reminded that "if it 
were possible" even the elect would be deceived. 

Pray for us, dear brother and sister, that we 
may not fall, and that the way may soon be 
opened for us to resume our place on the roll 
of colporteurs, that we may enter more fully 
into the harvest labors of the Lord. We remember 
you all in our devotions to the Lord. 
He will stand by his little ones to the end. 

Yours in his name, 

Mr. and Mrs. W. A. Davis. 



Michigan. 

BELOVED BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I 
was not surprised to hear of the crisis that you 
had and have from false brethren; for it is 
written that we will have them; and all these 
trials are for our good, that we may become more 
like our Savior and Master. I sympathize with 
you and wife, and my prayers have been that 
sustaining grace might be given and victory 
be yours over these carnal and selfish brethren 
who fight against the innocent. They will not 
prosper in their devilish deed, but they will 
be pointed before the others as Judas that betrayed 
Jesus is pointed out to this very day. 
"Fear not," my brother and sister. Go 
ahead! Satan will not overcome you, no 
matter how many will rise against you. God 
knows, and he is on your side, to protect you, 
to give victory and to strengthen your faith. 

I have passed through a similar experience. 
Without any evil cause I was imprisoned in 
Turkey and sentenced to be banished to Asia 
for life in prison. Five hours after the sentence 
God, the Almighty, delivered me; and 
three years afterward, in the same place, I 
freely proclaimed the Gospel. False brethren 
they were that led to my imprisonment, and 
they have never had peace since. 

God has given us wonderful promises, and 



they are fulfilling in our daily life, bringing joy 

page 197 

and peace and hope. "Be not afraid of their 
faces, for I am with thee to deliver thee, saith 
the Lord." "And they shall fight against 
thee; but they shall not prevail against thee." 
--Jer. 1:8,17-19. 

With fervent love, I am, Yours in hope of 
life eternal, B. Stephanoff. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--Your exposition of 
the late conspiracy was duly received. Your 
straight-forward, honest statement of the facts 
is enough to convince any unbiased mind of 
its truthfulness, and, with the added testimony 
of the other dear friends, is a complete refutation 
of all the charges against you. 

By some of us it was not needed. From the 
moment I read the infamous circular, not a 
shadow of doubt crossed my mind but that you 
could clear yourself from every charge; and the 
only effect it has had on me is to draw me closer 
to Christ and into deeper sympathy with yourself 
and Sister R. and all the dear friends that 
are trying to follow in the Master's footsteps. 

I have comforted myself many times in the 
last two weeks with a remark that Mr. Adamson 
made while here three years ago. My mother, 
who was then living, inquired anxiously about 
your health, fearing that you were wearing your 
self out too fast, and saying that we could not 
spare you. He said, "Oh, mother Rany, don't 
worry. The Lord will take care of Bro. Russell." 

I received a scoffing message to-day from a 
Presbyterian, asking if I had received one of 
the circulars. I answered, yes; and in it recognized 
the same spirit that prompted others— of 
like sort— to call Christ a wine bibber, a drunkard 
and a friend of publicans and sinners. 

With Christian love and sympathy for you 
and Sister R. and all the dear friends with you, 

I am, Yours in Him. N. Rany. 



New York. 
DEAR MR. RUSSELL:-I received yesterday 
a little book, entitled A Conspiracy Exposed 
and Harvest Siftings, which I have carefully 
read. I write to say that aside from the vindication, 
which you have thoroughly established, 



of the charges which the malicious 
agents of Satan have endeavored to bring 
against you, it contains something that will 
greatly interest and benefit distant readers by 
giving them some acquaintance with one whom 
God has chosen to reveal his beautiful plan, 
heretofore comparatively unknown, to those 
who are willing to "see" and "hear." 

I have read the three volumes of M. DAWN, 
and have been greatly benefited by the perusal. 
Always interested in theological subjects, 
in the course of my examinations, I stumbled 
across some skeptical works, which made me 
doubt even the existence of God. Your book 
has entirely removed the rank weed of infidelity, 
which had taken root in me, and I take 
this opportunity to thank you sincerely for it, 
and heartily to extend my sympathy to you in 
the trial which has lately been brought upon 
you by those four unworthy servants. I think 
it will redound to your credit and to their 
shame. Yours sincerely, L. L. Hains. 



Illinois. 

DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-We have 
received the Extra and have read the most of 
it. We desire to express to you our sincere 
sympathy in the difficulties you have to contend 
with, and to say that our confidence in 
you is not in the least shaken. You certainly 
have given us too much food when hungry and 
too much drink when thirsty to be what the 
conspirators would make us to believe you to 
be. Your case is not without parallel. History, 
both sacred and secular, gives many 
such instances. Can only say what you already 
know, to trust in the dear Lord, who is 
able to bring peace out of confusion, light 
from darkness and joy from sorrow. 

Please find enclosed $10, to be used according 
to your own judgment. With Christian 
love to you and Sister Russell and all the 
faithful in Christ, 

A. and Minerva Gooding. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Have just finished 
reading A Conspiracy Exposed, your defense 
against the villainous charges brought by those 
who should be bearing up the "feet" of the 
Master, instead of endeavoring to stumble them. 

Mr. Rogers came to see me (before I received 



the Extra), and wanted me to subscribe for 
their new paper; but I declined, telling him I 
would take no part with them until I had better 
evidence of your having gone astray. So 
he gave me the circular, saying that would 
show me how you were no longer fit to lead 
God's people, and that they had mentioned 
only a few of the many things of which you 
were guilty. I expected to find something awful 
in them, and so I did— but to their shame, 
for I soon saw the signs of the cloven hoof. 

He said he hoped I would be guided to follow 
the true spirit, to see and follow the truth 
(so may the good Lord grant). When I had 
read the circular, I pitied them all, for it did 
not take much study to see that the Arch-enemy 
had a hand in the whole thing. From 

page 198 

the time I talked with Mr. Rogers until I 
found time to read his circular, I prayed God 
to guide me, that I might see who was in error, 
and that I might follow the right; but 
when I had read it, I found that the spirit of 
Christ was not there. 

He tried to get me to have nothing more to 
do with you, as you had become corrupt, and 
that all who continued to follow you would be 
led astray. I told him that if it were so, I 
thanked the Lord that he had shown me as 
much of the truth as he has, and that I thought 
I would stand alone for a while, until I found 
which way the spirit of Christ was leading; but, 
praise God, I did not have to wait long to see. 

Yours in our Redeemer, J. M. Engle. 



Ontario. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Although the circular 
had perhaps but little effect after the first 
shock, still I have had many trials in other 
ways. Dear brother, I would ask you to remember 
me in prayer, that my faith fail not, 
that I may prove faithful. I am able to realize 
more and more each day the subtlety of the 
great enemy of us all. 

Have not heard of any in Ontario who have 
been shaken out in the recent severe trial. As 
one brother says, "Satan appears to have overreached 
himself in his desperate efforts to do 
away with God's successful method of spreading 
the truth." 

Surely it becomes us to watch and pray in 
such perilous times. Oh, how I do long for 



the end, when this terrible day will be over and 
the Kingdom fully set up, when the blessings 
will begin to flow through the appointed channel, 
"the seed." May we prove worthy to a 
position in that body. Much love to you all. 
Yours in Him, Wm. McAlpine. 



Illinois. 

DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Yesterday 
Bro. Hays brought your defense to me to 
read, and added that the charges were the 
weakest he ever heard brought against any one. 
It is very painful to us to hear that we were so 
much deceived in men as we have been in these 
conspirators. The earth is open for them, 
and it is sure to swallow them. It must needs 
be that offences come; but woe to them by 
whom they come. 

We take this opportunity to attest our loyalty 
to the Master and our confidence in the 
instruments which brought us from darkness 
into the marvelous light we now enjoy. The 
interest you manifest toward the sheep has increased 
our confidence. 

Please find a draft enclosed to further express 
my loyalty to the truth. 

May the grace of God be ever with you and 
enable you to overcome all temptation, is our 
prayer. W. H. Jenkins. 



Kentucky. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I have not seen the charges 
made against you, but have read your reply. 
No testimony could shake my confidence in 
your sincerity and honesty of purpose. I do 
not know you personally, but your writings 
uniformly breathe the spirit of the Savior. 
The charges will be harmless with the few 
brethren here. 

Go ahead in the footsteps of the Master, and 
all will end right. My wife joins me in love 
and sympathy. R. D. Happy. 



California. 
DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-We wish 
to say that the conspiracy has not in the least 
shaken our confidence in you as instruments 
in the hands of God to give out the truth as 
now due, and in which we now greatly rejoice. 
The explosion of the "bomb" reminds 



us of the recent incident in the east, where the 
man who threw a bomb which exploded hurt 
no one but himself. 

You have the prayers of the Church here. 
Yours in the faith, W. H. Steel. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--I have received the 
Extra. I see in it nothing more or less then 
another evidence among thousands of the signs 
of the times that we are really and truly in 
the glorious time of the harvest. The good 
Master knows how earnestly I pray that his 
Kingdom may come. 

I am one that was caught by the "Mrs. Lemuels' 
advertisement, and am still thanking God 
for the light thus received. The conspirators 
must have failed to read, "Be wise as serpents." 

Your brother in Christ, W. B. Johnson. 



California. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--We have just read A 
Conspiracy Exposed. Truly sorry that such 
has been the state of affairs with you. Language 
fails us in the expression of our sympathy 
for you and the household of faith. 

We desire to be numbered with those who 
will sustain your hands above your enemies 
until the battle is over. May God prosper 
you and the work until his voice shall be 
heard, "Come up higher," is the prayer of your 
humble servants, H. Hoskins and Wife. 



page 199 

Virginia. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--I have been reading 
the Extra TOWER, and am truly grieved that 
any brother who had so enjoyed the favor of 
our Father as to have the future unfolded to 
him as it has been to me by DAWN, could fall 
into such ways as these unfortunate brethren 
appear to have done. But, dear brother, must 
you not expect these things, and does not God 
permit them for the good of all who are 
humbly in the race for the high calling— the 
crown of immortality? May our loving 
Father keep me humble, so that in his own 
due time he may exalt me. "He that exalteth 
himself shall be abased." 



I cannot refrain, dear brother, from giving 
a short account of how I came into the truth. 
In the spring of 1888 a lady gave me a copy 
of DAWN, VOL. I. I was a deacon in a Presbyterian 
church, and thoroughly believed in 
its doctrines; but oh! the blessing that the 
Father sent me when he sent me that book. I 
afterwards read VOL. II.; and that merely confirmed 
and enlarged the truth I had already 
imbibed. Then, last winter, God sent Bro. 
Hettenbaugh with VOL. III.; and now I impatiently 
await the fourth volume, confident 
that the truth will be imparted in still larger 
quantity— "meat in due season." 

For yourself, I know that our Father will 
sustain you in everything that may be brought 
against you by the evil one; and do not forget 
that many earthly brethren are with you 
in spirit in all these struggles. 

A stranger to you, but still a brother, one 
day, I pray, to be together with our glorified 
Head. C. W. Bennett. 



Florida. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I will not trouble you 
with a long letter, knowing that letters are 
pouring in upon you from many sides, and you 
must be very busy. 

No doubt this fiery ordeal through which 
you are passing will deepen your sympathy for 
Christ and the apostles. The time may come 
when you, too, will have to be let down in a 
"basket," to escape injury of your person. 

Your defense in the Extra is nobly and well 
timed. Dear brother, let us all take courage 
and lift up our minds and hearts. Hope will 
spring up anew, as we unite in singing the song 
of the new heavens and new earth. For this 
glorious time the whole creation is now groaning 
and travailing in pain. This doctrine of 
"the restitution of all things," will, when 
Christ shall subdue all things, and when God 
will gather together in one, all things in Christ, 
expose all error and settle all difficulties and 
right all wrongs. When this manifestation of 
the saints of God takes place, the earth will be 
filled with a knowledge of the Lord as the 
waters cover the sea. His glory will be revealed, 
and all will see it together. 

To you and Sister R. we all join in sending 
greeting. Your brother, G. P. Morris. 



Arkansas. 

DEAR FRIENDS :--The charges made are the 
merest babbling and will, as we believe, 
strengthen those who are of the household of 
faith and who have been so wonderfully blessed 
by your researches and interpretations of the 
Scriptures. Be not dismayed. If you are not 
injured at home, where you are known, do not 
apprehend that you will be injured, by such 
foolish charges, with people who, while they 
do not know you personally, love you none 
the less. We are only surprised that you have 
been let alone in your work so long as you 
have, and will not be surprised, if, when this 
attack fails, as it surely will, we hear of another 
from some other direction. But you must stand 
firm, believing what the Savior said, "Lo, I 
am with you alway;" and so are the hundreds 
of friends who have read and listened to your 
incomparable interpretations of the Scriptures. 

Believe us, Your loving friends, 
S. King, M.D., L. H. Bradfield. 



Texas. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Myself and wife have 
received and read TOWER Extra. While we 
knew, by certain previous references, that 
something serious had occurred, we did not 
think that a thing so infamous was possible. 
We wish to express our sympathy and love for 
you both in this thing, but we cannot do so, 
for the feelings of our hearts are inexpressible; 
but our earnest prayer to the Father is that you 
may ever be just as free and blameless from 
wrong and as Christ-like in your every dealing 
with a thankless world as you have been in this 
one. Many thoughts present themselves for 
utterance concerning this affair, but we are 
confident we could express nothing new nor 
touch a responding chord in your hearts which 
has not been reached often before. Therefore, 
the whole substance of our letter is, We love 
you; for from the borderland of infidelity your 
help called us back to truths so grand and love 
so great toward God and men that we can see 
no greater obligation to love and respect and 
sustain as we can than this we owe to you. 

With our love and our prayers, 

H. W. Moore and Wife. 



page 200 



Pennsylvania. 

DEARLY BELOVED BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL: 
—It is with joy that I try to express to you my 
continued love and confidence. You have 
passed through a severe trial; but, thank God, 
you are the victor. Blessed are you when men 
shall revile you, and say all manner of evil 
against you falsely, for Christ's sake. If they 
have persecuted the Master of the household 
they will also persecute those that are his. But 
the persecution coming from those whom you 
thought brethren, makes it doubly hard to 
bear. I have carefully read A Conspiracy Exposed, 
and think you have answered all their 
charges in a way that would satisfy any unbiased 
mind. I cannot express how glad I 
was to know that Mrs. C.B. Lemuels was Mrs. 
Russell. I never thought of that; and now I 
want her to know the joy and peace that have 
filled my heart. Oh! how many times I have 
wanted to write to her and tell her of my 
gratitude. There could be no harm done, 
loaning books in that name, if it had brought 
joy to no one but me. 

Remember me at the throne of grace, as I 
do you daily; and may God bless you, and 
spare you to the Church as long as there is 
work for you to do, is the prayer of 

Your sister in Christ, Mrs. E. H. Bailey. 



R1665 : page 200 

New York. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I received your book 
in reply to the four conspirators, and return 
thanks to you for the same. It indeed meets 
the case fairly, squarely and honestly, and is 
in marked contrast to the spirit and evident 
purposes of the circular sent out by them. I 
was not pleased with the spirit of their circular, 
when I received it; and while I had known 
nothing previously regarding the charges (?) 
contained therein, I felt that there was certainly 
a mistake or a conspiracy somewhere, 
and consequently did not lose my confidence 
in you and Sister Russell, believing that out 
of the matter the Lord would bring the true 
light on the subject. And now that the whole 
purpose of the conspiracy is laid bare, it ought 
to cause them (were they true and earnest disciples 
of the meek and lowly Jesus) to hang 
their heads in shame and sorrow; but alas! 
this is not to be expected when Satan seems 
to have so completely puffed them up. May 



the dear Lord keep us, who are striving to be 
R1666: page 200 

his, very humble and meet for his best uses. 

I was surprised this A.M. to have Mr. Rogers 
call at my brother's house. He had only 
a few minutes to spend with me; but that was 
sufficient. He had in a few brief words (but 
to the point) my opinion of his recent misdoings. 
The topic of most of the few minutes' 
conversation was at first a surprise to me, but 
after further thought, I concluded it was only 
what might be expected. He said that Bro. 
—or, rather, as he put it, Mr.— Russell had 
been too dogmatic in insisting on a particular 
phase of the Ransom and dis-fellowshiping 
those who saw other important features of it, 
and said that this dogmatism had caused those 
who were at first associated with you to separate 
from you, or you from them, and had 
caused many to stumble and fall; and he gave 
it as his opinion that they were nearer right 
than you. (Verily, they "love darkness rather 
than light.") 

My earnest sympathies and prayers are with 
you and Sister Russell, and I am confident 
that out of it all final good will come. This 
is truly the time when all are being "weighed 
in the balances;" and they who are found 
wanting will be dropped out by the hand of the 
Master who holds the scales. 

Yours in faith and fellowship, 
J. A. Mitchell. 

P.S. I should like to ask a question regarding 
Mr. Rogers; but as you may consider it 
a matter of private business, you may perhaps 
not feel like answering. He has intimated to 
one or two that I know of, that aside from his 
traveling expenses, board, clothing, etc., about 
all of his income was donated to the Tract 
Society. I should like to know if that is so; 
for, if not, I feel that this, another of his deceptions, 
should be known. Personally, I 
take "no stock" in the statement; but in the 
absence of information I cannot pass upon it. 

[Your request is not unreasonable; and we 
reply, that Mr. S. D. Rogers contributed money 
to the Tract Fund as follows:— 

Dec. 28, 1889, $25.00 

Jan. 28, 1890, 25.00 

April 9, 1890, 20.00 

July 5, 1890, 2.90 

In all, $72.90] 

LATER. Am rejoiced to learn that the recent 



arrows of the Adversary have accomplished 
but little harm to the saints, and are apt to return 
upon his own head to his own discomfiture 
and hurt. Thus God overrules apparent 
evil to work out good to his own trusting ones. 
And, as you say, I also hope it may have the 
effect of drawing our hearts closer to our dear 
Lord and to each other. 

I am doing quite fairly in my canvass here, 
considering the condition of things in this 
vicinity. Yesterday took orders for sixteen 
books, and to-day for twenty. 

page 20 1 

Pennsylvania. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--I have just 
finished reading your defense of charges against 
you by those who were former co-laborers in 
the field and office of WATCH TOWER. 

It seems to me that if they had observed the 
Christian rule in regard to their various seeming 
offences, all would have resolved into 
thin air, as very often is the case with even 
worse charges. You have taken more pains 
than I would have done to refute the same, as 
many of them are as idle tales of gossip and 
unworthy of attention. Life is too short to 
grieve or worry over the frequent slanders of 
the envious. Joseph was sold by his brethren, 
Christ deserted for a time by his apostles, and 
suffered much therefrom; but have not we a 
sure refuge in One who will not leave us desolate? 
I am very glad, however, to get this 
book, as it gives me a knowledge of the Tract 
Society, your work, and much other valuable 
and interesting information, put into concise 
form for future reference, and for explanation 
to others of the work in which you are engaged. 

You and Sister Russell have my heartfelt 
sympathy in your constant and great work and 
labor of love; and may you ever have the 
abiding comfort of the dear, loving Master. 
With the fullest confidence that you are led 
by him and following in his footsteps. 

I am, yours as ever, A. D. Lundy. 



The first letter received from— England. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Sorry you should have 
been called to spend so much valuable time in 
defending yourself from the misrepresentations 
of others; but I see that it was absolutely 
necessary. You have defended yourself nobly, 
with true Christian spirit, which gives me 



greater confidence in you than ever. I received 
your TOWER Extra on the 17th. I also 
received the letters published by your adversaries. 
I am sorry that I was called to spend 
so much time to go through them. I first read 
these letters, then your reply, which quite convinces 
me you are in the right. 
Yours, etc. J. F. Johnson. 



New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Doubtless you 
are flooded with letters and other business, but 
I must tell you how our recent trials have 
affected me, up here alone, with hardly a friend 
who was connected with the DAWN work. 

The way through it all was rough indeed. 
That stumbling stone of a circular was well 
calculated to stumble such weak babes as myself; 
but the dear Lord was with me, according 
to his promise; and, resolving not to condemn 
one side or the other till I had heard 
both sides, and expecting a satisfactory explanation 
in the coming TOWER, I did not fall. 

Mrs. Jewett, who lives in this place, though 
having had DAWN for a comparatively short 
time, is quite established in the faith. We 
have taken pains that others here who were 
only beginning to read DAWN should hear 
nothing of the matter. 

I wrote to Brother Mitchell, who is the only 
brother in the work whom I have met, and in 
reply he assured me that it would all be right. 

Things are now straight again, and I am 
sure that I am made stronger for other such 
trials. At the same time I take heed lest I 
fall. 

With Christian love and prayers for you and 
all the brethren, V. G. Haviland. 



Illinois. 
DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-We, the 
undersigned, being regular subscribers to your 
excellent paper and readers of DAWNS and 
other helps, and having received your Extra, 
take this method of expressing our heartfelt 
sympathy for you. We have carefully studied 
the matter, as explained in your Extra, and 
have no hesitancy in saying that you have 
fully and fairly vindicated yourself in every 
instance, so far as we can see, and that we 
highly approve the Christian manner in which 
you have so nobly defended yourself. Go on, 



our Christian brother, looking to God for help, 
and he will be with you to the end. May this 
persecution only incite you to greater zeal for 
the truth, and may God give you renewed 
strength in his cause, is our prayer. 
The Church at Palmyra. 



Nova Scotia. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--I received the special 
TOWER, and am well satisfied with it, as are all 
the brethren here. I thank God that we are 
not so weak as to be hurt by anything that 
your enemies can bring against you. We 
could readily see that Satan was at the head of 
it all. We are all well pleased with the kind 
letters from the faithful ones sympathizing 
with you. They draw us closer together. The 
Allegheny Church Resolutions are good, and 
while I read the letter signed E. Abbott, 
W. Campbell, R. Ball, E. Henninges and J. A. 
Weimar, I was greatly lifted heavenward; for I 
know that such persons must be the Lord's own. 
I wish I could shake hands with the writers of 

page 202 

all. With this letter I send you, in behalf of 
the Church here, ten dollars for yourself; for 
we know you have been put to a lot of expense 
and trouble. 

[We appreciate much the thoughtfulness and 
confidence expressed by the sending of the $10. 
Accept thanks. Have placed it in the Tract 
Fund, to which we have charged the expense 
of the Extra, because we considered it not so 
much a personal matter as in the interest of the 
truth and TOWER readers in general. Had only 
ourselves been concerned, we might have maintained 
a dignified silence, ignoring both the 
slander and the slanderers.— EDITOR] 

Trusting that the Lord may continue to 
bless and lead you and dear Sister Russell, 
with all your faithful household, 

I remain your brother in Christ, in behalf of 
the Church in my house, N. Barrett, Sr. 



Pennsylvania. 
DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Let me 
congratulate you that you have been able so 
nobly to refute the slander of your enemies. 
I have just finished reading A Conspiracy Exposed. 
Surely, the Christ-like spirit manifested 



through it all, if nothing else, will convince 
those of the truth whose hearts are right in the 
sight of God. 

For others' sake I am glad every question is 
cleared up; but for my own part, it needed no 
explanation; for after receiving those horrid 
letters, I took the whole matter to the Lord in 
prayer and I was convinced they were of Satan. 
Brother and Sister Bourquin's letter to Mr. 
Zech expresses my sentiments. 

To me this has been the hardest trial since 
I came into the truth; for I was acquainted 
with the four and loved and esteemed them 
highly; but I feel I can do so no longer; nor 
can I recognize them as brethren in Christ 
until they do show his spirit. But I trust this 
trial will bring me only closer to the Master, 
and make me stronger and better fitted for his 
use. Hoping and praying the same for you 
and Sister Russell and all the household of faith, 
I remain, Yours in Christ and his service, 
Amelia Erlenmyer. 



California. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-We, the undersigned 
WATCH TOWER subscribers, believers in the 
truth as set forth in the MILLENNIAL DAWN 
Series, desire to extend to you our heartfelt 
sympathy and brotherly love in this time of 
trial that has been brought upon you by those 
who have called themselves brothers. We extend 
to you our most sincere thanks for your 
past labors and faithfulness in pointing out to 
the "household of faith" the truth of God's 
Word. We wish you a most earnest God-speed, 
and pray God to give you courage and 
strength to carry on the good work to his 
honor and glory in the future as you have done 
in the past. May his rich blessing rest and 
abide with you and help you to bear this trying 
ordeal patiently, as becomes the true servant 
of God, is our prayer. 

We heartily condemn and protest against 
the cruel treatment you have received at the 
hands of Messrs. Zech, Rogers, Adamson and 
Bryan; and while we look upon them as being 
no longer "brothers," we draw the closer to 
you, whom we believe to be the true servant 
of God, and the under-shepherd of his flock. 
The Church at Los Angeles. 



South Carolina. 



DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-The shock 
has reached us: it came as a great surprise; it 
came with force; but our faith is not thereby 
shaken. 

False accusations and hard sayings were 
brought against the Head Shepherd, and they 
will do the same to his true under-shepherds; 
but in all this rejoice, for suffering such 
things for Christ will only help you to put the 
finishing touches on the wedding garment that 
you will be required to have on at the marriage 
of the Lamb. The devil has side tracks 
laid all along the main line, so we have to 
keep a vigilant watch to keep from being 
switched off on some one of them. 

Dear Bro. and Sister, do not be troubled. 
We assure you of our prayers, and solicit yours. 
The above answers for all of the little flock here. 

Yours fraternally, D. T. Pitts. 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I feel satisfied that 
the men to whom we looked up as brethren 
were overcome or blinded by Satan, who appears 
"as an angel of light." I trust they 
will see the error of their ways and retrace 
their steps ere it is too late. 

I must give you a little of my experience 
just after receiving their circular. The next 
morning I was requested by an interested 
brother, to whom I had sold DAWN, to come 
to his house the next Sunday and give an explanation 
of the Chart of the Ages and some insight 
into the truths brought to light in DAWN. 
I accepted the invitation gladly. I canvassed 
till noon, when I met a Methodist lady, who 
had heard something of DAWN, but was afraid 

page 203 

to read it. The Lord helped me to bring some 
truth to her attention, and to get her interested 
in the book. Just after dinner I succeeded 
in getting a gentleman quite interested 
and was used the same week to aid Sister 
White to see the importance and significance 
of baptism. The following Sunday, from 2 
P.M. until 1 1:30 P.M., I had ten attentive listeners, 
and we all seemed very much blessed 
of the Lord. I was requested to come again 
every Sunday, if convenient— which you may 
know we shall make convenient and very glad 
of the opportunity. I feel very much encouraged 
indeed— not because I am called on to be 



a leader, but that the Lord has kept me so 

busy that I have had no time to think of or 

try any new departure. I would prefer to follow 

the "old paths," not of sectarianism, but 

the path trod by my dear Redeemer— the humble 

and quiet way, trying, as such as lies within 

my power, to "live peaceably with all men." 

Since receiving your reply I feel stronger 
and more determined than ever to press forward 
to the mark for the prize of our high 
calling, which is in Christ Jesus. Well, dear 
brother, "let us not be weary in well doing; 
for in due season we shall reap, if we faint 
not." We rejoice to know that the Lord has 
brought you out more than conqueror. 

With Christian love and sympathy from 
Sister S. and myself, to all the dear ones of the 
same precious body, 

Your humble servant in Christ. 
N. F. Sears. 



New York. 

DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I feel I 
must emphasize the dear; for since this fearful 
trial has come upon you and you have so 
clearly proven the groundlessness and injustice 
of the attack upon you, you look nobler 
to me than ever before. You are kept in peace, 
but now go further, rejoice! Rejoice that you 
are counted worthy thus to suffer for his 
name! Yes, rejoice; for out of this you come 
forth purer and brighter— and those who 
really love the Lord, not in word or tongue 
only, but in deed and truth, will love you 
more, trust you more fully and show themselves 
more willing to heed all your words of 
advice and encouragement. 

Well, the sifting is going on. The Lord 
will have only clean ones, and he knoweth 
them that are his— praise his name! Such 
favor to be chosen of him! How can any be 
other than humbled at the thought! 

Ever your sister, filled with blessed hope, 
F. G. Burroughs. 



R1666: page 203 

[The following is from one formerly a helper 
in the TOWER office, and whose defense of our 
integrity appeared in the Extra. 

Iowa. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--Your valued favor of 
18th inst. came duly, and was especially appreciated 
as I did not anticipate any personal 
words from you during this trial, knowing that 
you were taxed to the utmost. Though I love 
to hear from you, yet never consider it necessary 
to write me particularly, for I would prefer 
to know that you had used your time and powers 
among "lambs," where such need attention. 

That I was permitted in any measure to 
"hold up your hands" in the severe trial just 
passing, is a comfort to me. Having any 
measure of the spirit of the Master, how 
strengthening it is to help bear one another's 
burdens! Yours in the Master, 
W. E. Page. 



page 203 

Ontario. 

MY DEAR FRIENDS :-It is with feelings 
of sorrow and regret (shall I say indignation?) 
that I read of the scheme of false 
friends to cast a blot on the servant of the 
dear Master. Some years ago I heard an old 
minister say that Satan had a spite at him, 
and that he (the minister) had a spite at Satan, 
and always did him all the harm he 
could. It seems to me the remark suits my 
brother; for Satan seems to have let loose 
all the malice of his nature. Edgar Fawcett 
says, "The best reward of a kindly deed is 
the knowledge of having done it." When 
I read Mrs. Russell's noble defense of her 
persecuted husband it reminded me of Mrs. 
Fletcher's words when her heavenly-minded 
husband was traduced. She said: "I 
cannot bear to have the good in him evil 
spoken of." 

Believe me, dear friends, yours in love 
and the hope, Elizabeth Simpkins. 



California. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-We have just received 
the Extra, which brings to us the sad intelligence 
of the severe trial which has been brought 
upon you, by those whom we trusted were true 
to the dear Lord and His cause. After reading 
their charges, we fail to see anything in them 
which has not been most satisfactorily answered 
by you. Therefore, dear brother, we send you 
this letter, to express to you our heartfelt sympathy, 



Christian love, and continued confidence. 

We turn to our infallible guide (the Word of 
God), and inquire, Shall the followers of the 

page 204 

persecuted Jesus suffer also? We hear the answer, 
"All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall 
suffer persecution." (2 Tim. 3:12.) May the 
dear Lord help us joyfully to bear all the sufferings 
trials and afflictions that may come upon us; 
for "the sufferings of this present time are not 
worthy to be compared with the glory which 
shall be revealed in us."— Rom. 8:18. 

"Blessed are ye when men shall revile you 
and persecute you, and say all manner of evil 
against you, falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, 
and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward 
in heaven." 

Your brethren and sisters in Christ, 
The Church at Downey. 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER IN CHRIST:- 
How true it is that the sheep know the voice of 
the Shepherd and a stranger they will not follow. 
It is very easy to discern the difference between 
the spirit of the TOWER and that of the conspirators. 
My confidence in you remains unshaken. 
The thing I am most interested in is that I may 
be one of the overcomers. I know the testing 
is becoming more and more severe, but I will 
trust the dear Lord. His grace is sufficient, for 
I have proved it over and over again. I want 
the full assurance of faith, having my heart 
sprinkled from an evil conscience. I want to 
hold the confidence which hath great recompence 
of reward, and I am confident that nothing 
will befall me but what is for my good. 
Pray for me, that I may be kept meek, always 
at the Master's feet. The cross was very heavy 
at first, but, thank the dear Lord, it is getting 
lighter. Indeed, it has become a source of joy 
to me, and the more I take it up the lighter it 
gets and the more I realize the Master's presence. 
I stand upon the rock, which is Christ Jesus. 

Yours in hope of the high calling, 
Mrs. B. C. Stark. 



North Carolina. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Pamphlet containing 
the account of a conspiracy exposed duly received, 



and carefully read. I fail to discover 

anything in it to excite my sympathy for yourself, 

as I find that not a hair of your head has 

been singed, neither has the "smell of fire been 

found in your garments;" but my sorrow is more 

than I can express for the misguided brethren 

who, having permitted an evil influence to distort 

their better judgment and to lead them into 

an attempt (oh! "Tell it not in Gath!") 

to wreck this blessed Harvest work, that they 

themselves have assisted to carry on. A great 

man once said, "Save me from my friends." 

We will hope, and try to believe, that ere this 

they severely feel that amount of conscientious 

remorse that will convince them of the wrong 

step they have taken, and that, too, under the 

malignant eye of a scrutinizing world. 

Of course, the great cause under your management 
is instrumental in doing too much good 
in the world to suit the infernal characteristics 
of its wily "Prince;" but he has met with a 
disappointment for the present. But this may 
be only a sally, to put us on our guard and to 
prepare us for a general assault. We will suppose 
that ours is about the last and only fortress 
that is worthy of his steel. It is but natural to 
suppose that he will make the best use of the 
short time he has to work, especially when he 
reflects on that chain that John saw the angel 
use on the highly famous "Patmos." 

Cheer up, dear brother, you are in the service 
of Him who has all power in Heaven and on 
Earth, and is therefore quite capable of maintaining 
his own cause against every assault of 
the enemy. You have a grateful and loving 
community at your back, that will be more zealous 
than ever in holding up your hands in the 
great work that has been given you to do. 

Both yourself and dear Sister Russell will 
please accept the united love of Bro. Howard 
and myself. 

In Christian fellowship, 

Richard Marston. 



England. 
BRO. C. T. RUSSELL:-We, the undersigned 
brethren in Jesus Christ, having with much regret 
heard of the charges brought against your 
character as a follower of our blessed Lord and 
Master, and having read both the charges and 
the defense, have come to the conclusion that 
the charges are frivolous and vexatious, and that 
nothing but the spirit of enmity could possibly 
have actuated those who have made them. 



We regret to see the amount of unnecessary 
trouble to which the vindication of yourself has 
put you; still we see that, holding the position 
you do, it was incumbent upon you to enter into 
such a lengthy explanation, thereby exposing 
your private affairs; otherwise (but for the 
Church's sake) it would have been well to have 
"answered not a word." We write you thus 
that you may feel assured of our intense sympathy. 
With kind regards to Sister Russell 
and yourself. Yours in Christ, 

W. I. Biven, Henry Cornish, A. Edwards. 



Illinois. 
DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-This we 
hope will find you with all shadows and dark 
clouds past. We are sorry that so much has beset 
our little band this year, but now we hope that 

page 205 

all will be the better for the experience. We are 
glad to say that we have not been shaken, but 
seem to have been drawn closer together. We 
earnestly pray that this may be the last deflection, 
and that hereafter we may present a solid 
front to the foe. 
With true love and fellowship in Christ, 
T. S. Maxwell. 



Virginia. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Owing to the trials 
through which you have recently passed, we feel 
it both our duty and privilege to inform you of 
the deep sympathy we feel toward you and of 
the perfect confidence we have in your fitness and 
ability to perform any further work which the 
Lord Jesus, the Chief Shepherd, may direct. 

We were not surprised that such a conspiracy 
should occur. We can see the hand of the Lord 
in it all. It seems to be an important part of his 
work in this harvest, though we are surprised at 
the men who engaged in it; for we had expected 
better things of them. As to the charges 
brought against you, we need only say that as 
an impure fountain cannot bring forth pure water, 
or a corrupt tree good fruit, neither can the 
heart and mind which under the blessing of God 
have furnished us Z.W.T., Tabernacle Shadows, 
M. DAWN, etc., be full of wickedness as charged. 

We highly approve your course, and congratulate 
you on the plain and straightforward manner 



in which you have explained the subject. 
Believing that God will work all things together 
for good for those who love him, we remain, 
In the one and only hope through the ransom, 
The Church at Homers. 



R1666: page 205 

England. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--I write to let you 
know that I fully sympathize with you in your 
present trial. 

Mr. Rogers called here on Saturday evening. 
Of course you are the greatest villain that 
ever existed; but then opinions differ. Was 
he not surprised when I told him it was a matter 
of Korah and his company! "Why! I am surprised 
at you! !" he said. I think he was, for 
there was a momentary note of fear in his tone. 
I was not anxious to retain his services in any 
form. Yes, some are worthy of their hire— the 
devil, at least, thinks so; especially when they 
travel to villify the servants of God. I can tell you 
this plainly, Bro. Russell, that over two months 
ago, through the conduct of Mr. Rogers, I shut 
myself up and declined fellowship with anyone. 

He has an idea that you intend to send Mrs. 
Russell to London to checkmate him. The best 
thing you can do, Bro. Russell, is to dismiss him 
from your thoughts, as though he never existed. 

[This has been our intention, and we have 
deviated from it only for this special issue, believing 
that this would be to the Lord's praise 
and to the upbuilding of his people, to inform 
the Church of the outcome of the late conspiracy 
and of the deliverance vouchsafed to all 
the true sheep of his pasture. Mrs. Russell had 
no thought of going to England.] 

Do you not remember that the Lord was in 
the cloud and pillar of fire, guiding the Israelites 
through the wilderness? So, remember that 
the Lord is in this cloud of trouble, and, with 
the fiery trials, these are our protection. Be 
not over anxious concerning the brethren and 
sisters in England; for the Lord will give to his 
people, peace. 

Mr. Rogers says you are misrepresenting him 
in the article, "The work in England;" in fact, 
insinuating that he misappropriated the money. 
If you would give a concise statement showing 
what the $965.67 represents, you will remove 
some misapprehension. He says he sold 1,500 
DAWNS in America and 800 here. Total, 
2,300 @ 33c=$759--his own figures. 



Praying that the Lord's blessing may be with 
yourself and Sister Russell, as also all that are 
serving him in the office, 

Yours in Jesus, J. Brookes. 

[Our figures are not the retail value of what he sold, 
but the retail value of what was sent him, representing 
books either sold by him, still in his possession or transferred 
by him to others (and for which he received payment) 
—exclusive of the last shipment of 2,000 lbs. to 
London, which he abandoned at the docks. 

Jan. 1, 1894, To Balance, $640.90 

Jan. 29, By Cash, $73.05 

Mar. 22, "Mr. Rogers' statement 
of DAWN unsold, stored 
in Liverpool and London, 
1535 @ 12-l/2c, $191.88 264.93 

Balance, $375.97 

Deduct prepaid freight, 23.67 

Net $352.30 

This is the wholesale value of the merchandise 
for which Mr. Rogers owes us 
(assuming his statement of books stored 
to be correct). It represents DAWNS in 
cloth and paper bindings, booklets, 
TOWER subscriptions, etc. (the respective 
quantities unknown), a conservative 
estimate of which places their retail 

value at $942.00 

Add freight charges, 23.67 

Total, $965.67 

Mr. Rogers' credit had been extended, before he started 
for England, so that he owed us, on the day he sailed, 
for books sent him while in America, $214.72. This 
amount is included in the balance due Jan. 1, 1894.] 

R1666: page 206 

California. 

DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Somehow 
for the past month all of us here seemed to 
feel that a dark cloud was hovering above the 
household of faith threatening to burst upon 
us. We clung the closer together and sought 
comfort in prayer. We now see why it was. 

Courage, brother! These false brethren cannot 
injure the cause: they have only helped it. 
Since God permitted it, we say Amen. The 
cause will prosper the better henceforth. These 
people have been as a thorn in the flesh. Being 
now withdrawn, the sore will heal. 



The first article in TOWER of Sept. '91 seems 
to fit perfectly to the case, and might be repeated 
just at this time. All I have heard of 
here remain loyal and true. Praise the Lord! 

Yours in Christian fellowship, 
J. A. Bohnet. 



page 206 



Ohio. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Through recent 
issues of the TOWER I have been greatly 
blessed, instructed and cautioned by reason of 
the clear unfolding of the Scriptures touching 
the various subjects treated. Surely the Master 
is using you for his purpose in the Harvest of 
the Age, and is directing you from time to 
time, as to the proper dish of spiritual food to 
prepare for the truth-hungry of the household 
of faith; and, indeed, when so made ready 
and served, it not only meets the requirements 
of the spiritual appetites of the Lord's "sheep," 
but is always in season— "due time." The 
article in the April 1 number; viz.: "Lest 
ye enter into temptation," was timely: being 
opportunely written, and expeditiously sent 
forth on its mission of warning, carrying the 
signal flag of danger to the meek, the humble 
and unsuspicious ones; and now comes the 
Extra; and we inquire, 

"Watchman, what of the night?" 

The answer comes, A Conspiracy Exposed, 
and Harvest Siftings of those who, in times 
past, were enlightened and blessed through 
your teachings of the Word, refreshed by your 
hospitality, and comforted by your fellowship 
and love, but who have now "lifted up their 
heels against you." But, praise the Lord, 
you have, through a knowledge of the truth, 
and with courage and fortitude, met and successfully 
refuted every charge, explained every 
grievance brought against you and against the 
cause of Zion and truth, and clearly vindicated 
your character as an intelligent and honest 
man, exercising correct financial principles 
and methods in your personal dealings and in 
all matters relating to the Lord's service; 
"being not slothful in business, but serving 
the Lord"— a sympathetic, loving and devoted 
friend, and an orderly, conscientious, 
consecrated Christian. 

In view of the deflection and falling away 
of many, and the completeness and severity of 
the "siftings" as experienced as well as predicted, 



it is well to remember that the Harvest 

of the Gospel age is nearing its meridian 

splendor and ripeness; and the "time is 

short" wherein it will culminate in the refreshing 

brightness and glory of the Millennial 

morning, when the bride will have made herself 

ready, and "Zion will rejoice;" and that 

such of the Lord's children— the fully consecrated 

—as hope to stand in the time of 

trouble, and behold the salvation of God, 

should "gird up the loins of their minds;" 

go over and examine every piece of the Christian 

armor; see that every part is bright, in 

its place, and the whole properly adjusted, to 

the end that they may be able to meet and resist 

the shafts of the adversary. The way to 

immortality— the Divine nature— is too"narrow" 

and difficult; the dangers on either 

side thereof are too many; the "snares" too 

cunning and deceptive, and the pit too deep 

to be trifled with by any in the Lord's service, 

through mistaken efforts to share in the notoriety, 

vanities, ease, comforts and pride of life, 

at the expense of the Lord's means and his 

well devised system of harvest work; forgetting 

that, though in the world, they should 

not be of it. 

On the other hand, the rewards are so 
great; the crown so bright; the life so enduring; 
that only the fullness of meaning carried 
by the term "immortality" expresses it. Indeed, 
all of the promises to the successful 
competitors for the "prize" at the terminus 
of the "narrow way" are so "exceedingly 
great and precious" as to command every 
talent of the consecrated Christian, "even 
unto death," bearing in mind that "Pride 
goeth before destruction, and a haughty spirit 
before a fall;" while "by humility and the 
fear of the Lord are riches and honor and 
life."-Prov. 16:18,22:4. 

I thank the blessed Lord for having given 
you physical, mental and spiritual strength 
and ability so successfully to defeat the wiles 
and temptations of Satan, by and through the 
timely and skilful use of that potent, effective 
and very convincing weapon, the "the sword 
of the spirit." Having done your duty as enjoined, 
"Let not your heart be troubled neither 
let it be afraid;" for "The Lord will uphold you 
with the right hand of his righteousness." 

page 207 

Entertaining Christian love and fellowship 
for you and Sister Russell, I remain, 



Kindly yours in the Master's service. 
W. P. DeBolt. 



Illinois. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--Your Expose 
was really a great surprise to me. I was afraid 
you would over or under do it— but, if there is 
a word wrong, I fail to find it after careful 
reading. All the points seem to be covered, 
and effectually too. The Holy Spirit has surely 
guided you through this severe trouble. 

How long will the sun, just peeping from 
behind the clouds, continue to shine? Soon 
again will the clouds appear, the lightning flash 
and the thunder roll louder than before. Already 
from the last shower the ground is damp and 
muddy, and the walking is tedious and heavy. 
Who will continue to the end? Can any trial 
cut deeper than the one just past? It does not 
seem possible. We loved and trusted them so! 
God knows their hearts. They have fallen far: 
I fear past all recovery. 

God's choicest blessings on you and our dear 
Sister Russell. Your brother and sister in the 
Lord, Wm. M. and Eda Wright. 



R 1666 : page 207 

[The following is from a brother once a 
helper in the TOWER office. 

West Virginia. 

DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Greetings 
with all my heart! and I hold you dearer even 
than before. 

I suggest to your judgment with regard to 
the distribution of the Z.W.T., Extra, that 
it will be difficult to distinguish where and 
where not it should go. The only motive I 
can see for withholding it from any is to cover 
if possible the shame of the offenders. 

The book is a witness for you, for us, and 
for the truth; and I feel confident that the 
dear Lord intends it for a witness;— of course 
permitting us to use our judgment. But he will 
not fail to correct our errors in the use of this 
powerful testimony. 

Satan's attempt in this scheme is as cruel 
and deep as his acts at any former crisis, and 
meant to be as far reaching. 

Yours in Christ, H. L. Gillis. 



Germany. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:--Continuing from my 
last, I hardly need say that, as far as I know myself, 

R1667: page 207 

I love righteousness and peace, order and 
decency, and that I hate the reverse. My relation 
and connection with the Sichel-Haus have 
taken such a character that I begin to feel a disgust. 
I am not ungrateful, and for all the good 
received through Zechs I was truly thankful,— 
not in word only; and I have now in sincerest 
love and gratefulness written much to them, desiring 
to do good. 

But I begin to feel that I am already being misunderstood 
by them, and I doubt whether I shall 
be understood by them in the future; for I feel 
it to be the Lord's will that I sever all connections 
(which have not been severed by them) 
with the Sichel-Haus, and that I return to 
America, probably in three or four weeks, as matters 
may shape themselves. Karl may stay longer 
and probably return with Boehmers in the fall. 

Furthermore, I wish to tell you that after careful 
and prayerful consideration I believe it to be 
the Lord's will to humbly offer whatever talents 
I may have to be used in the Lord's service 
under your direction. I am sorry, very 
sorry, that you did not come to know me better 
during my stay in Allegheny, partially by reason 
of certain influences. And though I must admit, 
as a brother of Paul, that I have need of self-control, 
by the grace of God I have succeeded 
some in the past few years in controlling my 
spirit and keeping my body under; and I have 
great confidence that with the Lord's help, under 
your influence and that of others, I shall receive 
a new impetus, to have all the good work 
continue in me, including self-control, meekness, 
patience, etc. 

I feel, painfully to some extent, that I may be 
misunderstood by some. But I love the truth 
as pure and clear as possible, and, the Lord willing, 
I may see come to pass what I have often 
wished and expressed to Zechs, that one or more 
of the tracts of the TOWER Tract Society be translated 
into German; if it be the Lord's will that 
something be done among the Germans by the T.T.S. 
through your influence. I am so glad that 
we have One that judgeth us, and that He knows 
I am not trying to please men, except out of a 
pure heart. Furthermore, I believe I have the 
desire of many others, to see DAWN, VOL. IV., 
come out. For this reason I felt very sorry that 



the late disturbance has come in and that three 
of the office helpers have left their posts. If 
through my (as I hope quiet and faithful) service 
you could gain some time for VOL. IV., I should 
deem it a favor of the Lord. I hope that from 
the above and previous letters my sentiments 
and motives may be clear to you and Sister 
Russell: to be spent to the Lord's honor and 
praise, and, in unity of the spirit with those who 
are truly His, to grow up into Him. 

I shall await your advice. None need know 
of this though, lest some of your accusers think 
you needed or asked me from Germany to testify 

R1667: page 208 

for the truth on your behalf. It will be a 
test for them (if you should believe it to be the 
Lord's will that I come to Allegheny) whether 
or not they will think evil of me and treat 
me accordingly. 
Yours sincerely in our Lord and Redeemer, 
Otto A. Koetitz. 



[The following is from one known to many 
of our readers as Sister Millie Long—formerly 
one of the TOWER office helpers. We 
place it last because we would specially 
commend to all the sentiments of its fourth 
paragraph, relative to the "false brethren."] 
Missouri. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Our family has 
been acquainted with you since you were 
quite a young man, and were fully convinced 
long ago, by your walk and conversation, 
that from boyhood you have faithfully 
desired to serve the Lord. Sometimes 
we have heard you assailed by opponents 
to your religious views, who, being unable 
to overthrow the Scriptural doctrines you 
taught, resorted to the same methods as the 
Jews pursued toward Christ, viz., abusive 
personalities, etc. (Jno. 8:41; Matt. 11:19.) 
However, you have always been able to 
prove that "Wisdom is justified of her children;" 
and as our dear Redeemer, fully 
cognizant of his perfect manhood and purity, 
exclaimed, "Who convinceth me of 
sin?" (Jno. 8:46) so can all those who wear 
the robe of his righteousness, and are striving 
daily to bring every thought into subjection 
to the divine mind. 

The circular letter reached us a few days 
before the celebration of the Memorial Supper, 



and we (Mother and self) concluded 
that it was our duty to investigate the whole 
matter fully and impartially. The signatures 
the circular contained amazed us, owing 
to the fact that among them were 
brethren and sisters whom we honored and 
loved as God's children; but the Scriptures 
assured us that "all things work together 
for good to those who love God;" and we 
tried to rejoice in the trial, knowing the results 
would prove beneficial to the faithful, 
shaking out much that was detrimental to 
spiritual progress. 

The charges against you were ignoble 
and unworthy of publication. The words 
pope, etc., had no weight with us. When I 
first heard you preach I was deeply impressed 
by your urgent advice to "Prove all 
things" by the Scriptures, by following 
which I have escaped many snares of the 
adversary. Subsequently, when I was a 
member of your household and had the 
blessed privilege of serving in the TOWER 
office, the daily faithful sacrifices of Sister R. 
and yourself were constantly witnessed, but 
I never found either of you taking a self-righteous 
course, nor exalting yourselves in 
any way— although there was plenty of opportunity 
to do so. I was indubitably convinced 
that you were depending on the sacrificial 
death of our Lord for redemption 
from Adamic sin and its penalty, and had 
battles to fight the same as all members of 
the Church have; hence your sympathy, 
loving care and untiring service for other 
members of "the body." Consequently it 
is apparent to me that the "pope" who has 
been blinding the eyes of the false brethren 
was the product of "evil surmising" of the 
sinful, fallen mind, manufactured while they 
were neglecting the Father's business. Satisfactory 
evidence of the above is fully 
given in your pamphlet, A Conspiracy Exposed, 
which I have carefully read. 

This latest sifting of the Church is certainly 
the result of living after the flesh, instead 
of after the spirit. We who are begotten 
of the truth are reckoned to have 
passed the Adamic death; and if we cease 
to strive toward actual righteousness and 
wilfully continue to follow the flesh, we 
shall surely suffer the Second Death. (Rom. 8:13.) 
Even in dealing with false brethren 
I desire to avoid all fleshly bitterness that 
has a tendency to mingle with righteous 
indignation. 



I rejoice to tell you that those whom I 
have talked with in St. Louis, and especially 
do I wish to mention Sister Gallagher [colporteur], 
as she is very young in the truth, 
have nobly stood for the Lord and in his 
spirit of meekness during the shaking. For 
myself I can say there is no idolatry in my 
heart. I desire to worship only God. At 
the same time I never forget that all I am 
by divine grace I owe to the instrumentality 
of yourself and your beloved wife. 

Mother joins me in Christian love. Courage! 
dear brother and sister, as the valley 
grows darker. "The God of peace shall 
bruise Satan under our feet shortly." 

"Then crowns of victory, palms of glory, 
We shall wear." 

Yours in love of the truth, 

Mrs. R. W. Power. 



page 2 1 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1668: page 210 

THE ASSASSINATION OF CARNOT. 



The death of the President of France, at the 
hands of an assassin, will do much to intensify 
the feeling of opposition to anarchists and 
socialists, which for the past year has been 
growing in the minds of conservative people. 

The result will be laws looking toward the 
suppression of Socialism in its moderate as well 
as its radical phases. This will in turn mean 
the curtailment of liberties; and, while successful 
for a time, it will intensify a smouldering 
discontent, which eventually will break forth 
in an uncontrollable violence, and produce the 
"time of trouble such as was not since there 
was a nation." 

R1669: page 210 



DELUSIVE STATEMENTS. 



The idea seems thoroughly entrenched in the 
minds of men that a restitution to life of all of 
Adam's race would crowd the world until 
there would be standing room only, if, indeed, 
they were not piled one upon the other or 
crowded off into the oceans. 

These fallacious ideas come to people through 
the public press, and often are accredited to 
college professors. We give below one of 
these statements, sent in by a TOWER reader, 
and quote his comments following it. 

"A Berlin Professor finds that Europe contains 
272,000,000 inhabitants; Asia, 720,000,000; 
Africa, 89,000,000; America, 200,000,000; 
and Polynesia, 2,000,000-total, 1,283,000,000. 
Of this little crowd, about 32,000,000 
die in each year, which is 87,761 a day or 
61 per minute. Another professor calculates 
that 36,627,843,275,075,558 people have lived 
on the earth since the creation." 

Our correspondent adds:— 

"The DAWN says 252 billion. The German 
Professor says, 36 quadrillions, 627 trillions, 
843 billions, 275 millions, 75 thousands 558— 
a big difference. The Professor is a close calculator: 
he has gotten down to the last eight." 

Comment upon this is necessary, only because 
many accept such sweeping statements 
without criticism. Let us prove this matter to 
the satisfaction of all. 

Take this German Professor's figures, respecting 
the daily death-rate, as the foundation 
for our examination. He asserts that 87,76 1 
people die each day. If we multiply this 
number by 365, it will give the total deaths of 
a year; and the total is 32,032,765. This 
number is sufficiently large to satisfy anyone 
that the Professor has not under-estimated. 

Now multiply 32,032,765 by 6021, to ascertain 
the total number of persons who would 
have died since Adam was created, and the 
total will be found to be 192,869,278,065. 
Now add to this the living 1,400,000,000, and 
we have a grand total of 194,269,278,065. 
Thus, taking the German Professor's figures, 
we find them nearly sixty billions less than 
our liberal estimate presented in MILLENNIAL 

R1670: page 210 

DAWN, VOL. I., pages 160, 161, and which, as 



we there stated, we consider at least double 
the actual number. 

Notice, too, that in this calculation, based 
upon the German Professor's figures, we have 
certainly counted two persons for every one 
that has actually died; for back in Adam's day 
we know of no deaths but that of Abel, for 
nearly a thousand years; and then the death-rate 
must have been very small, in comparison 
to the present. 

As already shown, a person standing occupies 
about one and two-thirds square feet of 
space. At this rate the present population of 
the earth (one billion four hundred million 
persons) could stand on an area of eighty-six 
square miles— an area much less than that of 
the city of London or of Philadelphia. And 
the island of Ireland (area, thirty-two thousand 
square miles) would furnish standing room 
for more than twice the number of people who 
have ever lived on the earth, even at our exaggerated 
estimate. 



R1668: page 211 

VOL. XV. JULY 1, 1894. NO. 13. 

"THE PRIZE SET BEFORE US." 



ALL who are familiar with the Scriptures 

well know that the Christian course in 

the present life is represented therein as a race-course 

at whose farther end is a prize for all 

who so run as to obtain it. In the WATCH 

TOWER and in MILLENNIAL DAWN we have frequently 

pointed out this fact and, upon all professing 

to be God's people, have urged faithfulness 

in running the race. 

But in showing the Divine Plan of the Ages 
—from Eden lost to Paradise restored— it has 
been both necessary and proper to point out 
that the prize set before us in the gospel is a 
different one from that before Israel after the 
Flesh, during the Jewish age, and different 
also from that which will be set before mankind 
in general during the Millennium. And 
now something more upon the subject seems 
necessary from the fact that some have misunderstood 
us, and gotten the idea that there 
are two or three prizes, any one of which may 
now be run for successfully, and equally to the 
Lord's pleasing. These are defined to be, 



(1) The high calling, to divine nature and 
glory; (2) Spiritual nature of a lower order 
than the divine nature; (3) Human perfection 
by restitution. 

The advocates of the errors referred to proceed 
to explain three sets of conditions or 
terms to be complied with, and that which of 
the three prizes is won at the end of life's 
journey, will depend upon which of the three 
sets of conditions has been followed. (1) To 
gain the chief prize requires a full consecration 
of heart, followed as absolutely as possible, 
in thought, word and deed. To this we assent. 

(2) To gain the second prize, say they, one 
should live a good, honorable, Christian life, 
but need not specially sacrifice the good-will 
and esteem of worldly people. In other words, 
an honorable and generally esteemed Christian 
is supposed to be running for this second prize 
—successfully, whether he knows it or not. 
From this view we dissent, and will give our 
reasons later. (3) They hold that for the 

third prize little or no running is necessary, 
that if one merely feels his own unworthiness 
and trusts in the merit of Christ as the ransom 
for all, accepts the restitution promises, and 
avoids open wickedness, he will get this prize. 
Some, indeed, take credit to themselves in the 
matter, erroneously considering that they are 
cultivating the grace of humility,— saying, I 
don't aspire to be a king on the throne of 
God's Kingdom. Oh, no! a humbler place 
will do me. From all this also we dissent. 
The facts are these:— 

(1) There is but the one prize held out by 
the Scriptures as an offer during this age, as 
there was a different one held out previously, 
and as there will be a still different one held 
out during the Millennial age. The Scriptures 
are very definite respecting this one prize of 
the Gospel age. See Eph. 4:4; Col. 3:15. 

(2) None of God's laws or regulations conflict 
with Justice: they all harmonize with it. 

And hence God could not require less than a 
full consecration to him and his will, on the 

R1668: page 212 

part of all whom he accepts into his family— 

either on the divine or human plane. Nor 

could he accept as satisfactory or worthy of 

any prize the self-pleasing or the world-conforming 

rules above laid down for the second 

and third prizes. 

Things are either right or wrong; and the 
right side is always God's side. The reason 



that the path of the "little flock" is declared 

to be a narrow or difficult one at present, is, 

that it is God's path— the right path; and the 

world being wrong,— out of harmony with God, 

and consequently out of harmony with righteousness 

—is in opposition, directly and indirectly, 

to all who are in harmony with God 

and righteousness. And the more progress we 

make into harmony with God and righteousness 

the more the worldly minded will hate 

us, and the more narrow and difficult the path 

of life will be. Hence the Apostle's words: 

"The friendship of the world is enmity with 

God." (Jas. 4:4.) Can anyone suppose that 

God offers prizes of any grade or degree to 

those at enmity against him even to the extent 

of sympathy and harmony with his enemies 

and opponents? Surely not. Hence this one 

text alone would contradict all this theory respecting 

a second and a third prize being now 

offered. 

We repeat, what we have previously stated 
many times, but evidently not yet often 

R1669: page 213 

enough, that precisely the same requirements of 
God's law will be in force during the Millennium 
as are now in force. Nothing less could 
be accepted; for God's requirements of the 
Church are as moderate as justice would permit, 
at any time, viz.: (1) faith in Christ as 
Redeemer; (2) obedience, as far as possible, 
to his law of Love. 

We ask, Could God either ask or accept less 
than this, and yet be just,— either now or at 
any time? Assuredly not! 

But while the Gospel age requirements and 
those of the Millennial age will differ nothing, 
there will be another point upon which there 
will be a difference— viz., obedience to that 
law will be easier in the next age than now; 
because then Satan will be bound, and blind 
eyes opened to discern right from wrong on 
every subject. Hence the Lord has attached 
a greater prize to the call made during the 
Gospel age, which he designs shall select not 
only those who love righteousness and truth 
and the divine favor, but who so love them 
that they would sacrifice all else for the sake 
of these. 

True, we have taught that there will be a 
second class or company of saints saved 
during this Gospel age— the tribulation saints 
of Rev. 7:9-17— but we have nowhere intimated 
that they will be accepted upon any 



other terms than those given the overcomers, 

the first class. The terms for all who will attain 

to either class will be full consecration, 

even unto death. The difference between the 

two classes on account of which the one class 

gets the prize and the other class is "saved so 

as by fire" is that the overcomers have more 

zeal; they pay their consecration vows gladly. 

The tribulation saints fail to get the prize, because 

although consecrated lovers of the Lord, 

their love lacks the proper fervency to hold 

their lives constantly up to the point of self-sacrifice, 

where their own preferences would 

be yielded always and promptly to the Lord's. 

Because they lack this fervency of love they 
are not "overcomers," and cannot be rewarded 
as such with the great prize. But they have 
a measure of love and consecration, and they 
trust in the merit of Christ's great sacrifice, 
and thus abiding under the shadow of the New 
Covenant they are not wholly rejected by the 
Lord, although unworthy to constitute members 
of his "bride" or "body," joint-heirs of 
his glory, honor and power. 

In order to bring such of these as can be 
brought into full fervency of spirit and to a 
right estimate of their covenant, the Lord's 
rod of affliction is brought to bear upon them, 
until the souls melt in the furnace and the 
dross is separated, so that the precious element 
may be saved. 

But it may be asked, Is not this the experience 
of every Christian? And if these tribulation 
saints, the second or "great company" 
are to be purified from dross as well as the first 
company or "overcomers," why should they 
not be all of one class or company? 

R1669: page 213 

Yes, we answer, it is true that the majority 
of Christians are of the tribulation class, that 
is the reason it is called "a great company," 
while the overcomers are called a "little 
flock." The difference between them is not 
in the degree of purity finally attained, but in 
the manner of obtaining it. God has a special 
pleasure in those who delight to do his will, 
and who do not need to be whipped into an 
appreciation of right and wrong. These he 
calls "overcomers." These have the likeness 
of the Lord (Phil. 3:21; 1 John 3:2; Col. 3:4), 
and are accounted worthy to be with him 
where he is and to share his honor, glory and 
Kingdom and power.— Rev. 17:14. 

It is not because the "little flock" of "overcomers" 



suffer more than the great company 

of tribulation saints that they are to get the 

prize, but simply because they suffer gladly, 

willingly, self-sacrificingly. The tribulation 

saints doubtless suffer as much as the "overcomers" 

or more; and the "overcomers" 

have so much pleasure, in the divine favor, in 

connection with their sufferings in this present 

time, that it makes their willing services 

and sacrifices seem but light afflictions which 

are thus working out for them a far more 

exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 

As for the Restitution race and prize: No 
one can run for it until it is offered. There is 
no such offer for the present age. True, there 
may be children and others now living who 
will continue down through the "great time 
of trouble" and into the time of the reign of 
the great Restorer and Life-giver, and some 
droppings and showers of restitution favor are 
already manifest, but the fact remains that 
full restitution is not yet offered as a prize, 
and cannot be offered until the Church shall 
first be perfected in glory. 

It is true that restitution was the prize held 
before fleshly Israel, but that offer ended with 
the end of their Law Covenant. 

But the misapprehension on this subject 
quite possibly arose from our showing in the 
DAWN and elsewhere that justification, the first 
step into the New Covenant and present high 
calling is the equivalent of restitution. Justification 
by faith is indeed a restitution by faith. 
As a race we had fallen from divine favor into 
sin and degradation, and God could no longer 
deal with us, for we were unworthy. But after 
Christ had redeemed us— bought our formerly 
possessed rights and privileges— the offer was 
made to whoever believed this and desired to 
act upon it, that upon their mental acceptance 
of this they would be counted or reckoned in 
God's sight as though freed from all sin, as 
though restored to the perfection and divine 
favor enjoyed by Adam before he sinned. Thus 
it is true that the honest-hearted believer who 
accepts Christ stands in the divine sight as 
though fully restored. 

But why reckon him thus? Why not let 
all wait until the Millennial age, and then actually 
start their feet in the way that leads to 
full restitution? 

It is in order to make them eligible to the 
call of the present age. As shown above, the 
call of the present time is a call for willing 
sacrificers to present themselves as joint-sacrifices 
with Christ, in the service of God (his 



people and his truth). And since Christ was 
a lamb without spot or blemish, and since no 
blemished sacrifice could be accepted upon 
God's altar, and since we by nature, actually 
are blemished, therefore it was necessary that 
we should be either actually or reckonedly made 
perfect men, before we could be invited to become 
joint-sacrifices with Christ and thus to 
become joint-heirs of his glory. 

God chose to justify us or restore us or make 
us right reckonedly or by faith, instead of actually, 
so that those who chose might draw back 
after being justified by faith. All who, after 
being justified, draw back and refuse to use 
their reckoned justification for the purpose intended 
merely show that they received the 
grace of God that far in vain. (2 Cor. 6: 1,2; 
Heb. 12:15-17.) Their reckoned justification 
lapses or becomes void, —not being used as a 
stepping-stone to full consecration, as God 
had intended. 

The Gospel age as the great antitype of the 
Day of Atonement, must first close, its "better 
sacrifices" (the Church, Head and body) 
must be finished to the uttermost and be accepted 
before God, before the great High 
Priest can or will lift up his hand [power] to 
bless the people with the restitution call and 
blessings. 



R1670: page 214 

"WITH A PURE HEART FERVENTLY." 



"Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth 
through the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, 
see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently; 
being begotten again, not of corruptible seed, but 
of incorruptible, by the Word of God, which 
liveth and abideth forever."— 1 Pet. 1:22,23. 

"LOVE is the fulfilling of the law" of God, 

and God himself is love. So all creatures 

in his likeness, whether human or angelic, have 

this same chief characteristic. Love presides 

and rules in their hearts, always exercising itself 

in ministries of kindness and benevolence. 

Its most refined and exalted impulses are necessarily 

toward the fountain of all goodness 

and grace and glory, but in sympathetic solicitude 

it reaches out to help and lift up the 

degraded and vile, while with tender and 



fervent appreciation it regards the fellowship 
of all kindred minds. Thus, God-like love may 
be viewed in its three aspects— first, the love 
of reverence, which is centered in God, whose 
supreme goodness calls it forth; second, the love 
of fellowship or affinity for all those actuated by 
the same sentiments; and, third, the love of 
pity and sympathy toward all those who have 
fallen below the standard of moral excellence, 
or who suffer in any way. While we love God 
with supreme reverence, surpassing the love of 
self or of our fellow men, he also graciously 
condescends to take us into fellowship with 
himself; and all such are co-workers together 
with him in benevolent kindness for the lifting 
up of the fallen, whom God so loved that 
he gave his only begotten Son to redeem them, 
and then highly exalted him and gave him all 
power in heaven and on earth to restore them. 
-John 3:16; Phil. 2:8-11; Matt. 28:18. 

As members of the fallen race we do not 
inherit this God-like quality of love. It is only 
in obedience to divinely revealed truth that 
we acquire it, being purified thereby from the 
downward and selfish tendencies of our fallen 
nature. In other words, as the Apostle here 
expresses it, by the incorruptible seed of divine 
truth, which liveth and abideth forever, 
we are begotten again, and have become new 
creatures in Christ, so that now as new creatures 
we partake of the new, loving, glorious 
nature imparted through the Word of truth. 

Yet, since we still have this new treasure in 
the old, marred, earthen vessel (2 Cor. 4:7), 
it behooves us to take heed lest we lose it, and 
lest the old selfish nature of the earthen vessel 
again rise up and re-assert itself. Consequently, 
we must be diligent in the exercise and 
cultivation of the powers of the new nature, 
that it may thereby develop strength sufficient 
to ever keep the old nature under full control, 
so that none of its evil propensities may rise 
and gain the mastery. Therefore, "See that 
ye love one another with a pure heart [with 
disinterested benevolence] fervently." 

The language here is addressed not merely 
to babes in Christ— though it is wholesome 
counsel to them also— but to those of some 
degree of advancement, to such as have purified 
their souls unto unfeigned (not merely 
professed) love of the brethren. Let all such 
cultivate this grace more and more, that the 
whole body of Christ may be firmly knit together 
in love. 

The tendency of all divine truth is to purify 
the heart. "He that hath this hope [the 



hope that the truth alone inspires] in him, 
purifieth himself." Otherwise, though he may 
for a time hold the truth theoretically ,~hold 
it in unrighteousness—he cannot hold the 
hope; for the hope springs up in the heart only 
through obedience to the truth. 

Righteousness, and the hope of the rewards 
of righteousness through Christ, are the legitimate 
effects of the truth upon the heart that 
truly receives it. But where it is only received 
into the head, and is resisted in the heart, it 
only deepens the dye of sin by hardening the 
heart, thus bringing additional condemnation, 
and a fearful looking for of judgment. -- 
Heb. 10:27. 

This purifying of the heart by the truth is 
both an instantaneous and a gradual work. 
When a man is truly converted to God, 
there is necessarily a purifying of the heart 
(the will, the intentions)— a full turning away 
from sin and evil, and an unreserved surrender 
of the whole being to God. But as the constant 
tendency of the old, sinful nature is to 

R1670: page 215 

re-assert itself, the purifying influences of the 
truth must be continually applied that the 
heart may be kept pure and acceptable with 
God. But let none make the mistake of presuming 
that the pure in heart are necessarily 
free from all imperfections. As long as we 
have this treasure in the earthen vessel we shall 
be conscious of its imperfections; yet if the 
heart, the will, the intentions, be pure, holy 
and true and loyal to God as the mariner's 
needle to the pole, we are pure in heart, holy 
and acceptable with God through faith in 
Christ Jesus, whose imputed righteousness fully 
supplements all the imperfections of our 
earthen vessels. 

We notice also that this special love of fellowship, 
to which the Apostle here refers, is 
not to be exercised toward the world,— to 
whom belongs only the love of pity and sympathy, 
nor toward Satan or any of the wilful 
enemies of the Lord and his cause, against 
whom true love and loyalty to God ever arrays 
us in vigilant and determined opposition, 
—but toward the brethren— toward them of 
like precious faith and hope, and of one mind 
with us, and the Lord. Fervent love, the love 
of true brotherly fellowship, should indeed exist 
among all such. They should be in fullest 
sympathy and co-operation. They should bear 
one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of 



Christ; they should in honor prefer one another, 
and in love each esteem the other better 
than himself. They should love as brethren, 
be pitiful, courteous, kind, gentle, true 
and loyal. As Jesus said, "Love one another 
as I have loved you."— John 13:34. 

May the love of Christ more and more 
abound among his people, until the whole body 
of the Anointed, knit together in love and 
made all glorious within by its purifying power, 
is "made meet for the inheritance of the 
saints in light." 



R1673 : page 215 
RETROSPECTION. 



"Thou shalt remember the way which the Lord thy God 
led thee." "Cast not away, therefore, your confidence, 
which has great recompense of reward. "-- 
Deut. 8:2; Heb. 10:35. 

He was better to me than all my hopes, 

He was better than all my fears; 
He made a bridge of my broken works, 

And a rainbow of my tears. 
The billows that guarded my sea-girt path, 

Carried my Lord on their crest; 
When I dwell on the days of my wilderness march, 

I can lean on his love for the rest. 

He emptied my hands of my treasured store, 

And his covenant love revealed; 
There was not a wound in my aching heart, 

But the balm of his breath hath healed. 
Oh, tender and true was the chastening sore, 

In wisdom that taught and tried, 
Till the soul he sought was trusting in him, 

And nothing on earth beside. 

He guided my path that I could not see, 

By ways that I have not known, 
The crooked was straight and the rough made plain, 

As I followed the Lord alone. 
I praise him still for the pleasant palms, 

And the water-springs by the way; 
For the glowing pillars of flame by night, 

And the sheltering cloud by day. 

And if to warfare he calls me forth, 

He buckles my armor on; 
He greets me with smiles and a word of cheer 



For battles his sword hath won; 
He wipes my brow as I droop and faint, 

He blesses my hand to toil; 
Faithful is he, as he washes my feet, 

From the trace of each earthly soil. 

There is light for me on the trackless wild, 

As the wonders of old I trace, 
When the God of the whole earth went before 

To search me a resting place. 
Has he changed for me? Nay! He changes not, 

He will bring me by some new way, 
Through fire and flood, and each crafty foe, 

As safely as yesterday. 

Never a watch in the dreariest halt, 

But some promise of love endears; 
I read from the past that my future shall be 

Far better than all my fears,— 
Like the golden pot of the wilderness bread, 

Laid up with the blossoming rod, 
All safe in the ark with the law of the Lord, 

Is the covenant care of my God. 

—Anna Shipton. 



R1670: page 216 

THE CONCISION AND THE CIRCUMCISION. 



"Beware of the concision; for we are the circumcision, 
which worship God in the spirit and rejoice in Christ 
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh."— Phil. 3:2,3. 

THE Lord and the apostles take special care 
to point out to the Church the serious significance 
of her present position, upon which 
the weighty considerations of her eternal 
welfare depend. They mark out the specially 
perilous times, and forewarn us what to expect 
in the way of persecution and fiery trials 
of faith and patience, and then minister to us 
beforehand all the words of counsel, warning, 
encouragement, hope and promise that are 
necessary to enable us to war a good warfare 
and lay hold upon eternal life. 

But while the Lord promises grace sufficient 
for every time of need, he never encourages 
any to rest supinely upon his promises: the exhortations 
are always to activity, alertness and 
indomitable energy and perseverance. While 
he says, "I will instruct thee and teach thee 



in the way which thou shalt go," he also adds, 

"Be not as the horse or as the mule, which 

have no understanding, whose mouth must be 

held in with bit and bridle." (Psa. 32:8,9.) 

In this intelligent and proper attitude he 

would have us beware—be cautious, careful 

and watchful— against all the deceptions and 

dangers that beset our way; because we have 

a wily adversary who is the leader of the hosts 

of darkness against the Lord and against his 

anointed— "For we wrestle not against [mere] 

flesh and blood [the visible tools of the adversary], 

but against principalities, against 

powers, against the rulers of the darkness of 

this world, against spiritual wickedness in high 

places [under the power and control of the 

prince of this world, Satan]." The exhortations 

to beware of dangers are quite numerous 

-"Beware of false prophets" (Matt. 7:15-20); 

"Beware of [evil] men" (Matt. 10:17); 

"Beware of the leaven [the false doctrine] of 

the Pharisees and of the Sadducees" (Matt. 16:6,12); 

"Beware of covetousness" (Luke 12:15); 

"Beware lest any man spoil you 

through philosophy and vain deceit" (Col. 2:8); 

"Beware lest ye, also, being led away with the 

R1671 : page 216 

error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness' 

(2 Pet. 3:17); and, in the words of 

the above text, "Beware of dogs, beware of 

evil workers, beware of the concision," etc. 

While the wholesome dread of all these 
should be ever before our minds and keep us 
continually on guard against sudden attacks 
of the enemy, the Apostle in our text calls 
special attention to three things against which 
he would have us on guard. In the Scriptures, 
dogs are generally used as symbols of evil, the 
reference being, not to our domesticated and 
often noble animal, but to such as are more 
common in eastern countries, which are indeed 
disgusting creatures— lazy, filthy, greedy, 
snapping, snarling, treacherous and generally 
pestiferous— apt symbols of a very dangerous 
and wicked class of people. Beware, then, of 
all such dispositions, no matter by what name 
they disguise themselves. If any man be an 
idler— delinquent in his own duties, but busy 
in those of other men; if he be filthy, breeding 
spiritual contagion wherever he goes; if he 
be greedy— self-seeking; if his disposition be 
to snap and snarl, to bite and devour, or to 
treacherously lie in wait to deceive,— beware of 
that man. He is not fit company for a child 



of God: his influence is contaminating. "Evil 
communications corrupt good manners." 

And "give not that which is holy [the 
truth] unto the [such] dogs; neither cast ye your 
pearls before swine [the two being classed together], 
lest they trample them under their 
feet, and turn again and rend you." (Matt. 7:6.) 
"Light [truth] is sown for the righteous," 
and not for those of the dog and swine 
disposition. When, therefore, we find any 
such, we are to beware of them— be cautious, 
and on guard against their contaminating influence. 
The only preaching proper for such 
is, "Repent and be converted, that your sins 
may be blotted out;" and "Flee from the 
wrath to come;" for "God will bring every 
work into judgment with every secret thing." 
"He will reward righteousness and punish 
iniquity." 

R1671 : page 217 

Beware of evil workers: of those who go 
about to do evil, who have no bridle on their 
tongue, but who are given to evil-speaking 
and evil-surmisings which are improper. Indeed, 
evil surmising and evil speaking have 
become so common that very many professed 
children of God seem to think nothing of it; 
and little by little the habit grows, crowding 
out all spirituality; and thereby many are defiled 
and great reproach is brought upon the 
cause of Christ. Beware of all such evil workers: 
shun them as you would a pestilence; for 
it is a moral pestilence, most ruinous and fatal 
in its character. Our communications with 
such should be only to the extent of reproving, 
and, if that should fail, of exposing the evil 
work. The spirit that leads to slander is a 
murderous spirit, and should be recognized and 
dealt with accordingly. 

"Beware of the concision," says the Apostle, 
—of those not fully and truly consecrated 
to God; but who stir up strife and factions in 
the Church; "for we are of the circumcision" 
—whose circumcision is in the heart. Yes, let 
us beware of all such; for the influence of the 
semi-worldly mind is often more subtle, and 
therefore more dangerous, than that which 
makes no profession or effort toward godliness. 
The works of the flesh are covetousness and 
ambition— for money, fame or any or all of the 
desires common to the natural man. But the 
works of the truly and fully circumcised heart 
are the opposite of all these: they are faith, 
love, joy, peace, heavenly hopes and aspirations, 



and the daily crucifying of the flesh. 

No natural man of the fallen race ever had 
a fully circumcised heart. And such as have 
it are dead to the world. Its hopes, aims and 
ambitions are crucified to them, and they are 
alive toward God. Any one who has the realization 
of such a condition of heart has in this 
fact a blessed evidence of his acceptance with 
God and of his heirship of all the exceeding 
great and precious promises— if so be that he 
so continue, faithful even unto death. 

But let all such beware of the concision, 
the spirit of strife and division; for in 
the fiery trials of this evil day all such will 
surely fall, and only such as worship God 
in spirit and in truth can stand. Already 
the test of endurance is proving a severe test 
for some; and it will surely be yet more severe. 
"Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, 
striving against sin." There is no assurance 
whatever that any will be able to stand in this 
evil day who have not devoted themselves fully 
and unreservedly to the Lord. But those 
who have done so, and who are still faithful 
to their covenant, have cause to rejoice in 
Christ Jesus, whose grace is sufficient for them, 
and whose precious blood purchased their 
ransom. 

"NO CONFIDENCE IN THE FLESH." 



Like the Apostle, we are to have "no confidence 
in the flesh"— in any works of the flesh 
or advantages of fleshly inheritance. Our confidence 
rests in God who accepts us through 
the merit of his beloved Son. 

A very false construction, often put upon 
these words of the Apostle, infers from these 
words that he did not trust himself or anyone 
else;— that he put no confidence in any human 
being;— that he was always ready to be 
suspicious. 

That this is a wrong view of the Apostle's 
words is very clear: (1) from the fact that in 
his various epistles he repeatedly expresses 
confidence in himself and in other believers, 
and (2) from the context of this passage. 
The following verses (4-9) show that the 
Apostle meant that his confidence toward God 
was not based upon his being a circumcised 
Hebrew, nor on his zeal for God and his law, 
etc. These things in which he did have confidence, 
once, he now counts as loss and dross. 
He no longer has confidence therein, but rejects 



them as so much "loss" and "dross" 
and "dung." His confidence now is based 
upon faith in Christ's great sacrifice, and a full 
consecration to his service.— Verses 10-14. 

Let us be like-minded, and have great confidence 
in God and Christ and in all who have 
their word and spirit; and let us put no confidence 
in works of the flesh— in anything that 
we or others have done or can do aside from 
the salvation which God has provided in Christ 
Jesus, "through faith in his blood." 



R1673 : page 218 

"WHAT SHALL I RENDER?" 



"What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits 
toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and call 
upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto 
the Lord, now, in the presence of all his people." 
-Psa. 116: 12- IN- 
GRATITUDE is the responsive chord to 
benevolence in every truly noble heart, 
and no harmony is sweeter or more inspiring 
to noble deeds and lofty purposes. God would 
have his children cultivate for their own sake, 
as well as for the sake of others, all the graces 
of true nobility and moral excellence. It is 
therefore fitting that we should keep in mind 
a careful record of all deeds of love and kindness 
toward us, and be careful to return the 
gratitude due. How often does love go unrequited 
because selfishness crowds out the 
nobler instincts of the soul. 

While human kindnesses often draw largely 
upon us for the exercise of this grace, how 
much more does the constant and disinterested 
benevolence of our Heavenly Father. To him 
we are indebted for every good that we possess; 
and as his consecrated children we are 
also the special objects of his grace. Which 
of us cannot trace a long line of special providences 
on our behalf? Let us call to mind 
how he brought us up "out of the horrible pit" 
of condemnation to death, and "out of the 
miry clay" of personal sin, and "set our feet 
upon the rock" Christ Jesus; and then by his 
truth "established our goings." Yea, and 
he hath put a new song in our mouth, even 
praise unto our God."— Psa. 40:2,3. 

How wonderfully God has helped his people: 



they are his constant care; no good thing 
doth he withhold from them; and all things 
are made to work together for their good. In 
the smallest and in the greatest affairs of life 
he is ever watching for our interests, and the 
evidences of his care are all about us. 

What, then, shall we render unto the Lord 
for all his benefits? What, indeed, have we to 
render that we have not received of him? 
Nothing. But the inspired penman suggests 
what we may acceptably render as follows:— 

(1) "I will take the cup of salvation." 

Just as a parent loves to see his child gratefully 
and appreciatively accept his favors, so God 
regards our acceptance of his great salvation, 
—the gift of his love purchased for us at great 
cost. Therefore we will obey his call and take 
the cup of salvation through faith in Christ 
the Redeemer. 

(2) "And call upon the name of the Lord." 
He has invited our confidence and has proved 
his worthiness of it; therefore will we trust 
him and not be afraid. He who has redeemed 
us at a great price is both able and willing to 
perfect in and for us his great salvation. Yes, 
let us give him our fullest confidence. 

(3) "I will pay my vows unto the Lord, 

now, in the presence of all his people." This also 
the Lord will regard as an expression of gratitude. 
To render our consecrated hearts and 
talents, in glad and cheerful service, is but a 
reasonable return for all his goodness. Let 
us, therefore, do it gladly and with zeal and 
energy. It will be but a small return at best, 
but the measure of love and zeal that goes 
with it will indicate the measure of our gratitude. 
And let us do it promptly— "now"— 
and to such an extent that it will be blessedly 
realized by the Lord's people specially— "in 
the presence of all his people." 



R1671 : page 218 

"IN THE DAYS OF THY YOUTH." 



"Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, 
while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh 
when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them."— Eccl. 12:1. 

THOSE of the Lord's children who early gave 
their hearts to him and committed their 
way to his guidance can all bear testimony to 



multiplied blessings as the results of that early 
start in the right way. And we are glad to 
see some very young people among us now 
taking the first steps in the ways of life. To 
all such young pilgrims we would say, God 
bless you! You are starting out as young 
soldiers of the cross, and we want you to be 

R1671 : page 219 

brave and true soldiers, and to remember that 
the first duty of a soldier is obedience to the 
Captain— Jesus Christ. Give close attention 
and try to understand what he would have you 
do, and then be very prompt to obey, whether 
or not you are able to comprehend the wisdom 
of his directions. 

It is a question with many how early in life 
a child may give its heart to God and be fully 
consecrated to him. But the Scriptures make 
very plain the fact that they may and should 
be consecrated to the Lord by their parents 
before their birth or even their begetting, that 
thus their pre-natal influences may insure them 
a mental and spiritual inheritance tending to 
godliness, and that with the dawn of intelligence 
this disposition should begin to be cultivated 
and warmed into vital, active piety, so 
that at a very tender age the little ones may 
intelligently ratify the parental covenant of 
entire consecration to God. This they should 
be expected and led to do as early as possible. 

Of such early consecration to the Lord we 
have many notable examples in the Scriptures. 
Of John the Baptist it is said that his parents 
"were both righteous before God, walking in 
all the commandments and ordinances of the 
Lord blameless," and that John was given 
them in answer to prayer— "filled with the 
holy spirit, even from his mother's womb." 
(Luke 1:6,15,44,66,80.) Paul was similarly 
endowed from his birth (Gal. 1:15; Acts 26:4,5), 
and was zealous toward God long before 
his conversion from Judaism to Christianity. 
(Acts 22:3,4.) So also were Timothy 
(2 Tim. 1:5; 3:15), Samuel (1 Sam. 1:11,24-28; 
2:11,18,19) and Moses.-Exod. 2:1. 

Those thus early devoted to the Lord escape 
many a snare and many an entanglement, 
which in later years bring distress and trouble 
to so many. They do not have to reap the 
bitter harvest that always comes from the sowing 
of "wild oats;" they do not find it so 
much against the current of their nature to live 
godly lives; and they have in later years the 
strength of character born of continued self-discipline 



and self-restraint, and all the blessed 
advantages of a long acquaintance with God 
and of the instructions of his Word and 
of the leadings of his gracious providences. 
How wise is the counsel, "Remember thy 
Creator in the days of thy youth— while the 
evil days come not," etc. Those evil days of 
bitter disappointment and despair never will 
come to those who in youth commit their ways 
unto the Lord, and trust him to guide their 
paths. His ways are ways of pleasantness, 
and all his paths are peace. They are not 
by any means smooth and easy ways, but they 
are always peaceful and pleasant, because he 

R1672: page 219 

who has said, "I will never leave thee, nor 
forsake thee" (Heb. 13:5), is always present 
to comfort and to bless, and to make all things 
work together for good to those who love God 
—the called ones according to his purpose. 

Those of the consecrated who have children 
and young people under their care have much 
to do in shaping their course and in leading 
them to Christ, by throwing around them the 
influences of their own consecrated lives, and 
imparting to them such instruction as their 
own acquaintance with the truth and their 
more matured experience and judgment can 
give. Such efforts, properly directed, are not 
lost upon the young. 

Let them see both in your example and teaching 
how distinctly the line is drawn between 
the consecrated believer and the world;— that 
there is no compromise with the world: that 
to follow Christ is to renounce the world with 
all its ambitions, its gayety and its pleasures 
and companionship. Let them see the hollowness 
of worldly pleasures, and improve occasions 
for calling attention to the dissatisfaction 
and unrest of those who pursue the delusions, 
and the peace and joy of those who have 
left the world to follow Christ. It is helpful 
also to tell to others how graciously the Lord 
has led us, to speak of the various turning 
points in our course, where the friendly crook 
of the Good Shepherd kept us from straying 
away into the wrong path; or how when once 
we strayed his mercy tenderly pursued us and 
brought us back to his fold; how he has shielded 
us from evil; comforted us in sorrow; satisfied 
our longing souls with the joys of his 
salvation; and made us to sit down with him 
in heavenly places. 



R1672: page 220 

Before the mind becomes engrossed with the 
frivolities of this world it is easily led by wise 
and loving hearts; and none should lose these 
precious opportunities, which a few years later 
may bring forth a rich harvest to the Master's 
praise. Our object, however, is not to turn 
aside the saints from the great work of harvesting 
the mature wheat of this age, to the less 
important work of instructing the rising generation; 
but, rather, to point out the wayside 
privileges of very many who otherwise might 
not observe them. Many consecrated parents 
have these privileges every day; and many 
others come in contact with the young and 
forget to let their light shine upon them, under 
the erroneous impression that they cannot 
be expected to understand or to have any 
spiritual aspirations. 

It is a great mistake to presume that the 
young must first run in the race of pride, ambition, 
frivolity and folly with the world, and 
then be converted to God. It is the business 
of those who have to do with them to shield 
them as far as possible against such influences, 
and to help them to center their affections and 
hopes in God before the world throws its ensnaring 
charms about them. 

To all the dear children and young people 
who have given their hearts to God, and who 
are trying daily to follow Jesus, the WATCH 
TOWER sends its greeting. We know some of 
the very little ones who love Jesus, and who 
are not ashamed to stand up for Jesus among 
other children who do not love him or try to 
please him; and who are brave and true to 
God, even when laughed at and thought peculiar 
by their school-mates to whom they tell 
the good news of the Kingdom. And we are 
rejoiced to see some young people, who have 
bravely renounced the world and its ambitions 
and pleasures, among the most faithful of those 
who have consecrated their lives to the Lord. 
Some of our Office helpers as well as many of 
the successful colporteurs are still young in 
years. 

May the good work go on in the deepening 
and widening course. Let the young rejoice 
in the prospects of a lengthened campaign and 
great usefulness in the Lord's service; let those 
of maturer years bear up bravely and wisely 
under the burden and heat of the day, doing 
valiant service as veterans in the army of the 
Lord; and let the aged pilgrims, leaning upon 
the staff of divine truth and rejoicing in 



its steadfastness, stand as beacon lights to 
others and at the end of their course be able 
to testify, "I have fought a good fight, I have 
kept the faith." 



R1672: page 220 
PLEASING IN HIS SIGHT. 



A brother inquires:— Does God look with 
displeasure on those who, knowing his plan 
thoroughly, as laid down in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, just give up sin of all kinds, while 
still retaining their love of the good things 
of this life? Before reading MILLENNIAL 
DAWN I was a professing Christian; but, I 
see now, in name only. While trying to 
lead a pure life, I do not feel ready to enter 
on to a life of self-sacrifice. Do you think 
there is anything wrong in this course? 

To this we reply:— We do not believe that 
the Lord looks with displeasure upon a life 
which seeks to avoid sin, and which recognizes 
the merit of Christ's righteousness as the 
ground of acceptance. Nevertheless we hold 
with the Apostle, that it is but a "reasonable 
service" on our part to present our bodies a 
living sacrifice to God; for we judge that, 
Christ having died for us, we should live the 
remainder of our lives in his service.— 
2 Cor. 5:14,15,20. 

The spirit which would permit us to please 
simply ourselves, to the neglect of others who 
might be greatly blessed by the same truths 
which have so refreshed our hearts, would certainly 
be the spirit of selfishness— the opposite 
to the spirit of love. I trust, therefore, that 
your reception of the truth will lead to the development 
in you of the spirit of the truth- 
love; for we know that this spirit alone is the 
holy spirit— the spirit of God, the spirit of 
Christ— and that whoever does not sooner or 
later develop a spirit of love will not be accounted 
worthy of everlasting life, either as a 
member of the little flock, or of the great company 
or of the world during the Millennial age. 
None will be accounted worthy of everlasting 
life except he have the spirit of Christ. "If 
any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is 
none of his."— Rom. 8:9. 

Nevertheless, as we said before, the Lord is 
very merciful through Christ, and those who 



at first merely shun sin and accept the Redeemer 
will be recognized of God and patiently 
dealt with, that perchance the fruit of the spirit 
may ultimately be developed. "The fruit of 
the spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, 
gentleness, goodness, fidelity, meekness, self-control." 
--Gal. 5:22,23-Diaglott. 

R1672: page 221 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I want to get 
out of Babylon; but, if I meet not with the 
Church to which I have been attached for 
years (Disciple), I feel lost. I realize the 
necessity of close fellowship with spiritually 
minded people. And, now, the following 
please answer as fully as you can, either by 
letter to me personally or through the 
WATCH TOWER. If a man attempt the 
race for the "high calling," what is the nature 
of the sacrifice he must make? You 
say (MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I.), he is not 
only forbidden sinful things, but must deny 
himself the "good things" of this life. 
Please make this plain. Be explicit. Please 
come down to particulars. Again, are there 
any in the world doing so at present, to your 
knowledge? Any who are suffering for 
righteousness' sake? I say suffering; because 
to be slighted and misrepresented for 
the truth's sake does not cause one much 
"suffering." It is more of the nature of 
"sorrow." 

I stand amazed at the wonderful, wonderful 
light, which beams from the pages of 
the three volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

God help me in the way I should go. 

Your brother, EMORY A. SADDLER. 

REPLY:— What we mean by "suffering" is 
not the infliction of wounds or other injury to 
the person, but self-denials. The suffering is 
small— "not worthy to be compared to the 
glory to follow;" but it is the result of the ignoring 
of the hopes, ambitions and feelings of 
the sacrificer. 

Since it is to be a sacrifice, the things to be 
sacrificed are not specified in the Scriptures; 
nor may we speculate as to what you should 
sacrifice; but each one should seek to sacrifice 
something of comfort, pleasure or luxury in the 
service of the Lord, his truth and his Church. 

A person of means might deny himself several 
hundred or thousand dollar's worth of 
luxury in a year— luxury which he foregoes 
simply in the interest of the truth, that the 
means may be used in a better way. A poor 



brother, for instance, recently sent in $2.00 to 
the Tract Fund, saying it was the result of his 
walking instead of riding to daily work, and 
other small extras which he had willingly denied 
himself to be able to share in the spread 
of the truth. 

These both represent self-denials, self-sacrificings; 
the one of much out of much, the other 
of less out of little; but both, if done from 
the same pure, worthy motive, alike acceptable 
to God. See Mark 12:41-44. 

Then there are other forms of sacrifice, -- 
the practice of economy for the truth's sake, 
the sacrifice of time and strength in doing 
good, feeding the physically or spiritually 
hungry, the spending of time and energy in 
preaching the Word, either by voice or pen or 
printed page— tracts, etc. Any service rendered 
to God, his people, or his Word, which 
costs the flesh something, is a sacrifice, acceptable 
in God's sight through Christ. But a 
whole burnt-offering, the giving of all that 
we have and are to the Lord, is most pleasing 
to him, and our reasonable service. When 
practicable (i.e., when previous obligations as 
husband or wife, father or mother, do not 
prevent), this often leads to the Colporteur 
work, or some other service which ignores 
worldly ambitions; but where impracticable, the 
Lord equally accepts the will with lesser deeds, 
when they are faithfully done as unto him. 

Glad that you are able to take joyfully the 
spoiling of your goods; for amongst all the 
possessions of this present life, a good name 
is one of the chief.— EDITOR. 



page 221 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1673 : page 221 

THE BIRTH OF JESUS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON II., JULY 1, LUKE 2:1-16. 

Golden Text— "Unto you is born this day in the city 
of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord."— Luke 2:1 1. 

That our Lord Jesus existed prior to his 
incarnation, and in a more exalted nature 
and condition, is clearly stated in the 
Scriptures. See John 17:5; 2 Cor. 8:9; 
John 1:1-3,10; Eph. 3:9; Col. 1:15-17; 
Heb. 1 :2; Rev. 4:11. See also WATCH 
TOWER of August 1888 and April 15, 1893. 

This change of nature was a miracle, the 
philosophy of which, like that of all miracles, 
transcends the limits of human thought; 
and, like all other miracles, it was performed 
to meet an emergency for which no natural 
law could otherwise provide. The philosophy 
of the divine plan of redemption which 
required it is, however, very manifest to 
the thoughtful mind guided by the Scripture 
statements. The Son of God was made 

R1673: page 222 

flesh that he might give his flesh— his humanity 

—for the life of the world; that as 

by a man (Adam) came death, so by a man 

("the man Christ Jesus") might come the 

resurrection of the dead. (John 1:14; 6:51; 

1 Cor. 15:21.) In other words, he was transformed 

from the spiritual to the human nature, 

so that in giving his life for the world's 

redemption he might give the exact equivalent 

or corresponding price for that which 

was lost. 

For the sake of brevity we must of necessity 
pass by many points of interest connected 
with this narrative of our Lord's 
birth, e.g., the prophecies of his coming 
(Gen. 3:15; 22:18; 49:10; 2 Sam. 7:12-16; 
Isa. 9:6,7; 11:1-9; Dan. 9:24, etc.); the announcement 
of his coming (Luke 1); the 
date of his birth (See M. DAWN VOL. II., 
page 54); his human lineage as a Son of 
David and of Abraham, and his divine origin 
as the only begotten Son of God; and, 
lastly, the condition of the world at his advent. 
But these the student can with profit 
look up for himself. On the last point, 
however, we would have none fail to observe 
the evidences of the Lord's preparatory 
overruling providence in so shaping 
the world's affairs as to accomplish the purposes 
of his plan at that time. (1) The 



world was then for a time at peace, and 
quiet, the Roman dominion having brought 
all the world under its powerful control; 
and as all men were in expectation of Messiah's 
advent (Luke 3:15) according to the 
Jewish prophets whose fame had gone out 
into all the world, the sudden announcement 

R1674: page 222 

of his birth attracted wide attention, as it 

would not have done in less peaceful times. 

(2) The Greek language, noted by all scholars 

as the most nearly perfect, exact and precise 

medium for human speech, had at that 

time been fully developed and widely disseminated. 

Thus was prepared in due time the 

very best medium for the communication of 

the gospel of the new covenant. 

(3) The Old Testament had been translated 
into the Greek language three centuries 
before Christ (This version is called 
the Septuagint); and the Jews had been 
dispersed among all peoples, carrying the 
O.T. with them and bearing witness to its 
prophecies of a coming Messiah. (4) It 
was a time, too, of increased intellectual activity, 
which was ready to operate on this 
and every other question of public interest. 
Thus the circumstances of the time were 
peculiarly adapted to the announcement of 
this wonderful event,— the advent of the 
world's Redeemer. The fulness of time 
had come, and, under the overruling providence 
of God, the conditions were ripe. 

It is worthy of notice that the announcement 
of the Savior's birth was not made to 
an assembled world, in whose most vital 
interest he had come; nor even to assembled 
Israel, the chosen people of God; nor 
yet to all of those who, like Simeon and 
Anna, with devout hearts had long been 
looking for the hope of Israel. But it was 
made to only a few devout shepherds who 
were watching their flocks by night. The 
grand truth was one to be received by faith; 
and it was sent through humble, but trustworthy, 
human agents, who were the honored 
instruments in God's hands. And any 
who proudly despised the instruments were 
unworthy of the good tidings. 

The announcement was one which modern 
"orthodoxy" could not justify; for it 
was the very reverse of its bad tidings of 
great misery to nearly all people. The 
Angels' message was, "good tidings of 



GREAT JOY TO ALL PEOPLE; for unto you is 
born this day in the city of David a Savior, 
which is Christ the Lord." 

The tidings are of redemption and restitution 
and everlasting life for all who will 
accept this blessing on the terms on which 
it is offered;— viz., faith in Christ as the Redeemer, 
and full repentance from sin, which 
of necessity implies the forsaking of sin and 
the cultivation of righteousness. Christ was 
born to be a Savior by subsequently giving 
his life a ransom for all. These good tidings 
—this miracle of divine goodness and mercy 
to fallen and doomed men— met a marvelously 
cold and indifferent reception. The 
world in general, though apprised of the fact 
and its import, manifested no faith nor interest 
in it, while it is written that he came unto 
his own people (the Jews), and they received 
him not. But the jubilant heavenly 
hosts, who were capable of appreciating 
what fallen men could not appreciate, and 
will not until their blind eyes are opened 
and their deaf ears unstopped, broke out in 
a rapturous strain of heavenly melody, saying, 
"Glory to God in the highest, and on 
earth peace, good will toward men."* 



*This expression— "good will toward men"— as rendered 
by a majority of translators is confirmed by the 
latest found manuscript, the Lewis manuscript of the 
Gospels, discovered in 1892 in the convent at Mt. Sinai. 

R1674: page 223 

The full import of this song will not be fully 
realized by men until the Millennial reign 
of Christ shall proffer them full emancipation 
and deliverance from sin and its entailments. 

R1674: page 223 

PRESENTATION IN THE TEMPLE. 



III. QUAR., LESSON II., JULY 8, LUKE 2:25-38. 

Golden Text— "A light to lighten the Gentiles, and 
the glory of thy people Israel."— Luke 2:32. 

VERSES 25-31. Simeon was one of the 
kind of characters to whom God reveals 
his truth— a just and devout man, waiting 



in faith for the consolation of Israel. "Light 
is sown for the righteous, and joy for the 
upright in heart." And the holy spirit was 
upon him, so that, being thus inspired, he 
prophesied concerning the infant Jesus. 

VERSE 32. Under divine inspiration, 
therefore, Simeon declared this child to be 
a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the 
glory of Israel. John also pointed to him 
as the true light which lighteth every man 
that cometh into the world. (John 1:9.) 
And Paul adds, "This is good and acceptable 
in the sight of God our Savior, who will 
have all men to be saved [from their blindness 
and deafness], and to come unto the 
knowledge of the truth." (1 Tim. 2:4.) As 
the vast majority of mankind have never 
been thus enlightened, and thousands more 
have been only partially so, it follows logically 
that the full enlightenment of the 
world tarries until the Millennial reign of 
Christ shall call forth all that are in their 
graves—when "the Sun of righteousness 
shall rise with healing in his wings." Then 
he will enlighten the whole world, and believing 
Israel will glory in him. 

Simeon's further prophecy of verse 34 is 
partially fulfilled. The world has witnessed 
the fall of Israel from divine favor, and their 
sad condition as outcasts for nearly two 
thousand years, because of their rejection of 
Christ. And now the time for their rising 
again has come (beginning A.D. 1878): and 
they will be raised up nationally to all the 
favor from which they fell nationally. Today 
we are witnesses of the regathering 
of Israel, preparatory to the turning away 
of their blindness and their coming again 
into divine favor and blessing. 

"And for a sign which shall be spoken 
against." This has been true all through 
the age; and the reproach of the cross has 
not yet ceased. 

VERSE 35 had reference to Christ's tragic 
death, and the test of faith thereby instituted, 
both in that day, and even to the end 
of the age, thus (by the test) revealing the 
thoughts of many hearts,— proving which 
are loyal and faithful to God as true soldiers 
of the cross, and which are not. It is not 
probable, however, that Simeon, who spoke 
thus under divine inspiration, understood 
fully the import of his words. 

VERSES 36-38. Anna, a prophetess, 
another devout, faithful soul, recognized and 
pointed out the infant Redeemer. It will 



be observed that she was of the tribe of 
Aser— another evidence of what we have 
frequently called attention to in connection 
with the Anglo-Israel question, that the entire 
house of Israel (twelve tribes) was represented 
at Jerusalem in our Lord's day, 
and not the tribes of Judah and Benjamin 
only. See TOWER, Dec. '91. 

R1674: page 223 

VISIT OF THE WISE MEN. 



III. QUAR., LESSON III., JULY 15, MATT. 2:1-12. 

Golden Text— "They saw the young child with Mary 
his mother, and fell down and worshipped him."— 
Matt. 2:11. 

VERSES 1,2. That even the Gentile 
world was in expectation of the coming 
Messiah (Luke 3:15) is manifest from this 
visit of the wise men (Greek Magi, sages) 
from the east— possibly from Persia. The 
term originally belonged to a class of priests 
among the Medes and Persians who constituted 
the king's privy council and who 
cultivated astrology, medicine and occult and 
natural science. Ancient authors make frequent 
reference to them. Later the term 
was applied to all eastern philosophers. 

In the far east, the Chinese and Japanese 
and other nations have cherished a very 
ancient tradition that God would descend 
to the earth in visible form, to enlighten 
men and to redeem them from their sins. 
Tacitus, Suetonius and Josephus all testify 
that there prevailed throughout the entire 
East at this time an intense conviction, derived 
from ancient prophecies, that ere long 
a powerful monarch would arise in Judea 
and gain dominion over the world. Virgil, 
who lived a little before this, tells that a 
child from heaven was looked for who 
should restore the golden age and take away 
sin. Confucius, in China, about B.C. 500, 
prophesied the appearance of such a deliverer, 
and a deputation of his followers 
going forth in search of him was the means 
of introducing Buddhism into China. Zoroaster 

R1674: page 224 

taught the Persians that a pure virgin 



would bring forth a child, and that as 
soon as the child would be born a star would 
appear, which he added, "follow wheresoever 
it leads you, and adore the mysterious 
child, offering your gifts to him with the 
profoundest humility. He is the Almighty 
Word, which created the heavens." 

These expectations doubtless arose from 
the intermingling of the Jews with foreign 
nations. The Prophet Daniel was himself 
associated with some of their wise men. 
(Dan. 2:48.) His prophecies were made 
known to them, and the calculations by which 
he pointed to the time of Messiah's advent. 
These in course of time were woven into 
their literature. Nearly all of the ancient 
religions are confessions of human need: and 
in their blind gropings in the dark, they reveal 
the depths of man's degradation and 
misery. 

The miraculous star in the east, for which 
some of the Gentile wise men had been 
taught by a mere vague, groping superstition 
to look, finally made its appearance, 
and guided those blind feelers after God to 

R1675: page 224 

the wonderful light of the world. Thus 
kindly God condescends to human ignorance 
and weakness. "A bruised reed 
will he not break, and smoking flax will 
he not quench." All men will in due time 
have full, clear testimony to establish their 
faith in the Holy One of Israel and all who 
love righteousness will gladly accept him. 
Those who now can walk by faith have all 
the evidences which hopeful, loving faith 
requires. But none the less shall all the 
doubting Thomases and all the now blinded 
world in due time have the more tangible 
evidences in store for them. But more blessed 
are those who can now walk by faith.— 
John 20:29. 

The inquiry of the wise men (verse 2) 
betokened a proper condition of heart— (1) 
It showed that they had respect and reverence, 
and that they desired to render homage 
to the mighty God of Israel, and to his 
messenger to men. (2) It showed faith in 
the divinely inspired prophecies which had 
been irregularly interwoven with their own 
vague ideas and traditions. (3) It showed 
their zeal as truth-seekers, and their humility 
of heart in leaving their own philosophies, 
etc., and coming to inquire of the 



God of another nation. They seemed to 
desire truth on the great subjects of God 
and of human destiny, regardless of all 
other considerations. And they accordingly 
declared their disposition to render the 
homage due to the appointed ambassador 
of Israel's God, when they should find him. 

Jesus was born to be a king as well as a 
savior. The latter term includes the former; 
for the great salvation is secured by both 
his humiliation (even unto death) and his 
exaltation (as a king and deliverer). By 
his vicarious sacrifice our salvation was 
made legally possible; and by his glorious 
reign it will become an accomplished fact. 

VERSES 3-6 show the faith-though it 
was an irreverent and selfishly jealous faith 
—of Herod and his official staff in the God 
of Israel and in the words of his inspired 
prophets; and also the thorough acquaintance 
of the Jews with the prophecies. Without 
hesitation they pointed to the predictions 
of time and place and repeated Christ's 
foretold mission. Indirectly, we have here 
strong evidence of the esteem which the 
Hebrew Scriptures everywhere commanded. 
Herod's selfish faith, which sought the infant 
king that he might kill him, was in 
strong contrast with the reverent and devotional 
faith of the wise men. Fearing the 
overthrow of his own power, he was moved 
with envy toward the infant rival who was 
already attracting the world's attention. 
But, as usual, the wrath and duplicity of an 
evil man was overruled for good; for the 
king gave to the wise men the directions 
from the Jewish prophets— to go to Bethlehem, 
—an additional assurance to that of 
the star that they were being rightly guided, 
and that too by the God of Israel. 

VERSES 7,8,12 show the duplicity of 
Herod's wicked heart, which the wise men 
could not discern, but which God knew 
and guarded them against by a warning 
dream. The devout wise men obeyed the 
warning and, disregarding the kings command, 
departed into their own country 
another way, bearing the good tidings with 
them. 

VERSES 9-11. Leaving the king's presence, 
they observed that the star also led in 
the direction of Bethlehem, and, standing 
over where the young child was, the miraculous 
luminary had accomplished its mission: 
the infant Redeemer and King was 
found and reverently worshipped and presented 



with the choicest and most costly gifts. 

Thus even in his infancy this light that 
was to lighten the Gentiles began to shine 
into some waiting and devout Gentile hearts. 



page 226 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1677: page 226 

CAN IT BE DELAYED UNTIL 1914? 



Seventeen years ago people said, concerning 
the time features presented in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, They seem reasonable in many respects, 
but surely no such radical changes could occur 
between now and the close of 1914: if you 
had proved that they would come about in a 
century or two, it would seem much more 
probable. 

What changes have since occurred, and what 



velocity is gained daily! 

"The old is quickly passing, and the new is coming in. 

Now, in view of recent labor troubles and 
threatened anarchy, our readers are writing to 
know if there may not be a mistake in the 
1914 date. They say that they do not see how 
present conditions can hold out so long under 
the strain. 

We see no reason for changing the figures— 
nor could we change them if we would. They 
are, we believe, God's dates, not ours. But 
bear in mind that the end of 1914 is not the 
date for the beginning, but for the end of the 
time of trouble. We see no reason for changing 
from our opinion expressed in the View 
presented in the WATCH TOWER of Jan. 15, '92. 
We advise that it be read again. 



TRACT NO. 21. -DO YOU KNOW? 



We published one hundred and fifteen thousand 
copies of this tract, and have sent samples 
to all our TOWER readers. It seems to give 
general satisfaction, and orders from all quarters 
are large. We advise the circulation of 
this tract by all of you— on street cars, steam 
cars, at hotels and depots, and Sundays on 
the street-corners,— until everyone within your 
reach has been supplied. Order all that you 
will agree to use. Never mind the money. 
Many have opportunity for distributing sample 
copies of Old Theology Tracts who have no 
money to spare to pay for their printing, etc., 
but others, again, who have less opportunity for 
distributing tracts, take delight in meeting the 
publishing expenses, and thus help to preach 
the "good tidings of great joy, which shall be 
unto all people." 

The first edition, although large, is already 
exhausted; but we have another edition of over 
two hundred thousand under way which will 
be ready in about ten days. Send in your 
order and have a share in this feature of the 
harvest work. There should be a million copies 
of this tract in circulation within a year. 



R1675 : page 227 

VOL. XV. JULY 15, 1894. NO. 14. 



VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



LABOR PANGS OF THIS KOSMOS. 

"The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together 
until now, ...waiting for the manifestation of the 
sons of God" in Kingdom power; for which we 
[the sons of God who are to be manifested for the 
blessing of all the families of the earth] also 
groan, praying, "Thy Kingdom come, thy 
will be done on earth as in heaven." 
--Rom. 8:22,23,19; Matt. 6:10. 

NO one can be indifferent to the phenomenal 
times in which we are living; for although 
the rush and crush of business and pleasure 
continue, and even increasingly, there is, deep 
down in men's hearts, even at the theaters and 
sporting grounds, a feeling of unrest which cannot 
be better described than by the prophetic 
words of our Master,— "Men's hearts failing 
them for fear and for looking after [toward] 
those things coming upon the earth." 

We who know what is coming are relieved 
from anxiety; for, although we see near us a 
dark night of intense trouble, such as has not 
been since there was a nation, we see also the 
glorious beyond— the Millennial day, which 
"lights the gloom with healing ray." We can 
wait patiently, although not without interest 
and deep concern, for the development of 
God's great Plan of the Ages, now so near its 
consummation. 

It is interesting to look back and note the 
accuracy of the fulfilment of God's Word, so 
that our hearts may be established with the 
greater confidence respecting the future,— the 
things coming upon the earth. For instance, 
as we look back and note that the Scriptures 
marked 1 873 as the end of six thousand years 
from Adam to the beginning of the seventh 
thousand, and the fall of 1874 as the beginning 
of the forty-year harvest of the Gospel age and 
day of wrath for the overthrow of all the institutions 
of "this present evil world [or order of 
affairs],"* we can see that facts have well borne 
out those predictions of Scripture. We see that 
the present world-wide distress had its beginning 
there; that it has been progressing with increasing 
momentum every year since; and that, 
as the Apostle Paul declared it would be, so it 
has been, and so it is— "As travail upon a 
woman with child." Each spasm of pain is 
more intense; and so it evidently will continue 



to be until the death of the present order of 
things and the birth of the new. 

It might be presumed that all this would seem 
plain to us who have been so preaching and 
writing for nearly twenty years on these lines; 
but it will be interesting to our readers to note 
that now, twenty years after, others who have 
no knowledge of our writings, or of the prophecies 
upon which our expectations were and are 
based, are calling public attention to these very 
dates. Rev. Josiah Strong, D.D., a man of 
world-wide reputation as a thinker, calls attention 
to the year 1873, as laying the foundation 
of present troubles, saying:— 

"Profound economic changes have attended 
the transition of the world's methods of production 
and distribution which has taken place 
during this century and more especially during 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chaps. 2, 6, 7; 
VOL. I., Chap. 15. 

R1675: page 228 

the past twenty-five or thirty years. It is to 

this source we must look for some of the principle 

causes of popular discontent which has 

been pronounced ever since the commencement 

of the industrial depression which began in 1873 

and affected all classes." 

Even more widely known is Mr. Powderly, 
for years at the head of one of the chief labor 
organizations of this country: he places the 
date of the beginning of present labor disturbances 
as 1874— just following the financial 
strain of 1 873 noted by Mr. Strong. Thus both 
gentlemen and both of their dates agree with 
the Scriptures. Mr. Powderly says: "Go back 
twenty years [to 1874], and you will find that 
the employer and employee had interests in 
common." 

But Mr. Powderly's address, of which the 
above is a part, will all be interesting, and we 
quote it below, from the N.Y. World of July 2. 

MR. POWDERLY'S ADDRESS. 



T. V. Powderly, ex-General Master Workman 
of the Knights of Labor, spoke at Prohibition 
Park, Staten Island, yesterday, on the 
railroad strike and the coal strike of Pennsylvania. 
He carried the strain of total abstinence 



throughout his remarks. 

"Until the laboring men of America," he 
said, "are made to realize that they carry their 
worst enemy with them in the shape of liquor, 
they will not solve the great problems that now 
confront them. 

"You all probably have made up your minds 
that 1 am a very terrible sort of a man. You 
have read of the hundreds of strikes that I have 
ordered, strikes that have paralyzed the business 
of the country, and carried want into tens of 
thousands of homes. Standing here before you 
and before my God, I can say that I never 
ordered a strike in my life. All the strikes that 
I have been credited with ordering have been 
precipitated before I knew anything of them; 
and then I have, as leader, simply made the 
best of what I have always regarded as a very 
bad situation. 

"We are all now intensely interested as to 
the outcome of the strike in the West. Every 
strike that takes place upon a line of railroad is 
a strike against the whole country. Our railroads 

R1676: page 228 

are so closely identified with the life of 
the nation that when you stop any one of these 
arteries through which the life blood of the 
nation's prosperity flows you injure those whom 
you least expect to injure and whom you would 
least desire to harm. 

"There is now a great feeling of unrest in 
this land. Go back twenty years and you will 
find that the employer and the employee had 
interests in common. But machinery, that Juggernaut 
which for good or for ill has crushed 
millions in its march of progress, has made men 
merely subordinates to it. Then, too, money 
has become centralized, and unheard-of fortunes 
are in the hands of individuals. There 
are twenty-four men in America to-day who 
possess more money than there was in the whole 
world when this country had the revolution 
which gave us a name and a flag. 

"Taken altogether the brotherhood of man 
seems to be a long way off. Is it any wonder 
that men who are working for wages that will 
barely sustain life should take desperate measures 
to undo a wrong? There is a cause for all 
these labor demonstrations, whether they be 
right or wrong, and the cause is not of to-day 
or of yesterday, but one that has grown with the 
century. 

"The great national highways, the railways, 
are as much the property of our Government 



to-day as were the old coach roads. There are 
many who believe that these railroad strikes, 
which during the past twelve years have become 
more extensive, will continue, doing more injury 
each time, and that there will be less 
chance of controlling them in the future, until 
we adopt a plan of national co-operation and 
run the railroads under the supervision of the 
United States Government, by and for the 
whole people. 

"This strike to-day is not for wages, not for 
the recognition of any association or organization. 
It is a strike for the control of the arteries 
of trade and industry. 

"If all the railroads could be nationalized, 
then all strikes upon them would be at an end, 
for every man, whether he be an employee of 
the railroad or not, would be an equal owner in 
it and equally interested in the system and 
equally anxious for its well being. 

"These great labor problems will not be 
solved by the laboring men alone, however. 
Men and women not directly engaged in labor 
must act and vote so that they will be a power 
between what are now called the opposing 
forces." 

After demonstrating the ridiculously low 
wages that the anthracite coal miners of Pennsylvania 
have been reduced to, Mr. Powderly 
said: "Place yourselves in their places. Ask 
yourselves whether you would go down into the 
mines every day to slave and toil for the purpose 
of supplying others with coal, when by 
your labor you could not supply your own 
household with the common necessities of life. 

R1676: page 229 

"The day will come when these coal deposits, 
too, will be owned by the Government that 
represents the people, who must have the coal. 

"Do you believe that God intended that six 
men sitting here in New York should dictate as 
to whether all the people should or should not 
have coal— whether they should be kept warm 
or cold; whether they should have their meat 
cooked or raw: by fixing prices to suit themselves? 
If I thought so, I would be a rank infidel. 

"This may sound like Socialism. Well, 
there are Socialists, and there are men who 
think they are Socialists. I believe that at 
heart most of the people are Socialists to-day, 
for any man who believes that the social conditions 
need improvement is a Socialist." 

A SOCIAL REVOLUTION. 



All speak of the present world-wide troubles 
as "strikes;" but this name is not appropriate 
to present disturbances. Strikes are revolts 
against employers, because of real or fancied 
grievances, or for better pay, shorter hours, etc.; 
but recent uprisings such as that of the dock-men 
and coal-miners in England, a year ago, 
the recent general combination of coal-miners 
throughout the bituminous coal regions of the 
United States, and the present uprising of railway 
employees which is disturbing the comfort 
and welfare of millions, are not strikes,— 
they are more, they are incipient revolutions. 
They do not express dissatisfaction with employers 
or wages; for between the employers 
and the so-called striking employees in many 
instances there is respect, if not friendship;— 
but they do represent a rebellion against the 
present social system. They are "sympathy 
strikes," the employees often declaring that they 
have no grievances, but want to show sympathy 
with others whom they believe have grievances. 

Laborers, mechanics and employees in general 
are beginning to realize what we pointed out 
twenty years ago (but what was then scoffed at), 
that machinery and invention, with the natural 
increase of the human family, would soon [under 
present social and financial arrangements] 
show an over-supply of humanity, because the 
power of profitable employment would be centralized 
in the hands of the few, who, operating 
under the general law of self-interest, would 
always employ the cheapest competent service; 
and thus the masses of humanity, being thrown 
into competition for the necessities of life, would 
soon become the slaves of the few— their very 
living necessities depending upon the charity of 
their employers in providing work. This is 
what we see in many parts of the old world;— 
e.g., millions in China and India barely subsisting 
upon a wage of four cents per day. 

This is the meaning of the "sympathy strikes:" 
the masses are realizing that their cause is one, 
and that if something be not done to alter the 
present social condition and its tendencies, 
they will become the chattel slaves of corporate 
wealth. They feel that what is done must be 
done soon, too; because each year the pinch 
becomes tighter and they fear that the time may 
come when they as a class will be too poor to 
strike or to offer any resistance to oppression; 
for already they feel as poor, with a wage of 
one dollar a day, as the East Indiaman does with 



four cents per day. 

Can we wonder, then, at "sympathy strikes," 
no matter how unreasonable they may appear 
on the surface? Surely not: to those engaged 
it seems to be a question of life or death, socially. 
To them the future looks not only dark, 
but black, and without a ray of hope except 
through the methods now being pursued. And 
others, in other departments of life, equally 
hopeless, are only restrained from joining a 
general revolution by the well-grounded fear 
that the results would be worse than the present 
condition, and by the undefined and baseless 
hope that somehow matters will right themselves. 
Surely such conditions call for sympathy 
on all sides. And the people of God, 
who have gained the good hope of the Gospel 
of God's Word, can sympathize heartily with 
these hopeless ones, and should point them to the 
only real remedy, the Kingdom of God, and earnestly 
continue to pray, "Thy Kingdom come." 

And then can we not also sympathize with 
the rich and those who employ labor? Surely 
this is their day of trouble in an especial degree, 
as said the Prophet and the Apostle. 
(Zeph. 1:14-18; Jas. 5:1-6.) Present conditions 
are not, as is sometimes claimed, the result 
of special legislation secured in their favor, but 
the result of increased knowledge, and with it, 
increased ambition. (Dan. 12:4.) The case is 
like that of an outgrown shoe: once it was a 
comfortable fit and a desirable shoe; but now 
it pinches;— not because the shoe has grown 
narrower and shorter, but because the foot has 
grown larger. So the metes and bounds of the 
present social order, that once were easy and 
favorable, now pinch;— not because they are being 
contracted, for the reverse is the case: they 
are being stretched in every direction. They 
can never again prove easy, however, but will 
prove more and more distressing, because the 
general increase of knowledge daily increases 
the desires and discontents of the masses. 

Evidently the rich men are not to be blamed 
for this, even though they be blameworthy for 
not recognizing the changed conditions and 
adapting themselves thereto. Indeed, only millionaires 

R1676: page 230 

could do anything out of the current 

of social and financial custom. Others are 

powerless: the average mine-operator, storekeeper, 

and manufacturer is so beset with competition 

and with maturing debts that even an 

attempt to change from the rut of present custom 



would mean financial suicide— the wreck 
of his own business and that of others more or 
less dependent upon its prosperity. Indeed, we 
may safely say that the majority of this influential 
class of busy brain- workers recognize the 
situation and would rejoice if they could see 
any feasible method of bringing about a moderate 
change. And yet in times of strikes and 
riots, when their business is most disturbed, and 
when they feel themselves close to the brink of 
financial ruin, these men cannot call out for 
public sympathy as can the laborers and strikers; 
they cannot tell their distress, because to 
do so would be to spoil their credit and only 
hasten their ruin. And these men also deserve the 
sympathy of all who "look not every man upon 
his own things [troubles and interests], but 
also upon the things of others."— Phil. 2:4. 

But, as selfishness is the basis of the present 
social system, so love must be the basis of the 
new and better order; and that radical change 
can only come about by the sound conversion 
of the majority of the people to God and his 
plan (which is not supposable under present 
conditions), or the interposition of divine power 
and law,— the very thing which the Scriptures 
predict. What can we advise? To all the 
"brethren" we say, "Have patience, brethren;" 
"avenge not yourselves;" they that take to the 
sword will suffer therefrom the more themselves. 

R1677: page 230 

Trust in the Lord, wait patiently for him, and 
he will bring to pass in his due time and way 
(the best time and way) all the gracious promises 
of his Word— including the blessing of all 
the families of earth. 

We see the various inequalities and wrongs 
of the present system of society more clearly 
than others, because we see them from the 
standpoint of the Lord's Word; but we can 
see also that, if it were within our power to suddenly 
revolutionize matters, that would be undesirable: 
it would produce a condition far worse 
than the present. Far better the present social 
system than none; and far better, while the present 
system continues, that the power remain in 
the hands of men of judgment and moderation 
than that the lever of power be suddenly transferred 
into the hands of the rash and inexperienced 
masses, unused to weighty responsibilities, 
and mere novices and experimenters upon all 
questions, social and financial. A thousand 
times better is a social system in the hands of 
education and experience, even though selfish, 



than no social system, or an experimental one 
in the hands of novices equally selfish, but not 
equally moderate. We much prefer then to 
stay as long as we can where we are than to 
change to any other arrangement that men can 
originate, or assist in any way to precipitate the 
trouble which sooner or later must inevitably 
involve all nations and all individuals. 

Better, far better, wait on the Lord,— wait 
until his time for establishing his Kingdom and 
have it come about in his way. He will eventually 
restrain the forces of evil and selfishness 
in both rich and poor and bring in equity and 
everlasting righteousness. 

So, then, although we know that the revolution 
and anarchy and trouble are surely coming, 
let us, "brethren" of Christ, do nothing to 
promote or hasten it. Let our advice be to the 
contrary, to any of our friends who seek our 
counsel. Especially let us improve the opportunity 
for pointing out to them the true and 
only remedy for present distress— Christ's Kingdom 
and its new social order under the law of 
Love. And, to all who have ears to hear, preach 
Christ the Redeemer, soon, as the Great Physician, 
to be the Restorer of all who cheerfully 
obey him. Point him out as now our Savior, 
your Savior. Tell them of the joy and peace 
and blessing which he gives and which he 
promises shall abide with us in every condition. 
Tell them that it is for this reason that "We 
will not fear though the earth [society] be removed; 
though the mountains [governments] 
be removed and carried into the midst of the 
sea [the ungovernable masses]; though the waters 
[the people] thereof roar and be troubled; 
though the mountains [governments] shake with 
the swellings [riots, tumults, etc.] thereof." 

And if they become interested and willing, 
lead them to the Lamb of God and the streams 
of truth that make glad the true people of God, 
—and if they be converted to God, seal them 
in the forehead (mind, intellect) with the wonderful 
present truth with which God has caused 
us to be sealed.— Rev. 7:3. 

Remember that now is the time to be active 
co-workers with God in doing this sealing work, 
and that the disturbing winds are being held 
back until the sealing work is done. Therefore, 
when the present disturbances pass away and 
another season of comparative calm follows, 
continue earnest and zealous in the sealing work, 
knowing that the time is short and that "the 
night [the darker period] cometh when no man 
can work." We must labor while it is called 
day, and cannot hope for a more favorable opportunity 



than the present. "Be thou faithful 

unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life," 

is the promise. 



R1677: page 231 

"ANGELS WHICH KEPT NOT THEIR FIRST ESTATE." 



"The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they 
were fair; and they took them wives of all which they 
chose.... And they bare children to them; the 
same became mighty men, which were of old, 
men of renown."— Gen. 6:2,4. 

THE Scriptures not only point us to the future 

age and call the spiritual government 

of Christ which shall then exist a "new heavens," 

and earthly society and institutions under 

it a "new earth," but the present spiritual rulership 

(under Satan, "the prince of this world"), 

with the earthly institutions under it, is termed 

"the present evil world," dispensation or epoch.* 

Moreover, we are informed that the present 

dominion of evil has not always existed, but 

that it was preceded by a still different dispensation 

or epoch, spoken of as "the world that 

was before the flood," which also had a heavens, 

or spiritual ruling power, and an earth, or condition 

of men subject to that spiritual dominion. 

The three worlds mentioned by Peter (2 Pet. 3:6,7,13) 
designate these three great epochs 
of time. In each, God's plan with reference 
to men has a distinct and separate outline, 
yet each is but a part of the one great 
plan which, when complete, will exhibit the 
divine wisdom, justice, love and power, to the 
wonder and admiration of all his creatures. 

Since that first "world" (heavens and earth, 
or that order of things) passed away at the time 
of the flood, it follows that it must have been 
a different order from the present, and hence 
that the prince of this present evil world was 
not the prince of that order which preceded this 
—the dispensation before the flood— however 
widely his influence was then exerted and felt. 

Several Scriptures throw light on God's dealings 
during that first dispensation, and give 
clearer insight into his plan as a whole. The 
thought suggested by these is, that the first 
world (the dispensation before the flood) was 
under the supervision and special ministration 
of the angels; who were permitted to do what 



they could and desired to do to recover and rule 
the fallen race, which, because of sin, needed 
a government other than its own. 

That angels were the rulers of that epoch is 
not only indicated by all references to that 
period, but may be reasonably inferred from the 
Apostle's remark when contrasting the present 
dispensation with the past and the future. He 
endeavors to show both the righteousness and 
the enduring character of the future rulership 
of the world, saying, "The world to come hath 
he not put in subjection to the angels." No, 
it is put under the control of our Lord Jesus 
and his joint-heirs, and hence it shall not only 
be more righteous than the present rule of 
Satan, but it shall be more successful than was 
the previous rule by the angels.— Heb. 2:2,5. 

In their original estate all the angels, it seems, 
possessed the ability to appear in earthly forms. 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., Chapter iv. 

R1678: page 231 

Thus Satan appeared to Eve as a serpent, or acting 
through a serpent. Other angels frequently appeared 
as men, thus performing their ministry, appearing 
or disappearing, as the work demanded. 

It was at this time, it seems, that the fall of 
some of the angels occurred. It is a common 
supposition, though we think without foundation, 
that the fall of Satan's angels occurred 
before man's creation. We are told that Satan 
was a murderer (man-killer) from the beginning. 
(John 8:44.) Certainly not the beginning 
of his own existence, for every creation 
coming from God's hand is perfect; nor can 
we think any other beginning referred to than 
man's beginning, in Eden. But, so far as we 
are informed, he was then alone and had no 
followers or angels. 

The ambition of Satan, one of the mighty 
angels, to become a ruler seems to have developed 
as he beheld the first human pair with 
their procreative powers, and the grand possibilities 
of an extended dominion through their 
posterity. He probably reasoned that, if he 
could obtain the control of this man, he would 
have the dominion over all his offspring, and be 
in power and influence above others— a rival of 
Jehovah himself; and his growing ambition said, 
"I will be like the Most High."-Isa. 14:14. 

Successful in contaminating the stream at its 
source, Satan gained a great influence over the 



race; but his power over them was limited because 
of the competition of the great company 
of angels, who, as guardians, instructed and 
ruled mankind for a time in harmony with the 
will of God. But man's corruption was contagious, 
and some of these angelic rulers soon fell 
victims to the plague: left their own habitation, 
or condition as spiritual beings, keeping not 
their first or original estate. They misused the 
powers which they possessed, of assuming a human 
form, and became of a reprobate and licentious 
mind, copying after degenerate man, 
and started a new race of men in the world, as 
the above text (Gen. 6:2-4) affirms. 

This Scripture is applied by some to two 
classes of men— one class, more righteous than 
the other, called "sons of God." But such a 
position is untenable; for it is not a sin for one 

R1678: page 232 

man to take for a wife another man's daughter. 
Marriage among men is never in the Scriptures 
condemned as sinful. On the contrary, it was 
ordained of God, and has always had his sanction. 
(Gen. 2:24; Heb. 13:4.) Our Lord attested 
his approval by his presence at the marriage in 
Cana. (John 2:1-11.) Neither is the propagation 
of the race, under proper conditions, 
condemned as sinful. God commanded it, that 
the earth might be filled with a race of beings 
generated from one pair, and in order that the 
redemption of the race might be secured by the 
obedience and sacrifice of one— Christ. (Gen. 1 :28; 
Rom. 5:19.) However, those to whom 
the Lord has granted a knowledge of his truth 
sometimes forego marriage, as they deny themselves 
many other earthly rights and privileges 
"for the Kingdom of Heaven's sake" (Matt. 19:12), 
if they consider that thereby a more 
efficient service may be rendered to the Lord.* 

Again, if it were merely a union of two classes 
of the same race, why should the offspring be 
specially called "men of renown?" If the 
righteous and the wicked marry to-day, are their 
children therefore giants or mightier or more 
renowned men? 

Through the deterioration of several hundred 
years, mankind had lost much of its original 
vigor and perfection of mind and body; but 
with the angels it was different. Their powers 
were still perfect and unimpaired; hence it is 
clear that their children would partake of that 
vitality and much more resemble the first perfect 
man than those around them, among whom 
they would be giants both in physical and mental 



strength. 

Those angels which kept not their first condition, 
but sought the level of sinful men, and 
left their own habitation, or spiritual condition, 
God placed in age-lasting chains. That is, 
God restrained or limited their powers, taking 
from them the power and privilege of appearing 
in an earthly form, human or other. Hence, 
though we know that they did thus appear before 
the flood, there is not one instance recorded 
in which they have been able to free themselves 
from this restraint or chain since. On 
the contrary, the angels who left not their first 
estate are not so restrained, and have appeared 
frequently as men, as a flame of fire, as a pillar 
of cloud, etc., as recorded in both the Old and 
New Testament Scriptures. 

Having become depraved in their tastes, and 
being given over to a reprobate mind, and debarred 
from all association with God and his 
works and plan, these fallen angels have no 
longer any pleasure in things on the spiritual 
plane, but crave association with depraved mankind 
and a participation with men in sin. How 
wise and kind the Almighty hand which has restrained 
their power and influence over men, by 
preventing their personal intercourse! Now, 
they may indeed enter and act through any who 
invite their companionship, as spirit mediums, 
but no more can they do. Thus far shalt thou 
go, saith the Almighty, but no further. This 
is the explanation of what is known as Spiritism. 

Some of this class, possessed by devils, our 
Lord and his disciples met in their ministry. 
Out of one he cast a legion of devils. (Mark 5:1-15.) 
Anxious in some manner to become associated 
with humanity, yet unable to assume 
human form because restrained, when they found 
a man willing to have such company, a legion 
crowded into him, thereby making him a maniac. 
Even when they perceived that the Lord 
would release the man from their possession, 
they in despair requested as a favor that they 
might be permitted to inhabit and use the bodies 
of a herd of swine near by. But the swine were 
crazed thereby, and madly rushed into the sea. 

Jude (6,7) gives conclusive evidence on the 
subject, and clearly shows the nature of the sin 
for which the fallen angels were condemned and 
restrained, when, after mentioning the angels 
who sinned, he says, "Even as Sodom and 
Gomorrah,... IN LIKE MANNER giving themselves 
over to fornication and going after strange 
flesh." That God prohibits any mixture or 
blending of natures, and designs that each should 
keep its own original or first estate is clearly 



taught by this passage and also by Lev. 18:23; 
20: 15,16. And that our race as it exists to-day, 
coming through Noah, is purely Adamic 
stock, and contains no mixture, is shown by the 
expression— "These are the generations of Noah: 
Noah was a just man and perfect in his 
generation,"— i.e., not contaminated in the 
manner before described.— Gen. 6:9. 

Glancing back, then, we see the first epoch 
under angelic control, the inability of those 
angels to lift man out of his fallen condition, 
and the debasing influence of man's continued 
degradation upon some of the angels. The 
angels were utterly unable to accomplish the 
great work of man's recovery. Doubtless they 
were anxious to do it, for they sang and shouted 
for joy at his creation. God let them try it, 
and it was doubtless part of their trial and discipline, 
but they failed. Some joined the ranks 
of evil, while the rest stood by powerless to arrest 
the terrible course of sin. Later we find the 
good angels still interested, desiring to look into 
the plan which God has since been working 
out, and ever ready to do his bidding in our 
service. (1 Pet. 1:12.) Thus was proven to 



*See issue of July '93— "Man and Woman in God's 
Order." 

R1678: page 233 

both men and angels the futility of angelic 
power to save men. 

In the beginning of "this present evil world," 
notwithstanding Noah's endeavor to serve God 
and to teach his posterity to follow his example, 
and the exhibition of God's judgment in the 
deluge, the tendency was still downward; and 
soon the wickedness of Sodom brought its destruction. 
Mankind were bent on an evil course, 
and God permitted them to take it. Then the 
ministration of angels, except to the few of 
God's children, was withdrawn; and now, instead 
of sending heavenly messengers to declare 
to us his will, he has given us his Word, "that 
the man of God may be thoroughly furnished 
[thereby] unto all good works."— 2 Tim. 3:16,17. 

Ever since the fall, God's plan has been 
gradually and quietly developing, and in due 
time will bear abundant fruit unto eternal life; 
and he has now demonstrated to all his creatures 
that his plan is the only one which could 
accomplish the great work. It selects and tests 
first of all the "little flock," the Royal Priesthood, 



and then reaches out to lift up and restore 

all who will accept life upon God's conditions. 

THE SPIRITS IN PRISON. 



"Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the 
unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death 
in the flesh but quickened in the spirit. By which also [in 
addition to this work done for us] he preached to the 
spirits in prison; which sometime [before] were disobedient, 
when once the long-suffering of God waited in the 
days of Noah."-- 1 Pet. 3:18-20. See Diaglott, foot note. 

A satisfactory interpretation of this Scripture 
has long been sought, and but few have 
found a solution perfectly consistent and satisfying 
even to themselves. But in view of the 
truth gleaned from the suggestions of the preceding 
article, the above statements of the 
Apostle Peter become luminous. 

The two views of this passage commonly held 
we state first, and then give our present view of it. 

The most common view is, that during the 
time that Jesus was entombed he was off on a 
missionary tour preaching to the antediluvian 
sinners who were suffering torture in a supposed 
place called hell. 

If its advocates would consider it, they would 
find that their interpretation favors a view of 
future probation for the antediluvians, a thing 
which they strenuously oppose. For if Christ 
preached to them it must have been for some 
purpose. Surely it was not merely to mock and 
deride them. Consequently he must have 
preached a message of hope— a part of his 
blessed "good tidings of great joy." And if 
there is a future for the antediluvians, why not 
accept our position as correct— that in Christ 

R1679: page 233 

"all families of the earth shall be blessed?" 

This is the objection which consistency would 
urge against this view, from the standpoint of 
those who hold it. But if we view it from the 
Scriptural standpoint, and with the correct idea 
of death and "hell," we must reason that if 
Jesus were really dead during those three days, 
as the Apostles declare, then he could do no 
preaching; for "the dead know not anything" 
(Eccl. 9:5), and "there is no work, nor device, 
nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave." 
(Eccl. 9:10.) Second, If Jesus had been an 
exception to the rule, and could have preached, 
the antediluvians could not have heard; for 



certainly they have no wisdom, nor knowledge, 
in the grave. Hence this view is found generally 
unsatisfactory and as well as unscriptural.* 

The second view, and the one which seemed 
most reasonable to us until the considerations 
of the preceding article threw light upon this 
scripture also, is to refer the preaching to that 
which Noah did under the direction of the 
Spirit of God to the antediluvians, who at this 
time were imprisoned in death. The objection 
to this view is, that the preaching was not to 
men, nor to the spirits of men, but to spirits, 
spirit beings; and the preaching was not done 
by Noah, nor by the Spirit of God, nor before 
the flood, but after they had been chained,— 
by the death and resurrection of our Lord. 

It seems very clear, therefore, that the spirits 
are those spirit beings who were disobedient 
during the days of Noah, and whom God therefore 
imprisoned or restrained in some of their 
former liberties and privileges, even "those 
angels who kept not their own principality, but 
left their own habitation [or normal condition]. 
He has kept them in perpetual chains [restraints], 
under thick darkness, for the judgment of the 
great day."— Jude 6, Diaglott. 

This interpretation seems to meet all the circumstances 
of the case thus far. Now we inquire, 
In what way could our Lord preach to 
those spirits during the time he was dead? We 
answer that it is not so stated. It was by the 
facts that he preached, as we sometimes say that 
"actions speak louder than words." It was by 
his sufferings, death and resurrection that the 
preaching was done. Thus, as Jesus went from 
step to step in his work, his course was preaching 
a good sermon to those angels who once 
had been placed in control of man, and had 
themselves fallen, instead of lifting up mankind. 
In Jesus they saw exemplified obedience even 
unto death, and its reward— resurrection to 
spiritual being of the divine nature. Such was 
the great text; and the lesson from it is stated 



*For a full treatment of the subject of "hell," future 
punishment, etc., see our issue of Feb. 1-15, '93. Concerning 
"immortality" see issue of Apr. 15, '94. 

R1679: page 234 

by the Apostle (1 Pet. 3:22), viz., that Jesus 
was now highly exalted and given a name (title) 
above every name, that he was "gone into 
heaven, and is at the right hand of God [the 



position of highest favor]; angels and authorities 
and powers being made subject to him." 
They knew Jesus before he left the glory of the 
heavenly condition and became a man. They 
knew the object of his self-sacrifice as a man. 
They saw him obedient even unto death, and 
then that his high exaltation came as a reward. 
(Phil. 2:9.) They must have felt keenly their 
loss through disobedience, being cut off from 
communion with God, restrained as unworthy 
of former liberty and communion with the purer 
minded of mankind, and their own future an 
unsolved mystery. We can but imagine that 
sorrow and chagrin filled their hearts, as they 
contrasted their course of disobedience and its 
results with our Lord's obedient course and its 
grand results. We can fancy at least some of 
them saying, Would that we had realized before, 
as fully as we now do, the wide contrast 
between the results of obedience and disobedience. 
Would that we might have another trial: 
with our increased knowledge, our course would 
be very different. 

A clear distinction should be borne in mind, 
as between Satan and these angels. Satan evidently 
sinned against great light, so that infinite 
wisdom finds no place to do more for him, 
and his ultimate destruction is clearly predicted. 
-Heb. 2:14. 

But did not the Lord, in Matt. 25:41, declare 
eternal torment to be the punishment awaiting 
these fallen spirit beings? No: this scripture 
cannot be used as an argument against a hope 
for a probation for the imprisoned spirits; for 
though, by force of circumstances and restraint 
from any other service, they are now Satan's 
angels— messengers or servants—yet they may 
not always continue such, if an opportunity 
be granted them to return to God's service 
and be angels of God. This passage relates to 
the "lake of fire" or destruction (Rev. 20: 10),* 
into which, at the close of the Millennial 
age, all are to be cast, who are out of harmony 
with God. Satan will be of those cast into 
that everlasting destruction, and with him all 
who do unrighteousness or have pleasure therein 
—all of whom, spirits or men, are reckoned 
to be on his side, his angels or messengers. 
All evil-doers shall be cut off from life. To 
cut off such, and such only, was God's plan from 
the beginning. The wilfully wicked and not 
the merely ignorant, misled, blinded or deceived 
are meant when it is said, "All the wicked will 
God destroy." 



*See our issue of Feb. '93. 
THE PROBATION OF ANGELS. 



Will those "spirits in prison," "those angels 
which kept not their first estate," and who received 
such a powerful lesson from the ministry, 
death and resurrection of our Lord, ever have 
an opportunity to profit by those lessons? will 
they ever have an opportunity to repent of their 
sin, to leave Satan's service and to return to 
loyalty to God? 

If at first we thought the Scriptures were 
silent on the subject, we have found that to be 
a mistake; and when God speaks we may 
reasonably conclude there is something profitable 
for us to hear. Hence, let us give ear that 
we may learn whatever our Father deems expedient 
to communicate. 

Jude (verse 6) informs us that those angels 
which committed fornication and went after 
strange flesh, "also," "in like manner" to the 
Sodomites (verse 7), God is keeping under restraint 
(as a penalty or punishment) "unto the 
judgment of the great day." The "great day" 
is the Millennial Day, and mankind is also 
waiting for this judgment (krisis— trial). The 
Apostle Peter's testimony is in harmony (2 Pet. 2:4); 
and St. Paul settles the matter that these 
fallen and now imprisoned spirit beings, as well 
as mankind, will have a trial under the reign 
of Christ— the Church, the Kingdom of God 
in exalted power. Speaking of the impropriety 
of the saints appealing to earthly courts of justice 
for adjustment of their difficulties, he says, 
"Do you not know that the saints shall judge 
the world?. ..Know ye not that we shall 
judge angels?" (1 Cor. 6:1-4.) The Greek 
word here rendered "judge," is krino, of the 
same root as krisis, rendered "judgment" in 
Jude 7, and signifies, to govern, to test, as to 
mete out to each individual blessings or stripes, 
according to the merit of his course when 
brought fully into the light of truth, and under 
all the blessings of the reign of Christ. Thus 
it is seen that it will be part of the work of the 
Christ to rule over and direct both human and 
angelic sinners— "to judge the world" of fallen 
men, now restrained in death, from which 
they have been redeemed, and also fallen spirits, 
restrained alive until this judgment or trial 
of the Great Millennial Day, when the Church under 
the headship of her Lord shall try their cause 



also, giving everlasting life and favor to those who 
shall then prove themselves worthy of it, and 
everlasting destruction to those unworthy. 

Besides, we find frequent references to a work 
Christ is to do in subjecting heavenly or spiritual, 
as well as human powers, when the Church 
has been selected and the work of judging 
and blessing is commenced. For instance, we 

R1679: page 235 

read (Eph. 1:10), "In the dispensation of the 
fulness of times, to re-establish [under God's 
dominion and law] all things in Christ [the 
disordered things] that are in heaven [spiritual] 
and on earth [human] in him."— Douay translation. 
Again, "In him it hath well pleased 
the Father that all fulness should dwell, and 
through him to reconcile all things unto himself, 
making peace by the blood of his cross, 
both as to the things on earth, and the things 
in heaven"— earthly and spiritual transgressors. 
-Col. l:20.-Douay. 

In Eph. 3:8-10, it is shown that the length 
and breadth of God's redemptive plan has been 
hidden by God until the Gospel age, when the 
apostles were commissioned to declare to men 
the conditions upon which they might become 
sharers with Christ in the execution of God's 
loving plans; and the intent is, ultimately, to 
have all the heavenly or spiritual beings know, 
through the instrumentality of the Church, the 
boundless wealth that is in God's great gift — 
His Son— and the different methods and steps his 
wisdom marked out for all his creatures. We quote 
the passage from the Diaglott translation:— 

"To me, the very lowest of the saints, was 
this favor given— to announce among nations 
the glad tidings— the boundless wealth of the 
Anointed One: even to enlighten all as to 
what is the [method of] administration [or 
operation] of that secret [plan] which has 
been concealed from the ages by that God who 
created all things; in order that now [henceforth] 
may be made known to governments 
and the authorities in the heavenlies, through 
[the instrumentality of] the congregation [the 
Church] the much diversified wisdom of God, 
according to a plan of the ages," "which he 
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord." 

It would appear, then, that God's bountiful 
plan and diversified wisdom contains something 
of interest to the angels, and, if of interest to 
any, of special interest to those confined or 
restrained, and awaiting a trial in the judgment 
of the great day. They see the saints and seek 



to look into things revealed by the Spirit and 
Word to these; but in no other way can they 
learn of their future, or of what provision has 
been made for them in the boundless wealth 
and diversified wisdom of God, because it is to 
be "made known" "through the Church." 

These condemned angels have been learning 
much since the first text and sermon;— not only 
the lesson of our Lord's obedience and exaltation 
(1 Pet. 3:18-20; 1 Tim. 3:16), but also of 
his followers; for we read that "we are made a 
spectacle both to angels and to men." (1 Cor. 4:9 
—Diaglott.) The spectacle and lesson are 
to both men and angels for the reason that both 
men and angels will shortly be judged by the 
Church, and blessed by it, if found obedient 
and worthy of life. When the testimony in 
due time is given, all things, both in heaven 
(the spiritual condition) and on earth (the human), 
shall bow to Jehovah's Anointed and 
confess him their Lord and Ruler; and those 
who refuse obedience to his righteous authority 
shall be cut off, as unworthy of life.— Isa. 45:23; 
Rom. 14:11; Acts 3:23. 

The angels that sinned in the days of Noah 
have had a bitter experience since: no doubt 

R1680: page 235 

death would have been preferable in many respects. 

Cut off from association with good 

angels, and placed in companionship of each 

other and Satan, without God and having no 

hope, they must have had a terrible experience 

with sin's demoralizing effects, while their observation 

of mankind, dying on account of sin, 

would lead them to surmise that death might 

ultimately be their portion also. That such 

was the fear of these unclean spirits is evidenced 

by the protest of one whom the Lord cast out: 

"Art thou come to destroy us?" (Mark 1:24; 

Luke 4:34; Matt. 8:29.) But this no more 

proves that their suppositions were correct, than 

the belief of millions of professed Christians, 

that nine-tenths of humanity will be everlastingly 

tormented, proves that to be so. The 

fact is, we find that Satan, who taught men 

thus to blaspheme God's character through misrepresentation 

of his plan, was the master and 

chief over these cast-down spirits; and evidently 

he had misrepresented Jehovah's plan to the 

imprisoned spirits as he has to men. He is the 

father of lies. 

Neither can we forget their respectful conduct 
toward our Lord and his apostles, and the 
message they delivered; far more respectful indeed 



than that of the strictest sect of the Jewish 
Church. While the latter scoffed and said, "Is 
not this Jesus, the son of Joseph?" (John 6:42), 
the former exclaimed, "Thou art the Son 
of God." (Mark 3:11.) While the former said, 
"Thou hast a devil and art mad," the latter 
said, "I know thee who thou art, the holy one 
ofGod."-Mark 1:24. 

The "legion," which had crazed the Gadarene, 
worshiped him, acknowledging him to be 
"Son of the Most High God. "--Mark 5:6,7. 

While they respected the true, they opposed 
the false, saying to some who pretended to exercise 
power— "Jesus I know, and Paul I know, 
but who are ye? And the man in whom the 
evil spirit was, leaped on them and overcame 
them."-Acts 19:15. 

The Jews and Gentiles beat and stoned the 
messengers of God, when they came among 
them with the glad tidings of salvation; but 

R1680: page 236 

some of these fallen angels seemed desirous of 
spreading the glad tidings. One followed the 
apostles, saying, "These men are the servants 
of the Most High God, which show unto us [angels 
and men] the way of salvation."— Acts 16:17. 

THE BASIS OF THEIR HOPE. 



But an important question now arises. The 
Scriptures show us that man's hope centers in 
the fact that a ransom-price was given for our 
sins; but what is the basis of hope for these 
fallen angels? On what ground can they have 
a trial and a hope of everlasting life? Did our 
Lord die for them? 

We are not so informed: The ransom-sacrifice 
was human, a ransom for men. "Verily," 
says Paul, "he took not on him the nature of 
angels," etc. (Heb. 2:16.) Furthermore, they 
were not under condemnation to death, and 
hence have never lost their life in any measure, 
and need no ransom from death. It was because 
the sentence of death had passed upon men that 
a ransom was necessary in order that we might 
regain life. Those angels which kept not their 
first estate were condemned, not to death, but 
to restraint and confinement, until a day of 
trial, when God will judge both men and angels 
in righteousness by that man whom he hath 
ordained. (Acts 17:31.) They are therefore 
undergoing their penalty as truly as man is suffering 



his, though the penalties be very different 
in kind,— "according to the much diversified 
wisdom of God." 

And yet they had a great interest in our 
Lord's sacrifice; for though they were not being 
redeemed, bought by the precious blood, as 
was man, and did not need to be, not being 
under condemnation to death, yet their hope 
centered in the power which he should gain 
through his exaltation to the divine nature, in 
consequence of his obedience even unto death, 
to judge and restore them in due time. 

Again, if we have a correct view of the matter, 
that these angels had been tempted and seduced 
by evil men, which had become very 
great (Gen. 6:5), we may see how the reconciliation 
accomplished by the blood of the cross 
for man could apply to and cancel both direct 
and indirect guilt, if it resulted from the one 
man's disobedience and was not consented 
to by the will of the sinner. So that now we 
are assured in the words of the Apostle, "It 
pleased the Father,. ..having made peace 
[propitiation— satisfaction] through the blood 
of his cross, by him to reconcile unto himself 
all things [out of harmony];. ..whether 
things in earth, or things in heaven."— 
Col. 1:20. 

GOD'S COMPREHENSIVE LAW. 



God's wisdom, love and justice decide on 
what is best, and that decision is his will or 
law. But, strictly speaking, only so much of 
God's will as he expresses to his creatures is 
law to them. Hence, while his laws never conflict, 
they may be more or less fully expressed 
on one occasion than on another. 

All of God's intelligent creatures are under 
instruction, being taught those laws which his 
infinite love, wisdom and justice have enacted 
for the well-being of all. Though created perfect, 
each in his plane of being, yet they all lack 
that scope of knowledge and wisdom which belongs 
in full measure to the divine nature only. 
They all lack experience; hence, in giving them 
instruction in the wisdom and propriety of his 
laws, it has pleased Jehovah to make an illustration 
which would manifest and practically exemplify 
his own character and prove to his creatures 
the wisdom and righteousness of his laws. 

It is evident that the spirit of his law is not 
to take advantage of some transgressive slip, occasioned 
by lack of experience on the part of 



his creatures, but that he intends it to apply to 

the thoughts and intents of the hearts. That 

this is the real intent of God, we shall see illustrated 

by his dealings with those who have from 

lack of knowledge become sinners. 

His law in full, as we now see it in the light 
of his Word, is, "Thou shalt love the Lord 
thy God, with all thy heart, mind, soul and 
strength," and "thy neighbor as thyself;" and 
the penalty attached to the slightest deviation 
from that law is, "The soul that sinneth, it 
shall die;"— that no being shall be permitted to 
live, who, when fully informed of God's righteous 
will, and enabled to obey it, shall not conform 
thereto; that all such be cut off from life. 
But this is as it may be seen now. Once it was 
not so clearly expressed, nor so clearly seen. 

To fully exemplify this law, God caused man 
to be used as an illustration before this extreme 
penalty was placed upon the angels. So man 
was placed under the extreme penalty of his 
law— death; God knew that through inexperience 
man would violate that law and come under 
its penalty; but he purposed to make an 
illustration to all his creatures of the exceeding 
sinfulness of sin and its sure consequences, 
while at the same time his love and wisdom so 
marked out the plan, that mankind, the illustration, 
might not suffer loss, but be blessed 
by the lesson as learned. 

Nor should we forget that God's dealing with 
man was perfectly just. He had a right to demand 
perfect obedience from a perfect creature; 
and the fact that he at first did not inflict death 

R1680: page 237 

upon the angels was a favor toward them; even 
as toward man he has displayed his favor also, 
though in a different manner— through a ransom, 
and Savior, and restitution, and future 
trial for life, more favorable than the first, because 
of the knowledge of sin and its effects, 
meanwhile acquired by experience. This was 
a masterly stroke of wise economy on God's 
part; for had the death penalty been pronounced 
on the angels who sinned, a redeemer of their 
own kind would have been necessary for their 
recovery; and not only one, but many— one 
redeemer for each transgressor; for they were 
legion and were individually on trial; and the 
requirement of God's law is, Eye for eye, tooth 
for tooth, life for life. 

Let us briefly view the exhibition of God's 
character as displayed in his dealing toward 
mankind whom he made a spectacle to angels. 



(1 Cor. 4:9.) In so doing, let us guard against 
the common error which judges of God's actions 
exactly as of our own. Let us remember 
that justice, love, wisdom and power, as commonly 
displayed by the fallen race, in dealing 
with each other, and by human parents with 
their children, are far from perfect. In our 
first parents those qualities were perfect: they 
were in the image of Jehovah; but in our experience, 
in consequence of the fall, these qualities 
are constantly at war with each other. 
Sometimes love has a victory over justice, and 
sometimes justice has a victory over love. 

But with Jehovah there can be no conflict; 
and neither ever gains a victory or ascendancy 
over the other. Both are perfect, and work 
only in perfect harmony. 

Before man was created, the Justice, Wisdom, 
Love and Power of God held conference on the 
subject, and devised the plan which has since 
then been developing. The plan was suggested 
by Wisdom and concurred in by the other 
attributes; the arrangement and execution of 
it being left in Wisdom's hands. 

Wisdom designed to have the largest returns 
from the experience of man, and the most valuable 
illustration of God's character to all his 
creatures, on every plane of being. Accordingly 
Wisdom said, Let the man come under the 
control of Justice, Love and Power, separately, 
that the force and operation of each may be the 
more forcibly illustrated. Let Justice first have 
complete control, let men be dealt with by the 
strict law, "Thou shalt not"—. "In the 
day that thou dost. ..dying thou shalt die." 
And it was so. 

Man, inexperienced and unused to self-control 
and liberty, violated the law, and experienced 
the full weight of Justice, as Wisdom had 
foreseen and prepared for. 

The lesson under Justice has been long and 
severe, but the lesson must be thorough, so that 

R1681 : page 237 

it shall never need repeating. Men and angels 
must learn that Justice is relentless, irrevocable 
and unalterable. Then, too, before it could be 
realized that the remedy for man lay only in 
Jehovah and nowhere else, an opportunity was 
offered for the trial of other methods for man's 
recovery. First, the angels were given rulership 
(during the age before the flood), and 
made a miserable failure; for, while man became 
more and more corrupt himself, his evil influence 
led to the fall of some of those who attempted 



his assistance— "those angels which 
kept not their first estate." 

With the deluge that order of affairs passed 
away. Then, under the Law Covenant, given 
to one selected nation, another and different 
opportunity was presented, to prove to man that 
even if God should cancel all enmity, or resentment, 
and receive the world into covenant relations, 
they would require a Restorer, so that 
they could continue in harmony with God, even 
after being forgiven. Hence sacrifices and 
offerings for sin were instituted, and God treated 
that nation as though original sin and guilt 
had been removed, and then placed them under 
laws to prove to them, to us and to all, their inability 
(as degenerate creatures) to keep his law without 
a restitution to perfection— to his likeness. 

Meanwhile Love stood ready to manifest itself 
at the moment Wisdom should give the 
word. Love would have done so at once, but 
for two reasons: First, it could not oppose or 
interfere with the action of Justice in condemning 
man and delivering him over for the execution 
of the prescribed penalty. Second: though 
Love might have acknowledged Justice and approved 
its action by promptly providing a ransom 
(an equivalent price), Wisdom objected 
and did not permit this course at that time, because 
it saw best to make the lesson complete 
and thorough. 

Hence for over four thousand years Love was 
not permitted to manifest itself, and might only 
speak in shadowy sacrifices and ceremonies, 
and more or less obscure promises. But, finally, 
when the right time had come, "in due time," 
"in the fulness of time," Wisdom gave the 
word, and Love began to manifest itself for 
man's relief. The first act was to produce a 
perfect and sinless man to be a suitable "ransom 
for all:" one not under the Adamic curse 
—who would lay down his life for the race, and 
whose sacrifice would meet all the requirements 
of Justice, and therefore be acceptable as a 
ransom and propitiation for man's sins. And 
Love's great exhibition was seen in the gift of 
the grandest and greatest and first of all God's 

R1681 : page 238 

creation, who stooped and became man, to redeem 
men: and "they called his name Jesus." 

"Ah!" says one who judges by his own feelings, 
"Now comes Love's victory over Justice. We 
shall see that God is more loving than severe." 

But not so; God is not more loving than 
severely just: he is perfect in both respects. 



It will be indeed a victory for Love, but not 

over Justice. It will be much grander than that. 

It will prove a victory for both Justice and 

Love; for it will be gained by Love's paying 

the price demanded by Justice— a ransom, "an 

equivalent price." (1 Tim. 2:4-6.) The love 

of God, so long veiled from sight, was manifested 

in the gift of his Son to be our Redeemer 

and Savior. The record is: "Herein is love, 

not that we loved God, but that he loved us 

and sent his Son to be the propitiation [satisfaction 

or appeasement] for our sins." "In this 

was manifested the love of God toward us, because 

that God sent his only begotten Son into 

the world, that we might live through him." 

When Love had ransomed man, and was 
ready to reveal itself by restoring the willing 
and obedient of mankind to perfection and 
harmony with God, Wisdom postponed this on 
the ground that a further development of the 
plan would ultimately enhance Love's glory, 
and perfect the work: that an interlude (the 
Gospel age) must occur in which should be selected 
some from among the redeemed, some 
sharers in Christ's sufferings and reproach, who 
should be counted worthy to share his glory 
and to be his associates in the execution of 
Love's triumph in "the restitution of all things 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets." 

Long and faithfully has Love labored; but 
all her labor will yet be lost, unless in due time 
Wisdom shall commission Power to do its special 
part in the great plan. 

Power thus far has stood in the background, 
doing nothing directly in man's relief, save in 
the resurrection of our Lord, and in the miracles 
which shadowed forth its coming work. 

Now, we are living in the day when Power 
begins to act, not in opposition to Justice, but 
in harmony with Wisdom, Justice and Love. 
Oh, blessed day! The Lamb that was slain and 
who redeemed us by his blood is now invested 
with Power to bless all whom he bought; and 
he is now about taking unto himself his great 
power, and shall reign until he has subdued all 
enemies.— Rev. 20:6; 1 Cor. 15:25. 

God has chosen the plan which most fully 
and grandly exemplifies his unalterable justice, 
and exhibits the exceeding riches of his grace 
—his love; and in the restoration of man ("all 
who come to the Father by him") from destruction, 
from death, to perfection and life, 
will God's power be illustrated far more forcibly 
than even in man's creation. And as men 
and angels come to recognize the full fruition 
of God's plan in the ages to come, will they 



not with one consent exclaim with our brother 
and Apostle Paul, as he caught a glimpse of it: 
"O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom 
and knowledge of God! how unsearchable 
are his judgments, and his ways past finding 
out! For who hath known the mind [plan] of 
the Lord? or who hath been his counsellor? 
...Because out of him, and through him, 
and for him are all things. To him be the 
glory for ever."— Rom. 1 1:33-36. 

R1682: page 238 

THE DIVERSIFIED WISDOM OF GOD. 



"The much diversified wisdom of God" 
(Eph. 3:10— Diaglott) pursued one course with 
reference to the angels, not delivering the latter 
over to justice under the extreme penalty of the 
law, but pronouncing a lesser penalty until they 
should learn of evil and its consequences from 
the "spectacle" furnished them in mankind. 

But the result of Wisdom's course in either 
case is the same. The angels being perfect, 
and having had an example of the extreme penalty 
of the law, will be able to conform to God's 
law when again offered the opportunity, and 
doubtless many of them will be glad to do so. 
Man, who experienced the extreme penalty of 
the law, will also be able to appreciate forever 
good and evil, and, if he will, to choose that 
which is good, while both, in the event of 
non-conformity to God's will and a persistence 
in an evil course, will then be liable to 
the extreme penalty— the Second Death. Those 
counted worthy of everlasting life will then, as 
God does, love righteousness because it is good, 
and hate unrighteousness because it is evil. 

Though the experience of angels might at 
first appear less severe than man's, yet when it 
is remembered that man's dying experience was 
limited to an average of three-score years and 
ten, while the angels who sinned experienced 
over four thousand years of living restraint under 
Satan's rule, it will generally be conceded that 
their experience was not less severe than man's. 

In view of the great work to be accomplished, 
how necessary is the elevation of the Christ 
(Head and body) to the divine nature, since 
his mission is to govern, direct and bring to 
perfection "whosoever will," both of spiritual 
and human beings. And does not the selection 
of this class, made different from both angels 
and men— of the divine nature— illustrate yet 



further the much diversified wisdom of God, 
whereby he is able to work all things according 
to the counsel of his own will? Verily it does! 



page 239 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1681 : page 239 

THE FLIGHT INTO EGYPT. 



III. QUAR., LESSON IV., JULY 22, MATT. 2:13-23. 

Golden Text— "The Lord shall preserve thy going 
out and thy coming in."— Psa. 121:8. 

There are five points in this lesson worthy 
of special notice; viz., (1) The foresight 
and providence of God. His fore-knowledge 
is past our comprehension: the finite 
cannot fathom the depths of the infinite 
mind. But it is our privilege to know the 
comforting fact that Jehovah's knowledge 
and wisdom are superior to all the 
exigencies of his universal empire; and 
that the wrath of man and of all the combined 
powers of darkness cannot in the 
slightest degree frustrate the divine plan. 
The same power that was able to transform 
the spiritual Son of God to the human 
nature was able also to protect him against 
all opposers, from helpless infancy up to 
the appointed time of his sacrifice for the 
world's redemption. 

(2) We note again the ministry of angels 
—"Are they not all ministering spirits sent 
forth to minister for them who shall be heirs 
of salvation?" (Heb. 1:14.) Yes; and gladly 
are they ready for any service.— 1 Pet. 1:12. 

(3) The faith and prompt obedience of 
Joseph and Mary to the warning and counsel 
of the angel of the Lord is notable. They 



did not hesitate nor question, but immediately 

acted upon the command of the Lord; 

and his blessing and protection went with 

them, both in departing for Egypt and in 

returning to Palestine. In seeking to avoid 

the power of the new king Archelaus 

(Herod's son and successor, who even surpassed 

his father in oppression, cruelty, 

egotism and sensuality) and going to Nazareth 

instead of to Bethlehem which was 

near to Jerusalem, Joseph and Mary did not 

disregard the Lord's directions which were 

to go into the land of Israel— in any part 

of which they might settle. 

(4) In the circumstances here recorded 
we see the fulfilment of several prophecies 
—viz., (a) "Out of Egypt have I called my 
Son." This, like many other prophecies, 
was one of double significance, applying 
originally to the exodus of Israel from the 
bondage of Egypt (Hos. 11:1; Exod. 4:22,23), 
and subsequently to the return of the 

infant Son of God from Egypt after Herod 

was dead. (Matt. 2:15.) And on a still larger 

scale Egypt represents the world, and 

Christ and the entire Church of God are the 

called-out promised seed, (b) The circumstances 

which led to the settlement 

in Nazareth thereby led to the fulfilment of 

the prophecy of Matt. 2:23, "He shall be 

called a Nazarene." (c) The slaughter of 

the infants in Bethlehem was also prophetically 

mentioned. See Jer. 31:15; Matt. 2:17,18. 

It should be remembered, however, 

that in these cases the events were not made 

to fit the prophecies; but the prophecies 

were made to foretell the events, and become 

indications of the foreknowledge of God. 

(5) It is also worthy of notice that in protecting 
the infant Redeemer God's course 

did not interfere with the existing order of 
things. Although all power was in his 
hand, he did not strike Herod dead, nor 
overturn nor interfere with his authority and 
power. The time for such radical measures 
had not yet come. The lease of power had 
been granted to the kingdoms of this world 

R1682: page 239 

until the "Times of the Gentiles" should 

be fulfilled; i.e., until A. D. 1915. Consequently, 

they must (according to his plan) 

be permitted to take their own course for 

good or for evil, except in so far as their 

actions would interfere with the divine 



plan. And in such cases God always either 
overrules or prevents them. 

In the case here mentioned God interfered 
only so far as to protect his Son in 
whom the plan of salvation centered. But 
when the appointed time came for the sacrifice 
of that Son for the redemption of the 
world, then the rulers of darkness of this 
world had their way. They were then permitted 
to crucify the Son of God, because 
for this purpose came he into the world— 
to give his life a ransom for many; and because 
his hour was come.— Matt. 20:28; 
John 2:4; 7:6; Luke 22:53. 

The weeping and lamentation for the 
slaughtered infants who did not escape the 
wrath of the king, was but another note of 
the long wail of distress of the groaning 
creation, of which the Lord has not been 
unmindful, but which his far-sighted wisdom 
permits for wise and benevolent ends, 
until "the times of restitution of all things." 

R1682: page 240 

The promise of the Golden Text) has special 
reference to the spiritual life of the 
Lord's consecrated people— spiritual Israel. 
As new creatures they are always safe in 
God's keeping, while they abide in Christ. 

R1682: page 240 

THE YOUTH OF JESUS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON V., JULY 29, LUKE 2:40-52. 

Golden Text— "And Jesus increased in wisdom and 
stature, and in favor with God and man."— Luke 2:52. 

In this incident of the early life of Jesus 
we catch a glimpse of the rapid development 
of perfect humanity. "The [perfect] child 
grew and waxed strong* [physically and 
intellectually], filled with wisdom; and the 
grace of God was upon him." His humble 
birth gave him none of the advantages of 
education or social culture, yet even at the 
age of twelve years all that heard him in 
conversation with the matured and learned 
doctors of the law in the temple were 
astonished at his understanding and answers. 
(Verse 47.) And later, when he 
taught in the synagogues, the astonished 



people said, "Whence hath this man this 

wisdom and these mighty works? Is not 

this the carpenter's son? is not his mother 

Mary? and his brethren. ..and his sisters, 

are they not all with us? Whence 

then hath this man all these things?" (Matt. 13:54-56.) 

"And all... wondered at 

the gracious words that proceeded out his 

mouth." (Luke 4:22.) "And the Jews marvelled 

saying, How knoweth this man letters, 

having never learned?" (John 7:15.) 

And others said, "Never man spake like this 

man."— John 7:46. 

At the tender age of twelve he was intellectually 
more than a match for the mature 
and learned doctors; and he did not assume 
to be a teacher, but with becoming modesty 
he heard and asked questions— questions, 
however, so keen and penetrating as to indicate 
a very superior comprehension of the 
law and the prophets. As a perfect human 
being his mind was active and strong, 
his reasoning powers were astute, his perceptives 
awake to every educating influence 
with which he came in contact, his moral 
perceptions always discarding every thing 
that was evil, and his memory treasuring 
up all that was worthy of a place in his 
mind. Thus he grew and waxed strong and 
was filled with wisdom. 

Joseph and Mary were, of course, unable 
to measure the breadth and capacity of such 
a mind, or to realize that at such an early 
age their child was developed so far beyond 
his years. But, having some appreciation 
of it, they did not give themselves 
special concern as to his whereabouts all 
the time of their stay in Jerusalem. They 
even started home and had gone a day's 
journey supposing that he was with friends 
in the company. Finding their mistake, 
they spent another day returning, and a 
third in searching for him, and finally found 
him in the temple earnestly studying the 
law and the prophets in the midst of the 
learned doctors. 

To their solicitous inquiry as to why he 
had thus dealt with them, his somewhat 
surprised answer was, "How is it that ye 
sought me? wist ye not that I must be 
about my Father's business?" He evidently 
thought they understood him better than 
they did. But "they understood not the 
saying which he spake unto them." (Verses 48-50.) 
They probably had never told him 
of his wonderful origin, and that Joseph 



was only his reputed father. How then 

could he know? thought they. The fact 

was that the mystery of his incarnation was 

incomprehensible to them. They did not 

know of the previous spiritual existence of 

this wonderful Son of God that he was now 

made flesh. They only knew him as the 

promised Seed of Abraham. But he knew; 

for as he grew and developed on the human 

plane of existence, memory carried him 

back to the glory that he had with the Father 

before the world was (John 17:5), so 

that he knew who he was and whence he 

came (John 8:58,14), and that he came to accomplish 

his Father's business. He seemed 

somewhat surprised that Joseph and Mary 

did not more fully comprehend him; but 

since they did not, he meekly conformed to 

their ideas and was subject to them until 

he reached the years generally recognized 

as the years of maturity or manhood. 

"And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature 
and in favor with God and man." 
(Verse 52.) Though the wisdom of twelve 
years surpassed that of the sages among men, 
neither his mind nor his body had yet reached 
full development. And not until he was a 
fully developed man was he suitable to the 
purpose for which he had been called. Not 
until he attained the age of thirty was he 
the full grown man ready for sacrifice.— 
1 Chron. 23:3; Num. 4:3; Heb. 10:5-9. 



*Sinaitic and Vatican MSS. omit the words, "in spirit. 



page 242 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1683 : page 242 

"GO LABOR ON: SPEND AND BE SPENT." 



Two have written that they feel discouraged 
because unable to do labor in the harvest field 
as colporteurs. They seem to feel that if not 
colporteurs they are not overcomers. This is a 
serious mistake; and since others may feel similarly, 
we reply publicly, although we have 
stated the same things in substance in previous 
TOWERS. 

While the colporteur work is one of the best 
means of serving the truth, it is by no means 
the only one. If you have not the needful 
strength for travel, or if you have a large family 
dependent on you for support, or if you have 
not the gifts necessary to success in that work, 
you may know that it is not your work. Then 
look about you, while you pray the Lord to 



show you what you can do—most to his praise, 
most in the service of his truth, most to the 
blessing of his people. 

However humble your talents may be, rest 
assured they will be accepted if presented in 
the name and merit and love of Christ. But be 
assured that you have at least one talent, else 
you would not have been granted an acquaintance 
with the truth. Be assured, too, that 
whatever the number of your talents, they 
must be used— must not be buried in pleasure or 
business or work of an earthly, selfish sort. If 
you do not use your talents (whatever they may 
be), it will be a proof of your lack of love, and 
hence a proof of your unworthiness to be one 
of the Lord's "little flock," all of whom will 
be so full of love for him and his that to sacrifice 
earthly good things in his service will be a 
part of their chiefest joy. And surely these are 
objects to draw upon our love and service, 
always and everywhere;— the Church of Christ 
in general, excepting only the "goats" and 
"wolves," are fainting for the true bread and 
the true water of life— truth. Under such conditions, 
while God's children are striving for 
what we can give, to be idle or pleasure-seeking 
would be almost criminal,— surely loveless. 

So, then, if you cannot do one thing, be all 
the more diligent to do another. Tracts can 
be distributed, and it needs just such as yourself 
to hand them out effectively with perhaps 
"a word in season," in the evenings, or on 
Sundays,— in the cars, in the hotels and on the 
street corners. The brethren and sisters in 
Cleveland have distributed thirty-five thousand 
(35,000) tracts during the past month, and the 
results are showing favorably. Turn to your 
TOWER for May last and read again our suggestions— 
"Fervent in spirit, serving the Lord."— 
Page 140. 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Our meetings are held in Bible House Chapel, Arch St., 
Allegheny, Pa. Readers and friends will be warmly welcomed. 
Preaching every Sunday at 3:30 P.M. 



R1683 : page 243 

VOL. XV. AUGUST 1, 1894. NO. 15. 

IS DEATH A PENALTY OR A CONSEQUENCE? 



WE are requested to harmonize the statement 
of 1 Cor. 15:56, "The sting of death is 
sin, and the strength of sin is the law," with 
the statement of Heb. 2:14, "Him that hath 
the power of death, that is the devil." And the 
further question is asked,— "Are we to consider 
death a penalty for the infraction of the divine 
law, or as a natural result of disease contracted 
by disobedience to the divine commands?" 

We will answer the question first, and then 
consider the harmony of the Scriptures cited. 

We may properly consider death from both 
of these standpoints: it does not come now as 
an individual sentence from God, a penalty for 
personal disobedience; for not only do criminals 
and malicious persons die, but also saints and 
prattling babes: it is now a result of disease inherited 
and transmitted from one generation to 
another, under generally prevailing conditions. 
But, looking back to Eden, we can see that matters 
were different there: disease was unknown 
until, as an element of death, it was incurred, not 
from the eating of some poisonous substance in 
the fruit of the forbidden tree (for all the trees of 
the garden were trees of life), but as the curse or 
penalty for transgressing the divine law. That 
the penalty did not come as the result of a poison 
from the tree is evident, and that God specially 
forced Adam and Eve into conditions productive 
of disease and death is also evident from 
the record,— that God drove them out of the 
garden and away from the trees (literally, grove 
or orchard) of life into the unfit wilderness, 
outside the prepared garden, where, lacking 
suitable sustenance, gradually dying, they died. 

The proper view of the question then is this. 
Adam, created in God's moral likeness and 
surrounded by his favors, transgressed his Creator's 
law knowingly, and without any just provocation, 
and suffered the penalty of his transgression 
—death. But, as he died slowly, he 
begat children who, although not put on trial 
as he had been, and hence not sentenced by 
God as Adam was, died nevertheless, because 
they had inherited from Adam a diseased or 
dying organism. And thus it has been ever 
since, and is now. As the Apostle declares, it 
was "by one man's disobedience [that] sin 
entered the world, and death as a result of sin. 
As all inherit sinful weaknesses and tendencies 
through Adam, so they also inherit death, the 
penalty of sin, through him. A father can bequeath 
to his children no rights, privileges or 
conditions that he does not possess at the time 
of their conception. 



Coming now to the Scriptures cited, we remark 
that, so far from being in conflict, these 
passages corroborate and expound each other. 
Sin is the poisonous sting which has blighted 
and killed our race. Not that the sin committed 
(the fruit eaten) would of itself have had 
this effect: the strength or power to kill lay 
not in the fruit,— "the strength [or power] of 
sin was the law," whose vengeance or penalty 
the sin brought upon the sinner. And Satan, 
the tempter, by starting sin amongst men, 
brought all under the sentence of divine law,— 
under the power of death. And since he is the 

R1683: page 244 

father of sin, and thus of sinners, the power or 
strength or weight of sin may be said to be his 
power or influence. And Satan's power of death 
continues steadily; for, by reason of man's 
weakness, through the fall, Satan can the more 
easily delude and beguile into deeper degradation; 
and thus by the increase of the disease of 
sin the power of death increases, swallowing up 
the human family more and more rapidly. 

But in a still more particular way Satan has 
the power of death. When God had created 
man in his own image, with the divine law 
interwoven as a part of his being and nature, 
he made him ruler or king over earth, as his 
representative, and left matters in that way to 
take their course: as the Scriptures express it, 
God "rested from all his work." He did not 
interfere, even when man by reason of sin, disease 
and death became incapable of properly 
ruling the empire committed to his care. God 
had foreseen that man, in the abuse of his liberty, 
would become a servant of sin and Satan, 
and that in consequence not only man himself, 
and the lower animals, would suffer from lack 
of proper discipline and direction, but that the 
entire course of nature would become deranged; 
—and God arranged his plans accordingly;— 
to let men and angels see to the full the result 
of disobedience, and then, in due time, still 
"resting" so far as personal influence is concerned, 
to raise up Christ, who, first as Redeemer 
of "that which was lost," and during the Millennial 
reign as Restorer of all the willingly 
obedient, should bring order out of the chaos of 
sin and death which Satan's power would effect. 

What powers of mind and body the first man 
enjoyed, at the time God created him in his 
own image and pronounced him "very good," 
we cannot well judge by looking at the generally 
degraded race,— whose fall to such depths 



of ignorance, misery and depravity St. Paul 
explains in Rom. 1:18,21-29. Even the most 
intelligent of the human species give but a slight 
conception of what human perfection would be, 
—in the image and likeness of God and "very 
good" in his estimation;— for we know that 
even the best at present are accounted of God 
acceptable only through the atonement made by 
the death of his Son as our ransom-price. 

Even the prodigies of manhood sometimes 
encountered,— musical prodigies, poetic prodigies, 
mathematical prodigies, oratorical prodigies, 
memorizing prodigies, mind-reading and 
mesmeric prodigies, who can exercise a mental 
power over the brute creation as well as amongst 
men;— none of these, nor even all of these 
brilliant powers if imagined as belonging to one 
person, can give us a correct concept of the 
perfect man, as he was before sin marred the 
likeness of God in him, and as he will be after 
all the traces of sin have been blotted out by 
the Great Physician, who, during the "times of 
restitution" (Acts 3:19-21), will restore all that 
"was lost" (Luke 19:10), to all who will receive 
it upon God's terms,— the New Covenant. 

We think it reasonable to conclude that as 
the length of human life was greatly shortened, 
evidently by the changed physical conditions 
of the earth, after the Deluge, so his mentality 
suffered correspondingly at the same time, and 
from the same causes. And all that we know 
of man, aside from the meager records of Genesis, 
belongs to this period of his degradation 

R1684: page 244 

since that flood. The great down-pour of 
waters from the North pole, with its glaciers 
which cut great valleys, which can still be 
traced in the hills, evidently swept into the 
ocean, and into oblivion, all that would have 
been to us evidences of the wisdom and skill of 
our race as exercised before the flood of Noah's 
day— not only noted in Genesis, but confirmed 
by our Lord and the apostles, as well as by the 
most ancient histories of various ancient peoples. 
Yet even the ruins of Syria and Egypt impress 
us with the ability and knowledge and skill of the 
race, a thousand years after the deluge. We fain 
would know the secret of some of their "lost 
arts," even in this boasted nineteenth century. 

SATAN'S USURPATION OF MAN'S EMPIRE. 



But what has all this to do with Satan and 
his power of death? Very much. It is the 
period since the deluge that in Scripture is 
termed, "this present evil world [—or the 
present epoch of disaster and trouble]." (See 
Gal. 1:4; compare 2 Pet. 3:6,7.) And it is 
of "this present evil world," or this disastrous 
epoch and condition, that Satan is declared to 

R1684: page 245 

be the prince or ruler. He is the ruler or 
"prince of this world," as Christ is to be the 
ruler and prince of peace and blessings in "the 
world to come." 

As Christ, the Prince of Peace, will bring in 
everlasting righteousness and blessing, by restoring 
all things to proper order, and subjection 
to the divine will and arrangement, it is 
but reasonable to suppose that Satan has had 
much to do with bringing about the disorder, 
evils and calamities of "this present evil world;" 
—by the misuse of knowledge and powers, in a 
spirit of devilishness. 

Satan, the prince of this present evil world, or 
epoch of trouble, is also "the prince of the 
power of the air" (Eph. 2:2), both the literal 
and the symbolic air. He is the prince of 
earth's religious systems, sometimes in symbol 
represented by the "heavens" or the "air" 
powers. They all, from fetish and devil worship, 
up through the various heathen philosophies 
or religions, show signs of his supervision 
in their formation. He recognizes man's native 
religious tendencies, and by partially satisfying 
them prevents, as far as possible, escape 
from his slavery into the liberty of sons of God, 
wherewith the gospel of Christ would make all 
free from his bondage under ignorance, superstition, 
sin and death. The Apostle refers to 
this policy on Satan's part, saying,— "The God 
of this world hath blinded the minds of them that 
believe not [by supplying them with false religions], 
lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ 
...should shine unto them."— 2 Cor. 4:4. 

Not only does Satan rule thus in false, heathen 
religions, but amongst Christian believers also 
he is a prince or ruler to a far greater extent 
than is supposed; for in proportion as the minds 
of men become enlightened, by glimpses of the 
divine character and plan revealed in the gospel 
of Christ, Satan is on the alert to mislead them 
with vain philosophies and sciences falsely so 
called; and equally ready to give visions of heaven 
and hell and mixed interpretations of Scripture, 
to a Swedenborg, or to lead the new school of 



thought in the theory of evolution, to the discarding 
of the Bible as a relic of barbarism and ignorance 
—or to speak through Spiritualist mediums, 
and personate the dead and mislead the living,— 
or to lead the Mormons to a peculiar interpretation 
of Scripture to their own blinding,— or to 
open schools of Christian Science and Theosophy, 
and do wonderful works in the name of a 
Christ of their own theory, but not in the name 
of Jesus, the Christ of God and the Redeemer 
of men,— or to mislead others, who have gotten 
their eyes wide open, into the belief that all 
men will be saved everlastingly, and that they 
did not fall, and therefore needed no ransom, 
and that Christ was merely a good example, and 
that men are blest and brought nigh to God 
not "by the blood of the cross," but by the 
figurative blood of the sinner's sins, killed or 
destroyed by himself. 

Thus, as an "angel of light," clothed in light, 
Satan shows himself to those who have caught 
glimpses of the great Light, the true Light, the 
Light of Life, that yet shall enlighten "every 
man that cometh into the world." What wonder 
that many are fearful of the light, and love 
rather the fancied security of the dark past, and 
of unreason. But to thus frighten some away 
from the light of present truth serves Satan's 
purposes just as well as to ensnare and mislead 
by his glaring, false lights. Truly, the only 
safe condition for any who would be true 
"sheep" is to be intimately acquainted with 
the true Shepherd— his spirit and his word. 
"My sheep hear my voice, and they follow me. 
A stranger they will not follow, for they know 
not the voice of strangers." 

Thus seen, Satan is indeed the prince of the 
air, the present heavens— ecclesiasticism, both 
heathen and nominal Christian— and only the 
Lord's "little flock" are kept, so that the 
"wicked one toucheth them not."— 1 John 5:18. 

But in another sense Satan is prince of the 
air power,— literally. When Job was given into 
his hand to be tried, he manifested his power 
of death. He caused fire to fall from heaven 
(probably a bolt of lightning), and destroyed 
several of Job's servants and his sheep. He 
caused a great wind (a cyclone or tornado) to 
come upon Job's house, and thus killed Job's 
sons and daughters. 

Satan's object evidently was, to make Job 
suppose that God caused those calamities, and 
to thus cause Job to feel bitter and resentful 

R1684: page 246 



against God, and to "curse God and die;" or 

to shake his faith in there being any God. Indeed, 

that such was Satan's object is implied in 

the narrative; and Job's friends, although God-fearing 

men, were deceived into this view, and 

tried for days to convince Job that his afflictions 

were the work of the Lord. But of Job 

it is written, "In all this Job sinned not, nor 

charged God foolishly [with being the author 

of his calamities.]"— Job 1:22. 

Again, notice that when our Lord and his 
disciples were in the little boat on the Sea of 
Galilee, and our Lord asleep, a storm suddenly 
arose, which palled the hearts of those old and 
expert fishermen accustomed to storms, until 
they awakened the Master, saying, Lord, save 
us; we perish! We cannot presume that, if the 
Heavenly Father had willed or caused that 
storm, our Lord Jesus would have commanded 
it to subside, or that it would have obeyed him. 
On the contrary, rather, we may suppose that 
the same Satan who used his power against Job's 
household sought to destroy the Lord and the 
infant Church. But that Satan had no power 
over the life of Christ, until "his hour was come," 
is evident from our Lord's words upon this occasion 
— "O ye of little faith, why are ye fearful?" 

We would not be understood to question 
God's ability to cause storms, cyclones, etc.; 
but from our Lord's teachings we know that 
such would not be his spirit: for when the disciples 
were incensed against the Samaritans who 
did not welcome the Redeemer and asked, "Lord, 
wilt thou that we command fire to come down 
from heaven and consume them?" our Lord's 
answer was, "Ye know not what spirit ye are of 
[—your spirit is not mine, nor the Father's]." 

Remembering the Deluge and the destruction 
of Sodom, we can only understand, in the light 
of the account in Job, that God may at times 
use storms and fires as his servants to execute 
his decrees against the wicked; or that Satan is 
ever ready as an executioner, taking pleasure in 
evil, to destroy life whenever permitted to do so. 

In thinking of how Satan has the power of 
death, let us not forget that in healing the diseases 
of the people, at his first advent, our Lord 
expressly stated that they were "afflicted of [or 
by] the devil." If God had directly caused 
the diseases, our Redeemer in healing the sick 
would have been opposing the Father, and not 
doing his will. Since disease is death at work, 
devouring the sick, to have the power of disease 
is to have the power of death. 

Satan is permitted to have such a power of 
disease and death because of sin;— because men 



are under the divine and just sentence of death, 
as culprits. The Scriptures represent that mankind 
has sold itself under Sin and death, and to 
him that has this power, Satan. The Church- 
all truly consecrated and faithful believers— are 
reckoned as having escaped from the condemnation 
of the world and from the power and dominion 
of its prince, so that he toucheth them 
not, or has no power over them,— so long as 
they abide in Christ. Such, the Redeemer 
makes free from the law of sin and death and 
from the power of Satan. And although they 
die, their death is in no sense under Satan's 
power;— as Job's was not and as our Lord's was 
not. Their death is separate from that of the 
world, and is not even counted as being a share 
in the Adamic death, but, as though having 
been lifted out of that condemnation, and out 
of that death, over which Satan has power, 
theirs is reckoned to be a sacrificial death;— a 
part and share of Christ's death; "dead with 
him," and not with Adam. 

But "the whole world lieth under [control of] 
the Wicked One," Satan (1 John 5:19), and 
over them he has "the power of death"— including 
disease— subject no doubt to some divine 
regulations; but just what his limitations 
are we may not clearly distinguish. But he can 
have no power over God's people, except by 
special divine permission; and in such cases 
the Lord stands pledged to his own, that all 
things which he permits will work for their ultimate 
advantage, if they abide faithful to their 
covenant with him in Christ. 

These can, therefore, rejoice always, and in 
every thing give thanks; for the Lord is their 
Shepherd. 

"Our times are in thy hand; 
Our God we wish them there; 

R1685: page 246 

Our life, our friends, our soul, we leave 
Entirely to thy care. 

"Our times are in thy hand, 
Whatever they may be; 

R1685: page 247 

Pleasing or painful, dark or bright, 
As best may seem to thee. 

"Our times are in thy hand; 

Why have we doubts or fears? 



Our Father's hand will never cause 
His children needless tears." 

SATAN'S KNOWLEDGE AND POWER 
INCREASING. 



The foregoing being true, it seems more than 
possible, yes, probable, that Satan's power for 
evil and death finds exercise in the development 
of new diseases which for a time successfully 
baffle the skill of all except Satan's own physicians, 
—Christian Scientists, etc. Medical science 
has within recent years reached the conclusion 
that the majority of infectious diseases 
are the result of poisoning communicated sometimes 
through the air, and sometimes through 
the food, in the form of animal life, so small as 
to be indistinguishable except with powerful 
microscopes;— long-shaped, it would require 
nine thousand laid lengthwise to equal an inch. 
These disease-producing little animals breed by 
the millions in a few hours, carrying disease 
wherever they go, and are known as Bacteria. 

The same principles apply to the numerous 
insects, worms and beetles which plague the 
farmers: new ones are continually appearing. 

Knowing that God is resting from his creative 
work, since the creation of man, we are bound 
to attribute these new creations to some other 
source. Satan is wise, and no doubt merely 
takes advantage of natural laws in the propagation 
of the evils mentioned; and no doubt if 
mankind possessed the powers with which his 
Creator endowed him, when he gave him dominion 
over every creature, he would have 
equal knowledge of the laws governing the start 
and propagation of bacteria, and could use his 
knowledge and powers to prevent such formations 
or to destroy them. But man is fallen, 
and has "lost" (Luke 19:10) much that he 
once possessed: Satan is now his master and 
prince; he "now worketh in the children of disobedience;" 
under his misrule "the whole creation 
groaneth and travaileth in pain together." 
Eph. 2:2; Rom. 8:19-23; 1 John 5:19, Diaglott. 

Illustrations of this power to create, or rather 
to take advantage of laws of nature to cause 
rapid propagation amongst, lower forms of life, 
are found in the course of Moses and Aaron, 
and Jannes and Jambres their opponents, before 
the court of Egypt. Under divine direction 
God's servants produced myriads of frogs, lice, 
flies, etc., turned the river of Egypt to corruption, 
caused disease amongst the cattle and a 



severe hail and lightning storm, which did great 

damage. These we are told were judgments; 

but the point we now make is that these were 

evidently brought about under some natural 

laws, because God has been resting from creative 

work and will continue so to do until the 

close of the Millennium;— leaving all the restitution 

work for Christ to do. "The Father 

worketh hitherto, and [now] I work."— Compare 

John 5:17; Heb. 4:4,5,10. 

Not only so, but Jannes and Jambres, as Satan's 
representatives, were able to duplicate 
many of the plagues; certainly not by special 
divine power,— evidently under Satan's knowledge 
of natural laws.-Exod. 7:11,12,22; 8:7. 

We may safely assume that Satan's object in 
using his "power of death" over his subjects 
is not merely to gratify a fiendish delight in 
their sufferings; quite probably his special object 
is to oppose the true light, which is now 
more and more breaking over the world as the 
Sun of Righteousness rises into place and influence. 
He is still striving to prevent the light 
of the knowledge of the goodness of God from 
shining into men's hearts and chasing away the 
dark shadows of doubt and fear which he has 
deeply engraved thereon for centuries by "doctrines 
of devils,"— by which he has made God 
to appear as mercilessly cruel, unjust and unkind, 
and the author of evil,— calamities, diseases, 
plagues, storms, etc. 

Satan may think that he is unrestrainable, 
but we know that "all power in heaven and in 
earth" was given unto Christ, when, having 
finished his course, he was raised from death 
by the Father's power, and highly exalted. 

God's foreknowledge saw that if opportunity 
were granted to the dead and dying members 
of Adam's sinful race, to return to righteousness 
and to harmony with God as his children, 
some would accept it; and for this foreseen class 
the great work of atonement was undertaken; 

R1685: page 248 

—in order to deliver these prophetically seen 

"children" from the power of sin and Satan 

and death. But willing to prove to his creatures 

that he is no respecter of persons, and that 

his dealings are equitable, God adopted a plan 

of atonement which would open the door to his 

favor, not to his foreseen "children" only, but 

to all who died in Adam— "to every creature 

under heaven." Hence, the sacrifice of Christ, 

while it will benefit only those who become "children' 

of God, was not for our sins only, but also 



for the whole world. Accordingly we read, 

"Forasmuch as the children are partakers of 
flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took 
part of the same; that through death [as their 
substitute or ransom-price before God's law] he 
might [legally] destroy him that has the power 
of death, that is, the devil; and deliver them 
who through fear of death were all their lifetime 
subject to bondage."— Heb. 2:14,15. 

By that ransom which he gave, by which 
God's sentence against the sinner-race was 
legally met and paid, once for all, our Lord became 
the owner of the race which had by sin 
sold itself to Satan and came under his control, 
—but without any divine sanction of the transaction. 
Christ, the legal purchaser, now holds 
the destinies of all men. His purpose, as he 
explains it, is the very reverse of Satan's policy. 
He will set men free to act for themselves, 
by increasing their knowledge,— opening the 
sin-blinded eyes of all, to see the goodness 
and love and justice of God. Those who then 
choose righteousness he will bless and help and 
heal,— restoring them to the perfection lost 
through Adam. Those who will not hear, obey, 
after the knowledge of the Lord fills the whole 
earth, will he cut off from among the people- 
in the second death. Then Satan, too, he 
that for six thousand years has had the power 
of death and exercised it so relentlessly, shall 
be destroyed.— Acts 3:22,23. 

The permission of Satan's policy and power 
as "prince of this world," since the ransom-price 
was paid, and since all power over men 
passed legally into the hands of Christ, is not 
from lack of power to destroy Satan and release 
his blinded slaves, nor from lack of loving sympathy 
and interest in them, but because God's 
due time for this world (age) to end, and for the 
world (age) to come to begin, has not arrived; 
and all of God's dealings are upon lines of strictest 
order. God's plan provided a work for Christ 
to do before the setting up of his Kingdom, 
and the taking to himself of his great power and 
beginning his reign. (Rev. 11:17.) That work 
was the selection of a faithful "little flock" of 
joint-heirs— "the bride, the Lamb's wife." 
(Acts 15:14-17.) The Gospel age was needful 
for the call, selection and discipline of this class; 
and its work will very shortly be completed. 

At the close of this Gospel age, and the introduction 
of the Millennial age, our Lord in wisdom 
has purposed a great time of trouble, which 
shall not only be a just recompense upon the 
world for sins against light and opportunity, 
but also a time of breaking up present imperfect 



institutions preparatory to the better ones of 

Christ's Kingdom; and the breaking of the 

hard hearts of the ungodly— plowing and harrowing 

them, and getting ready many (we trust) 

for the good seed of righteousness, which the 

glorified Church will sow unsparingly during 

the Millennium. 

As a part of that coming trouble, "such as 
was not since there was a nation," in addition 
to its financial and social and political and religious 
features, we believe that Satan's "power 
of death" will be permitted to a remarkable 
degree— increasingly and along the lines already 
indicated— storms, hail, drouths, pests, disease-germs 
and diseases. Building upon the false 
doctrines he has already inculcated, he will be 
zealous in the exercise of his power of death, 
that thus to some he may represent God as a 
being of devilish disposition, while to others 
the effect may be to destroy all faith in a divine 
power. For none, except as instructed out of 
the Scriptures respecting the cause and object 
of the permission of evil,— calamities, etc.,— 
could suppose any reason why God should either 
inflict such calamities or permit them to come 
upon men from other causes. 

And Satan's power of death makes quite possible 
his relief from sickness, etc., through 
agencies of his choice,— for the purpose of enforcing 
their false teachings. This deception 
will, we believe, be employed by him more and 

R1685: page 249 

more in the future, and constitute part of the 
"strong delusion" which would, "if it were 
possible, deceive the very elect." But their 
deception will not be possible; because the true 
"sheep" know their Shepherd's voice, and 
flee from other teachers. This is another sign 
of Satan's desperation, and indicates the near 
approach of the dissolution of his kingdom and 
power of death. So says our Lord, in 
Matt. 12:25,26. 

Satan, no doubt is permitted to gain increasing 
knowledge since 1799 just as with men: and 
no doubt like them he takes the credit to himself, 
and supposes that he is daily growing wiser; 
and that through his wisdom he has a greater 
"power of death." Christ, the new King, according 

R1686: page 249 

to the Scriptures will permit Satan to 

use his knowledge and powers increasingly, and 

thus cause the wrath of Satan to praise him, 



and to work out features of his plan; as he so 
often has done with the wrath of man. 

All who have "escaped" from under this 
prince of evil should be earnest in helping 
others out of his bondage— fully, completely— 
and into the service of the prince of life and 
peace and joy everlasting. Oh! what a comfort 
to know that, although we wrestle not with 
flesh and blood, but with wicked spirits of exalted 
influence and power (Eph. 6:12), yet one is on 
our side, the Prince of Light, against whom the 
Prince of Darkness cannot prevail. How restful 
to realize that all things are ours, because we 
are Christ's, and Christ is God's; and that all 
things shall work together for good to us, because 
we love God and are called and have responded, 
according to his promise. 



R1686: page 249 

"THE PRINCE OF THIS WORLD." 



"The prince of this world cometh, and 
hath nothing in me."— John 14:30. 

OUR Lord's reference here is to the great adversary 
of God and deceiver of men who 
for six thousand years past has pursued a course 
of systematic opposition to, and defiance of, the 
Almighty Jehovah, the great Emperor of the 
universe. He is elsewhere called the prince of 
the power of the air, and that old serpent which 
is the devil and Satan. He is also called Beelzebub, 
the prince of devils.— Matt. 12:24. 

Every reference to him represents him as an 
intelligent being of great power and influence, 
and an ambitious leader. Yet in the beginning 
of his existence he was pure and perfect, an intelligent 
creature of God, created through the 
agency of his only begotten Son, without whom 
nothing was made that was made.* (John 1:3.) 
Previous to his fall into sin he is spoken 
of as Lucifer, a morning star (a glorious being 
of creation's early morning). 

Referring to his fall, the Lord, who declares 
that he has no pleasure in the death of him that 
falls into sin and the consequent condemnation 
to death, says, "How art thou fallen from 
heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning!" Then 
he shows that undue ambition was the cause of 
his fall, saying, "For thou hast said in thine 
heart, Into heaven [the position of power] will 



I ascend; above the stars of God [other sons 
of the morning] will I exalt my throne; and I 
will sit also upon the mount of the assembly in 
the farthest end of the north [universal dominion]; 
I will ascend above the heights of the 
clouds; I will be equal to the Most High."— 
Isa. 14:12-14. (That this language applies also, 
symbolically, to Papacy is entirely proper; for 
Papacy is Satan's own work in his own likeness.) 

Thus, instead of humbly and thankfully appreciating 
the favor of God which brought him 
into existence and crowned him with glory 
and honor as a bright star of creation's early 
morning, and instead of returning due filial 
reverence, love and submission to his Creator's 
righteous will, Satan cultivated a spirit of 
pride; until his rising ambition aspired first to 
be a leader and chief of the other stars of the 
morning (the position already filled by the only 
begotten Son of God-John 1:1-3; Col. 1:15-17), 
and finally to rival the Most High himself, 
as king of the universe. 

How different was the course of him who was 
actually above the morning stars, the angelic 
sons of creation's morning,— the only begotten 
Son of the Father, his honored agent in the 



:|: See issue of April 15, '93. 

R1686: page 250 

creation of all things— not only of all the physical 
universe, but of all intelligences as well. 
Of him we read that, "though being in a form 
of God [a mighty one], yet he did not meditate 
a usurpation, but [on the contrary] divested 
himself [of his glory], taking a bondman's form, 
and was made in the likeness of men. And, 
being found in fashion as a man, he humbled 
himself [yet more], and became obedient unto 
death, even the death of the cross." 

"Wherefore," says the Apostle [because of 
his humility and obedience], "God also hath 
highly exalted him, and given him a name which 
is above every name, that at the name of Jesus 
every knee should bow, both of things in heaven 
and things in earth, and things under the earth; 
and that every tongue should confess that Jesus 
Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father." 
(Phil. 2:6-1 1— Diaglott.) Thus, in accordance 
with a principle which God has laid down- 
that he will abase the proud and exalt the humble 
(Matt. 23:12; Jas. 4:6)— we see our Lord 
Jesus now exalted to the very position to which 



Satan through pride and ambition aspired, while 
Satan has been degraded, "cut down [or limited] 
to the earth" (Isa. 14:12), and sentenced 
to final destruction. 

Satan evidently had no faith in God's power, 
or perhaps in his willingness, to destroy him. 
Reasoning from the fact of his long continued 
existence, and his unimpaired powers without 
any evidence of approaching dissolution, he 
concluded that his life could not be terminated. 
Consequently his schemes for power and dominion 
were deep laid and far reaching, having, 
as he supposed, ample time for full development. 

His ambitious policy seems to have begun to 
take shape immediately after the creation of 
man, through whose posterity, as they should 
multiply and attain the grand possibilities which 
he saw before them, he thought he saw his opportunity 
for the gratification of his hopes— for 
laying the foundation of his future dominion. 
And when he realized the restraint placed upon 
him, which limited the sphere of his influence 
to the earth, he seems to have determined to 
make the most of his opportunities among men. 

From the promise of deliverance to mankind 
through the coming deliverer, he learned that a 
plan was already formed, the intended outcome 
of which was to be the triumph of the Son of 
God, whom he regarded with jealous hatred as 
a mighty rival. 

It surely was no part of his original policy to 
prostrate the human race in death; and when 
to Eve he contradicted the threat of Jehovah, 
and declared, "Ye shall not surely die," he 
probably believed the lie, having first deceived 
himself, as most deceivers do. His object, 
seemingly, was to transfer man's allegiance from 
God to himself. He would represent God as a 
tyrant, curtailing the pleasures and powers of 
his creatures that he might have no rivals. And 
hence he said to Eve, "God doth know that 
in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall 
be opened, and ye shall be as gods." Thus too, 
Satan would pose as benefactor and liberator of 
men as he has often done since. And Satan's 
perverted heart may have reached that conclusion 
—that God was an ambitious tyrant and he, 
Satan, the true friend of liberty and progress. 
At all events, the death-penalty pronounced 
and executed upon the race was, we believe, an 
unlooked-for frustration of his plans. With 
this thought in mind, we see a continuation of 
the same line of policy, and an effort on the 
part of Satan, to outwit the Almighty, in the introduction 
of a new element among men, when 
some of the angels, under his seductive influence, 



were induced to leave their first estate* and to 
assume and retain the human form and take to 
themselves wives of the daughters of men (Gen. 6:1,2,4; 
Jude 6,7), thus imparting a new life 
principle to the Adamic stock, the result of 
which was a race of "mighty men of renown," 
who, presumably, might live forever. This was 
a desperate and masterly stroke of policy; but 
again God put forth his power and frustrated 
the scheme, destroying with a flood the whole 
mongrel race, and preserving only Noah with 
his family, who was "perfect in his generation;" 
i.e., of pure, unmixed Adamic stock.— Gen. 6:9. 
But, nothing daunted, Satan, the defiant rebel, 
began his work after the flood among the sons 
of Noah, and with varying success has since 
pursued his policy among the kingdoms of this 
world. And God has not specially interfered, 



*See issue of July 15, '94. 

R1686: page 251 

and will not, until the end of this present evil 
world, when his time will have come for the 
setting up of Christ's Kingdom. Then, he declares, 
Satan shall be firmly fettered and imprisoned 
for a thousand years. His policy during 
the period termed "this present evil world" 
—from the flood to the dawn of the Millennium 
—has been on the same line of scheming for 
power. Ever working in the hearts of the 
children of disobedience, he has always kept in 
power a majority who were not lovers of God 
and righteousness, as the pages of history fully 
attest; and, working through the ambitions and 
selfishness of men, he has overturned kingdoms 
and revolutionized society with reckless indifference 
to miseries of men, in establishing his 
own dominion as "the prince of this world." 

To this our Lord referred when, just previous 
to his crucifixion, he said to his disciples, 
"Hereafter I will not talk much with you; for 
the prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing 
in me." All along he had been in the 
world, and had been plotting and scheming and 
manipulating the affairs of men; but soon he 
was to come in the power of his kingdom, which 
we have seen to be the counterfeit kingdom of 
Christ, which was actually set up in the year 
800 of the Christian era under the name of 
"The Holy Roman Empire." "Hereafter"— 
after his death and resurrection— earth's rightful 
prince would have little to say; he would not 



interfere with the workings of the mystery of 
iniquity; he would permit the prince of this 

R1687: page 251 

world to plot and scheme and develop his plans 
for setting up his counterfeit kingdom and doing 
what he could to frustrate the plan of Jehovah 
for the establishment of Christ's Kingdom. 

From the pages of history we see how his 
kingdom was set up on a foundation of error, 
and how it was established on the basest principles 
of unrighteousness, with fire and fagot and 
sword and every device of torture wherewith to 
crush out truth and righteousness. And on the 
other hand, we see with what cunning craft he 
has endeavored to ensnare, entrap and lead 
astray, or, failing in this, to persecute the embryo 
Kingdom of God, the Christian Church, 
both the Head, Christ Jesus and all the members 
of his body. But when God's time for the 
establishment of Christ's Kingdom comes, Satan's 
kingdom will be brought to naught as effectually 
as was his former purpose at the time of the flood. 

And even after the Millennial reign of Christ, 
notwithstanding the manifest futility of all his 
past endeavors, Satan's ambition, even then, 
will lead to an attempt to establish some measure 
of authority and influence among men. When, 
under the reign of Christ, the resurrection of 
the dead and the blessing of all the families of 
the earth has been accomplished, Satan will be 
loosed. It will be for only a little season (Rev. 20:7,3); 
for, his heart remaining unchanged, he 
will soon see a new avenue to the success of his 
long- cherished ambition, and be inspired with 
a fresh hope that his original purpose may yet 
be accomplished, and that victory may very 
shortly be his. Then he will see not merely a 
perfect human pair with power to produce a 
mighty race destined to live forever, but a race 
restored to life and vigor. His thought will be, 
If I can win this mighty race to my standard, 
my triumph and exaltation will be speedily accomplished. 
Again, therefore, he will figure as 
a leader, though, as now, unrecognized by men. 
Doubtless the temptation will again rest upon 
his old doctrine— that they shall not surely die, 
even if they do disregard and oppose the will of 
God. And those among men in whom the 
goodness of God has not wrought the spirit of 
humility and filial submission to his acknowledged 
superior wisdom, but, on the contrary, 
in whom pride has asserted itself, will easily be 
deceived and led into this error of believing 
that God either cannot or will not destroy them 



in a second death. God will permit Satan to 

work for a little season; and no doubt he will 

work with all the zeal which a hope of speedy 

victory would naturally inspire. But he shall 

not succeed beyond the point which God permits 

for the final testing of mankind, to prove 

who are worthy and who are unworthy of everlasting 

life. When this is accomplished, then 

will take place the destruction of Satan and all 

who follow his leading. 

Thus discerning the general policy of our 
great adversary, we are enabled the better to 
understand his various devices and to discover 
his secret workings; and hence we should be 

R1687: page 252 

the better guarded against his influence. In all 
his plottings and workings we see the evidence 
of an intellectuality which, though like the human, 
is far superior to it in power and scope, 
and with resources upon which to draw which 
are beyond the range of the human powers. 
Before the mind's eye, as represented in the 
Word of God, he stands out as a great intellectual 
giant, with an accumulation of more than 
six thousand years of knowledge and experience. 
What a mighty foe for poor fallen humanity to 
combat, with our present brief experience of 
three-score years and ten, and that in a degenerating 
and dying condition! 

He is full of ambition for self-exaltation, 
puffed up with arrogant pride which so over-estimates 
his own greatness that he considers 
himself worthy of the honor, power and glory 
of God who gave him being, and is moved with 
merciless and continuous envy and hatred of the 
Son of God, as well as of the Heavenly Father 
who exalted him; and his whole career is untiringly 
devoted to his own ambitions and to 
frustration of the divine plans, which he vainly 
presumes to accomplish. In the pursuance of 
his policy he is utterly reckless of its cost to humanity. 
Men in whose hearts he can work are 
so many tools in his hand, whom he uses to oppose 
the principles of righteousness and truth. 
(Eph. 2:2.) For the accomplishment of his 
purposes there is no measure of hypocrisy which 
he would spurn (2 Cor. 1 1:14), no depth of 
iniquity to which he would not descend (John 13:27; 
2 Thes. 2:9,10), no measure of cruelty 
that he would spare, and no height of folly to 
which he would not lead his deluded victims. 
He is a hypocrite, a deceiver, a tyrant and a 
merciless enemy of all who stand in the way of 
his ambitions. Look out for him! He will 



dog your steps; he will blind your eyes; he will 
stop your ears; he will fetter and hand-cuff and 
mentally chain you to his chariot-wheels, if you 
beware not of him. He it is who now "has 
the dominion of death"— whose power is manifest 
throughout the earth among those under 
condemnation to death. Here he goes about 
as a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. 
(1 Pet. 5:8.) In the great Papal system, the 
most complete representative of his policy, his 
lionlike strength has most fully appeared, and 
his lionlike jaws have greedily devoured every 
interest of his deluded victims, while with the 
fires of persecution he has sought to devour in 
another sense the faithful few, who, despite his 
roaring anathemas, have bravely withstood his 
power. But, nevertheless, his days are numbered 
and his end is sure; for it is written that 
God will destroy him "holding the dominion 
of death [not the eternal dominion and glory 
and power to which he aspired, but an ignominious 
dominion amid sin and death, over poor 
fallen humanity], that is, the devil."— Heb. 2:14 
-Rotherham; Rom. 16:20; Rev. 20:10. 

A clear distinction, however, should be borne 
in mind, as between Satan and those angels 
that "kept not their first estate." Satan has 
sinned wilfully against so great light, and has 
so persisted in his evil course, that infinite wisdom 
finds no place to do more for him. 

As children of God, therefore, in the midst 
of Satan's dominion and in opposition to his 
power, let us beware "lest Satan should get an 
advantage of us [through one or another of the 
numerous snares he has set for our feet] ; for we 
are not ignorant of his devices." (2 Cor. 2:11.) 
"Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may 
be able to stand against the wiles of the devil; 
for we wrestle not against flesh and blood. 
[There are mighty invisible powers under the 
leadership of the prince of this world plotting 
to accomplish the stumbling of the "feet" of 
the body of Christ, and flesh and blood are only 
used as tools for that purpose, by the great 
adversary], but [we wrestle] against principalities, 
against powers, against the rulers of the 
darkness of this world, against wicked spirits 
in heavenly places [in places of authority and 
power." (Eph. 6:11,12, margin.) Yet, if well 
armed with the whole armor which God supplies, 
and following our Captain's leading, we 
are safe; for greater is he that is for us than all 
that are against us. 



page 252 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1687: page 252 

THE BAPTISM OF JESUS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON VI., AUG. 5, MARK 1:1-11. 

Golden Text— "Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I 
am well pleased."— Mark 1:11. 

This lesson presents the subject of baptism 
in two different aspects— (1) a baptism 
unto repentance; and (2) a baptism unto 
entire consecration to the will of God, even 
unto death. The first was the baptism which 
John preached: the second was that which 
our Lord instituted and exemplified. Both 
are distinctly referred to in Acts 19:3-5. 

The preaching and baptism of John were 

R1687: page 253 

a special call to God's covenant people, Israel 

after the flesh, to repent of their sins 

and their failure as a nation and as individuals 

to live up to their early covenant 

with the Lord. (Exod. 19:8.) The stirring 

theme of this last and greatest (most honored) 

prophet was that the Messiah, the 

King, had come; that his Kingdom was at 

hand; and that Israel, the chosen people, 

whose privilege it was to be the heirs of 

Kingdom, should at once prepare their minds 

and hearts, repent of their sins and be fully 

consecrated to God, that so they might be 

counted worthy to inherit the covenant 

blessings. 

John came to that people in the spirit 
and power of Elias— i.e., with the same disposition, 
zeal, energy and power of eloquent 
persuasion, that characterized the ancient 
prophet. Even his dress and abstemious 



mode of life were marks of similarity; and 
so striking was the resemblance that the 
priests and Levites inquired, "Art thou 
Elias? Art thou that prophet?" (Mai. 4:5; 
Deut. 18:15,18; John 1:21.) But John 
replied, "No. ..I am the voice of one 
crying in the wilderness, Make straight the 
way of the Lord, as said the Prophet Esaias." 
-Isa. 40:3; John 1:23-27. 

Though John came in the spirit and power 
of Elias, and would have fully answered as 
the antitype of Elias had he been received 
by the Jewish people (Matt. 1 1 : 14), yet he 
was not the Elias, the Great Prophet, referred 
to by the Prophet Malachi (4:5,6); 
for the Lord, foreseeing Israel's rejection of 
John's testimony concerning Christ, had in 
mind another antitypical Elias, viz., the true 
Gospel Church in the flesh, which, in the 
spirit and power of Elias, is the forerunner 
of the spiritual Christ complete, Head and 
body.-See M. DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. viii. 

That the Kingdom of Heaven was "at 
hand" in John's day, was true, regarding 
that Kingdom and its formative or embryo 
state— the state in which during the entire 
Gospel age it has suffered humiliation and 

R1688: page 253 

violence (Matt. 1 1:12);— but it was reserved 
for the Elias (the Church) of to-day to declare 
"the Kingdom at hand" in its glory 
and power. 

John's preaching drew great multitudes of 
all classes who confessed their sins and were 
baptized; but when later they failed to see 
either the King or the Kingdom in earthly 
glory, as they had anticipated, they lapsed 
into unbelief, only a small remnant heeding 
the prophecies of the humiliation of the 
Kingdom prior to its exaltation. Hence 
but few accepted Christ and became identified 
with his cause as prospective heirs with 
him of the Kingdom. 

With the baptism of Jesus that ordinance 
received a new significance. He had no sins 
whereof to repent or to symbolically wash 
away, but as a perfect man he had something 
to offer as a living sacrifice to God. 
He had a human nature which he desired 
should be completely submitted to the will of 
God, even unto death; which complete subjection 
was symbolized by his baptism, or 
immersion, in water. The baptism in water 
was the symbol of his consecration, and the 



subsequent anointing with the holy spirit, 
outwardly testified by the opening heavens, 
the descending dove and the approving 
voice, was God's recognition and acceptance 
of his sacrifice. (Verses 10,11.) And 
the same anointing, the same baptism, is 
promised to all who follow in his footprints. 
(See Verse 8; 1 John 2:27.) As in the type 
(Lev. 8:12; Psa. 133:2), the anointing came 
first upon the Head, the High Priest of 
our profession, and from him it descends 
upon all the members of his body, the 
Church.-See THE TABERNACLE SHADOWS, 
page 32. 

R1688: page 253 

THE TEMPTATION OF JESUS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON VII., AUG. 12, MATT. 4:1-11. 

Golden Text— "In all points tempted like as we are, 
yet without sin."— Heb. 4:15. 

Our Lord's temptation immediately followed 
his consecration and baptism, and as 
a logical consequence. The temptation came 
from Satan, "the prince of this world" 
(John 14:30; Luke 4:5,6), who came to our 
Lord just as he comes to his followers— as 
an angel of light, and with his real character 
and purposes cloaked. 

VERSE 1. Immediately after his consecration, 
being full of the holy spirit, of zeal 
to accomplish his appointed mission, our 
Lord's most natural and reasonable impulse 
(which was truly the leading or prompting 
of the holy spirit within him) was to withdraw 
in solitude for meditation upon the 
sure word of divine law and prophecy, and 
for prayer, that thus he might fully comprehend 
the purpose of God in sending him 
into the world, and gain strength to accomplish 
it. For although as a perfect being 
our Lord, even as a child of twelve, surprised 

R1688: page 254 

the Doctors of the Law by his wisdom 
and perception, yet he could not grasp 
the full import of the prophecies and of his 
own share in them until after he had been 
baptized or anointed with the holy spirit of 
God, following his presentation of himself 



to God's service. 

With the intellectual endowments of a 
perfect man it was not necessary that he 
should take with him the scroll of the law 
and the prophets, when he turned aside into 
the wilderness for meditation; for, having 
been a student of them from his youth up, 
they were all doubtless stored in his perfect 
memory. As there he meditated in 
solitude upon the law and the prophecies 
touching the work before him, carefully 
comparing Scripture with Scripture and 
reasoning on them, with increasing clearness 
and under the influence of the holy spirit, 
the divine plan opened up before him, showing 
a pathway of humiliation and sacrifice 
culminating in death, and accomplishing 
almost nothing for the present amelioration 
of suffering humanity. Though times and 
seasons for the full accomplishment of the 
restitution of all things were wisely hidden 
from his view (Mark 13:32), as they were 
also wisely hidden from the Church's view 
until the realization of it was near at hand, 
he doubtless foresaw that considerable time 
must elapse and that the pathway to that 
glorious culmination must necessarily be a 
narrow, difficult, and to the eyes of men, an 
inglorious one. 

Such a realization, when first dawning 
on the mind, would naturally bring with it 
some measure of disappointment to one 
whose sympathetic love and zeal so longed 
to lift the load of sin and misery from fallen 
humanity. God's appointed time for 
blessing was evidently at quite a distance 
in the future: his grand designs mature 
slowly; and only in the light of their full 
accomplishment can the necessity for all 
the painful steps thereto be appreciated. 
Consequently, until such time the loyal and 
obedient sons of God must walk by faith, 
and not by sight. This his only begotten 
Son did, thus setting us an example that 
we should follow in his steps. 

The natural craving of the loving, benevolent, 
perfect heart of Jesus to lift up and 
bless humanity opened a way for Satan to 
present a temptation to him which would 
verily be a trying one; and he improved the 
opportunity, his object being to thwart, if 
possible, the divine purpose by turning our 
Lord aside from it and absorbing his time 
and energies in other pursuits. Accordingly, 
his first temptation was that recorded in 

VERSES 5,6. A Scripture was brought 



to his attention which seemed to imply that 

it was God's plan that he should attract attention 

to himself, and introduce himself to 

the people by leaping from the pinnacle of 

the Temple into the valley below, and, by 

being preserved from harm, attract the attention 

of the people to himself and to the 

providence of God over his physical life, 

and thus to his acceptance as Israel's King 

and Messiah. The suggestion was plausible, 

but our Lord saw that such a transgression 

of the laws of nature was not probably 

God's will; and then he recalled a Scripture 

which settled the question as to his 

duty,— "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy 

God." Thus this temptation was ended. He 

must serve and trust God— not prove or test 

providence by disregarding his clearly understood 

laws of nature. It doubtless was 

Deut. 6:16 that decided the Lord's course 

in this temptation. Although filled with 

the spirit, he relied upon what was "written" 

for his replies to temptations. And 

our Lord's spirit or disposition was far from 

that of tempting God with unreasonable 

and unnecessary requests: he claimed no 

temporal favors— no protection against the 

legitimate, natural results of any presumptuous 

experiment. Thus, discerning the real 

spirit of God's Word by the spirit of God 

which was in him, our Lord refused any 

misapplication of it, made manifest by its 

lack of harmony with its true spirit, intent 

or purpose. 

Similar temptations have come to thousands 
of God's people in the claims of Spiritualism, 
Christian Science, etc.; and those 
who succumb to them have their reward 
in the deceptions of the Adversary who 
leads them boldly on from one presumptuous 
claim to another, until they are hopelessly 
entangled in his ensnaring net. Those 
who would escape this snare should meet 
it as the Lord met the temptation; for it is 
written, "Seek not unto them that peep and 
mutter and have familiar spirits,"— i.e., are 
spirit mediums.—Lev. 19:31; Isa. 8:19. 

Other common forms of this temptation 
are: (1) Eating what you know does not 
agree with your system and asking God to 
bless it and keep you from experiencing its 
legitimate effects; (2) otherwise sowing to 

R1688: page 255 

the flesh and asking God to give a crop of 



spiritual blessings; (3) from curiosity or 
other motives tampering with things known 
to be evils, and expecting blessings to result, 
—as, for instance, the reading of literature 
which you have proved to be off 
the true foundation (the ransom), and praying 
God to keep you in the truth. These 
are temptings of God's providence, and as 
such should be put far away from every 
real child of God. "Hearken, and eat ye 
that which is good," instead of tempting 
God by eating that which is bad and praying 
and hoping for blessings from it. 

(In reference to the above Scripture— 
Psa. 91:11,12— we remark that its proper 
application is to the Church, of which Christ 
Jesus is the Head and of which his living 
saints are the feet. These are the "feet" 
now being borne up by God's messengers 
of truth lest they stumble in this evil day in 
which all others will surely stumble.) 

Failing in this attempt to ensnare our 
Lord, Satan's next effort was a still more 
subtle one— 

VERSES 8,9. The power of the kings 
and potentates of this present world or 
order of things was brought before his mind 
with the suggestion that with some maneuvering 
and wire-pulling, he, as a perfect 
man, and therefore so far superior to all 
other men, could soon win his way to a 
chief place of power and dominion over 
the whole world, which place of power he 
could at once begin to utilize for the blessing 
of mankind. In this view of the situation 
he mentally saw himself in the top of 
a very high mountain (kingdom)— an autocratic 
emperor having dominion over the 
whole world and using his power for the 
betterment of the entire race. 

That was a suggestion worthy of the consideration 
of such a benevolent heart; but 
again he stopped to consider how it was 
written. "To the law and to the testimony!" 
said the prophet; and to the law and to the 
testimony he went, impelled by the same 
spirit of meekness and obedience that led 
to his consecration and baptism, to see if 
this suggestion was in harmony with the 
plan of God. 

R1689: page 255 

As he carefully considered it, he found it 
was not so— that he was not then to be exalted 
among men to power and influence, 



but that, on the contrary, he was to be despised 

among men, and that they would 

turn their faces from him, and not toward 

him; that he was to be a man of sorrows 

and acquainted with grief. Thus the suggestion 

was seen to be out of harmony with 

the divine plan, and it was promptly recognized 

as a temptation of Satan, who was 

again repelled by the "sword of the 

spirit, which is the Word of God;" for, 

said he: "It is written, Thou shalt worship 

the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou 

serve." 

He had come to serve the Lord's plan, 
and therefore not to accept any suggestions 
out of harmony with that plan. He foresaw 
that the suggested course would involve 
many compromises of truth and righteousness 
with evil men then in power in 
order to gain the coveted place of power 
and influence, just as all office-seekers under 
the present order of things have always 
found it. They must bow down and do 
homage to the "prince of this world" by 
the sacrifice of many of the principles of 
truth and righteousness in order to be installed 
in power. This the Lord would not 
do; nor will any of his followers; for, like 
him, they will discern the temptation and 
say, "Get thee hence, Satan." 

This same temptation has been presented 
to the Church, the body of Christ, throughout 
the entire age; and the result of this 
test of her fidelity has been that only a very 
small minority of those who nominally constituted 
the Church proved to have the spirit 
of the Head, which rejected the temptation 
and faithfully pursued the narrow way 
of the divine appointment. Early in the 
Church's history the spirit of the "prince 
of this world" offered power and influence 
in consideration of the sacrifice of Christian 
principles and doctrine; and the masses of 
professed Christians accepted the offer, in 
consequence of which the great antichristian 
systems of nominal Christianity have been 
exalted, while the true saints, whose names 
are written in heaven (Heb. 12:23), have, 
like their Lord, been despised and rejected 
of men— men of sorrows and acquainted 
with grief; because of their unflinching determination 
to worship God and serve him 
(his plan) only. 

VERSES 3,4. One more temptation awaited 
our Lord. During the forty days and 
nights of profound meditation and study 



and of brave resistance and conquest of 
temptation, he seemed to forget the demands 
of nature for food; or perhaps the spirit 
of sacrifice impelled him to ignore them 

R1689: page 256 

in the interest of his mental and spiritual 

work, his perfect physical constitution permitting 

him to endure the privation longer 

than other men could. But, not until 

afterward— after forty days of fasting— did 

he seem to realize the cravings of hunger. 

And then there was nothing in the wilderness 

to satisfy it. Then came the suggestion 

to call in the aid of divine power to 

support by miraculous manner the life which 

he had consecrated to sacrifice,— by commanding 

that the stones be made bread. 

This temptation was equivalent to that 

which comes also to many of the consecrated 

Church— viz., to request of God the 

healing of the body and the protection of 

the natural life which is consecrated to 

death. 

Our Lord's reply was, "Man shall not 
live by bread alone, but by every word that 
proceedeth out of the mouth of God." That 
is, our meat and drink should be to do the 
will of our God and to finish his work 
(John 4:34) at any cost to ourselves; and 
to ask to be relieved from the legitimate effects 
of such a course would be out of harmony 
with the very spirit of sacrifice, which 
in the present time is the way to eternal life. 

Our Lord had the power to turn the stones 
to bread; and later he did turn water into 
wine, and, to feed the multitudes, he twice 
made food out of nothing— increasing two 
fishes and three small loaves into an abundance 
for thousands. But these miracles 
were an unselfish use of his power. He 
never used that power selfishly: to have 
done so would have been an avoidance of 
his covenant of sacrifice; and such a suggestion 
was this temptation. 

The same principle attaches to our prayers 
and efforts for the sick: they should be 
unselfish. We, the consecrated, are not 
authorized to call upon divine power for 
the healing of our own infirmities. Our 
Lord healed the multitudes, but when weary 
himself simply sat down and rested. On 
the same principle, the Apostle Paul healed 
the multitudes, but did not cure himself. He 
sent napkins and handkerchiefs to the diseased, 



but when the consecrated were sick 
he sent none to them. Compare Acts 19:12; 
28:7-9; 2 Tim. 4:20; 1 Tim. 5:23 on this 
subject. Also see TOWER for July '88. We 
have only a few of this number, but we will 
lend a copy to anyone requesting it who 
will promise to return it after reading. 

In consideration of these temptations of 
our Lord, we realize how true is the statement 
of our Golden Text— that our High 
Priest "was in all points tempted like as 
we are, yet without sin." He was not 
tempted like the world— to godlessness, vice 
and criminality; but like the Church— (1) 
To a deceitful handling of the Word of God 
for the purpose of gaining its apparent support 
for human theories, instead of patiently 
waiting until the long time and painful 
processes of God's plan mature; (2) To ambitious 
efforts to gain present power and 
advantage, even for the apparently good 
purpose of blessing others now instead of 
waiting God's time and conforming all our 
present efforts to the present direction of 
his plan; (3) To take the sacrifice off the 
altar when we begin to realize what fortitude 
and zeal are necessary to fully render it. 

These, in general terms, are the great 
temptations which assail the Church, as they 
assailed her Head; and their source and 
channels are— the world, the flesh and the 
devil. The devil is the instigator, and the 
environments of the present world and the 
natural and often legitimate desires of the 
flesh (surely legitimate in our Lord's case) 
are the mediums through which his temptations 
are presented. 

The fact that these temptations occur to 
us does not constitute sin. They came also 
to our Lord, who was without sin. The 
sin is not in being tempted, but in yielding 
to temptation. 

VERSE 11. "Then the devil leaveth him." 
The spirit of the Lord in Jesus was more 
than a match for the tempter, and the sword 
of the spirit did its work, as it always does. 
With this weapon "resist the devil, and he 
will flee from you." (Jas. 4:7.) No power 
of art or spurious logic can stand against 
it; for it is mighty and shall prevail. 

"And, behold, angels came and ministered 
unto him." But they came uninvited. As 
on a similar occasion subsequently (Matt. 26:53,54), 
he declined to ask any temporal 
favors; but the Father graciously granted 
on this occasion even the temporal favors; 



though on the later occasion it was withheld 
that the divine purpose might be accomplished 
in the sacrificial death of his beloved 
Son. 

What a beautiful example the Lord thus 
furnishes of Christian fortitude which never 
flinches nor hesitates, but with fixedness 
of purpose steadily pursues the appointed 
course of sacrifice! 



page 258 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1696: page 258 

ANY BROTHER having a thorough knowledge of stenography, 
who is fully consecrated to the Lord and in full 
sympathy with M. DAWN and WATCH TOWER teachings, 
and unincumbered by family cares, etc., and who would 
enjoy assisting in the TOWER office, is requested to correspond 
on the subject, enclosing his photograph. Address 
the Editor. 



R1689: page 258 

A REMARKABLE NARRATIVE. 



"The Rev. Dr. John Joseph Nouri, D.D., 
LL.D., Chaldean archdeacon of Babylon and 
Jerusalem, pontifical delegate general of Malabar 
and ex-grand secretary of the Metropolitan 
archdiocese of India and Persia, has found 
Noah's ark! At least he says he has, tells a 
very straight though somewhat gorgeous story 
about it and has gained believers among men 
of piety and learning. He is of the Orthodox 
Greek church and his labors have been chiefly 
in Africa and southwestern Asia. 

"After spending several years in African explorations, 
Dr. Nouri crossed the east mountains 
to the coast of Abyssinia, and was received 
with great honors. His expedition up the 
Euphrates and over the Ararat was an expensive 
affair, but he got there, camped on the plateau 
and climbed the two peaks. Between them is 
a valley, and from each side of it rise the peaks 
--one 16,000 and the other nearly 18,000 feet 
high. Starting in March, they found the snow-drifts 
impassable, and waited another month. 
Then they climbed to within sight of a narrow 
plateau almost on the summit, and on that 
plateau they saw the ark. 

"The bow and stern,' says the archdeacon, 
were clearly in view, but the center was buried 
in snow and one end of it had fallen off and 
decayed. It stood more than 100 feet high and 
was over 300 yards long. The wood was peculiar, 
dark reddish in color, almost iron colored 
in fact, and seemed very thick. I think the 
cold has preserved the wood. I am very positive 
that we saw the real ark, though it is over 
4,000 years old.' 

"Though within rifle shot they could not 
reach it, the slope from the 'bench' on which 
it rested being a glare of ice and snow, and 
they could not remain till the midsummer thaw. 
Many educated gentlemen, including preachers, 
have called upon Archdeacon Nouri and found 
him a most fascinating talker. He speaks ten 
languages with considerable fluency, having also 
a smattering of the local dialects of various 
places. He is by birth a Syrian of the old 
Chaldean stock, and is a man of great wealth. 
His credentials are a study in themselves. His 
commission for Persia and India is signed by 
all the Greek bishops of those countries to the 
number of eighty." —Selected. 



R1690 : page 259 

VOL. XV. AUGUST 15, 1894. NO. 16. 

BRINGING BACK THE KING. 



"WHY ARE YE THE LAST TO BRING BACK THE KING?" 

"And King David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the 
priests, saying, Speak unto the elders of Judah, saying, 
Why are ye the last to bring the king back to his house? 
seeing the speech of all Israel is come to the king, 
even to his house. Ye are my brethren; ye are 
my bones and my flesh: wherefore, then, are ye 
the last to bring back the king?"— 2 Sam. 19:9-12. 

IN the scrap of history here recorded we find 
an illustration of a very similar condition 
of things in the world to-day. The kingdom 
of Israel had been thrown into a state of confusion, 
threatening anarchy, in consequence of 
being left for a time without any official head 
or king, by the rebellion of Absalom and the 
divided sentiments of the people. 

Absalom had cunningly managed to alienate 
the hearts of the people from his father David, 
and had finally headed a revolt. And David, 
in fear of the consequences, fled from the city 
and country to the region beyond Jordan, accompanied 
by a few loyal and faithful subjects. 
A great battle took place, which resulted in the 
prompt subduing of the rebellion and in the 
death of Absalom, the would-be usurper. 

Afterward King David did not attempt to 
repossess himself of the Kingdom, but waited 
until the desire of Israel for his return should 
be expressed. 

Meantime, says the record, "All the people 
were at strife throughout all the tribes of Israel, 
saying, The king saved us out of the hand of 
our enemies, and he delivered us out of the hand 
of the Philistines; and now he is fled out of 
the land for Absalom. And Absalom whom we 
anointed over us is dead in battle. Now, therefore, 
why speak ye not a word of bringing the 
king back?" 

Just so it is in the world to-day. Earth's 
rightful King is not upon its throne, nor has 
the world recognized his right to it or desired 
his return. Men have been busy with their 
own schemes and plans of government. They 



have anointed various kings of their own choosing: 
in fact, they have tried every experiment 
of self-government; and, one after another, all 
have ended in failure. And now, after six 
thousand years of human experiment, the whole 
world is on the verge of a revolution, in the outcome 
of which they have nothing to expect 
but anarchy. 

In times past the civil and religious powers 
of the world have been yoked together for 
mutual support, and have defended each other. 
It mattered not, so far as the state was concerned, 
whether the religion was a true or a 
false one, so that it kept the people in subjection 
to the ruling powers. Civil rulers have always 
favored most the religion that best served this 
end. Ecclesiastical rulers have also in turn 
looked to the State for compensating favors; 
and in the days of their power they exacted 
much. Thus the two were in close affiliation. 
Around each there has always gathered a privileged 
aristocracy of wealth and brains and 
education, which has ever kept them at the 
head of social influence and power. But the 
overruling providence of God has in recent times 

R1690: page 260 

been bringing about a change, so that knowledge 

and general enlightenment have been 

brought within the range of the common people. 

The printing press, common schools, daily newspapers, 

the multiplicity of books, cheap and 

rapid means of travel and communication by 

steam and electricity— all of these and minor 

influences have waked up the masses of the people 

and set them to thinking and planning and 

studying and traveling and acquiring and aspiring 

to higher if not to better things. 

So general has this tendency of the people 
become, that the favored aristocratic classes, who 
have long enjoyed a monopoly of this world's 
good things, are in fear lest their glory may 
suddenly depart. And well indeed they may 
be; for the struggling masses are determined to 
reach the top rounds of the ladder of fortune, 
no matter what hoary-headed authorities may 
stand in their way. The struggle is already on, 
and the threatening aspect of things forebodes 
an early fulfilment of that prophecy of Daniel (12:1), 
"There shall be a time of trouble such 
as never was since there was a nation." 

The Scriptures also indicate the character of 
the trouble— that it will be one in which the 
animosities of the masses will be exercised with 
violence against the rich, and the specially favored 



aristocratic classes,— political, social and 
religious. (Jas. 5:1-6; Ezek. 7:19, etc.) And 
what intelligent observer of the signs of the 
times cannot see the rapid development of just 
such a trouble in the present proportions of the 
socialistic and anarchistic movements, and their 
aggressive disposition? Indeed, the civil and 
social condition of the world is appalling, from 
every standpoint, whether it be that of politics, 
social order, finance or religion. 

In every land the tendency of politics is to 
corruption, both in civil and ecclesiastical circles; 
not because people are really worse than 
formerly, but because enlightenment is so much 
greater and more general, that temptations to 
cupidity are a hundred times greater than ever 
before. Social order is continually menaced; 
the strain between capital and labor is unprecedented; 
and true religion, the religion of the 
cross, is at a very low ebb. Many who begin 
to realize the seriousness of the present situation, 
as they forecast the outcome of all these things, 
in substance disconsolately say, as the Prophet 
Jeremiah (8:15-19) foretold they would— "We 
hoped for peace, but no happiness is here; for a 
time of cure, and behold here is terror. When 
I would comfort myself against sorrow, my heart 
is faint in me. Is the Lord not in Zion? is her 
King no more in her?" 

In the religious situation there is little to be 
seen in the way of encouragement: the clash 
of conflicting creeds and their discord with the 
notes of divine revelation are most painfully 
manifest. In consequence of this, and of the 
general awakening and mental activity of our 
day, we find Infidelity, bold and outspoken, rampant 
in every denomination of "Christendom;" 
the truths and the errors of hoary creeds of men 
are being discarded in fact (though not by admission, 
for fear of the effect); and the general 
tendency is to ignore the Bible doctrine and 
terms of salvation, and merely to hold our morality 
as the hope of everlasting life, alike to 
believers in Christ and to unbelievers. A proposition 
so much in harmony with the pride of 
the natural man (which always prefers to pay 
its own way, and feels that it is "nearly good 
enough") is bound to be popular; while the 
cross of Christ has always been a stumbling-block, 
and its preaching unpopular and a cause 
of division to them that stumble at the word, 
being disobedient.— 1 Pet. 2:8. 

Infidelity— i.e., unbelief in the sound doctrine 
taught by the Lord and his inspired apostles 
—sits in the pews, declaims from the pulpits, 
rules in the assemblies, and is even finding its 



way into the Sunday School literature— in the 
interpretations of the International Lessons. It 
is ably seconded by Doubt or Agnosticism; and 
together these strike with increasing determination 
against the very foundation doctrines of 
Christianity— the fall of man and his redemption 
by the vicarious sacrifice of Christ. Discrediting 
the Bible account of the fall of the 
race in Adam, and hence the necessity of its 
redemption through Christ, it substitutes the 
entirely antagonistic theory of Evolution— that 
man was evolved from lower animal forms, by 
his own effort, that he has now reached a higher 
plane than was ever before realized, and that he 

R1690: page 261 

will continue to so make progress indefinitely. 

It institutes what it is pleased to term a 
"higher criticism" of the Word of God, by 
which the sacred record is being gradually 
whittled and trimmed to fit the present state of 
development of human philosophies and science 
—often falsely so called— thereby to lend its 
seeming sanction to the idea that the philosophy 
and science of the nineteenth century are the 
very climax of perfection and the essence of 
wisdom. It slashes its ruthless scissors into 
miracles, calls them all incredible, and believes 
only those things for which it has tangible evidence. 
It claims that at most the apostles and 
prophets of the Bible had an inspiration of 
thought, which they clothed more or less imperfectly 
in language of their own choice; and 
that therefore each reader has the liberty to 
whittle out of their words such thoughts as best 
suit his own conceptions of truth, relying on an 
inspiration of his own mind, equal to theirs 
with the advantages of present-day higher criticism. 
The apostles tell us, to the contrary, 
that they were inspired as to the words they 
spoke and wrote, and not as to the thoughts 
or sentiments. (See 2 Pet. 1:21; 1 Pet. 1:12.) 
It places the Bible and its writers on a par 
with all profane history and historians, and says 
that much of the Bible is fiction, and that it is 
impossible to discover the dividing line between 
truth and fiction. 

Under the various disintegrating influences 
of our peculiar day the old creeds are fast 
crumbling into ruin, and the old institutions 
which they held together are being terribly 
shaken; and the various attempts at reorganization 
on other grounds are all open to a thousand 
objections. The faith of all is being tested, 
and many who really care to have a faith, and 



who long for a firm establishment in divine 
truth, are indeed in dismay. 

Nominal Christianity is fast losing its power 
over the masses; for the general awakening of 
the human mind has loosened the reins of superstition, 
so that the most illiterate begin to 
realize that they are men, with all the prerogatives 
of men, and that the king and the priest 
are nothing more, except as the superior advantages 
of wealth and education have developed 
in them the faculties which are common to all 
mankind. And the unreasonable and unscriptural 
doctrines of the divine right of kings and 

R1691 : page 261 

of the eternal torment of a large proportion 
of humanity, and kindred absurdities, are coming 
more and more into disrepute, and have less 
and less of a restraining influence upon the 
masses of men, who rightly reason that since 
"the earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof," 
and since "God is no respecter of persons," 
the peasant has an equal right with the 
king or the priest to share its bounties. 

To the awakening masses the only apparent 
way to obtain their ends is by revolt against the 
existing arrangements;--they see not the Jubilee 
of "restitution times" which God has 
promised. (Acts 3:19-21.) And the hearts of 
all classes being under the control of selfish 
principles, it is only a question of increasing 
unrest from increasing knowledge and liberty, 
and of divine permission (Rev. 7:1-3), when the 
terrible crisis of trouble will consume the present 
order of society. 

It is in view of this clearly discernible trend 
of present events that the thrones of earth are 
trembling, and that statesmen are greatly perplexed 
in seeking measures of policy to avert 
the impending disaster. The sea and the waves 
(the restless masses of humanity) are roaring, 
and the mountains (kingdoms) are shaking with 
the swellings thereof.— Psa. 46:3. 

Six years ago Prince Bismark called attention 
in the German Reichstag to the fact that great 
national crises occur about every twenty years, 
and urged that such contingencies should be 
prepared for. And more recently, in justification 
of the last army bill, he recounted the 
special dangers to Germany, lying, as she does, 
in the center of Europe, exposed to the hostile 
powers of France on the east, and of Russia on 
the west, as well as to the dangers of their coalition, 
and the lack of cohesion among her own 
people. Again he said, "European countries 



have something more important to attend to 
than making war upon each other. They should 
unite in suppressing the crime of socialism." 
But that is more easily said than done; for the 
nations are not ready to unite on any thing. 
And where is the power of resistance which the 

R1691 : page 262 

rulers would call to their aid in such a contingency, 
when the armies upon which they depend 
are permeated with socialistic sentiments? 
The power of the churches was relied upon once, 
when the churches demanded and got a superstitious 
reverence for civil potentates and ecclesiastical 
dignitaries; but that day is almost 
past; and the reins of superstition are growing 
more and more slack. The time was when a 
German Emperor stood for three days and 
nights barefoot in the snow, waiting for Papal 
absolution, that the dreaded Papal interdict 
might be lifted and his authority in the empire 
established by the word of the Pope. And glad 
indeed would some of the crowned heads be to-day 
to see that power restored to the control of 
the public mind, for the support of kingly authority. 
This is illustrated by the fact of Germany's 
repealing the law that expelled the Jesuits. 
Although those infamous allies of Papal 
power have been a menace to good government 
in every land, and have been alternately expelled 
and re-instated again and again in almost 
every land, their influence is felt to be a 
necessity now against the increasing influence 
and power of Socialism and Anarchy. 

Dynamite plots and assassinations are getting 
to be common occurrences. Several bills have 
been presented and favorably considered in the 
French Chamber of Deputies looking to the suppression 
of Socialistic movements. And since 
the assassination of President Carnot one of the 
most stringent of these has passed into a law. 
Similar regulations are before the governments 
of Austria and Spain; the latter, indeed, proposes 
to all civilized governments common laws 
for the suppression of Anarchists, their literature 
and their sympathizers. 

The wonderful mechanical inventions of this 
"day of the Lord's preparation" for the Millennium 
(Nah. 2:3), the manufacture of which 
has for a time brought great prosperity to the 
whole world, once gave promise of great future 
blessing to all mankind, by a general increase 
of wealth, and lessening of the drudgery of 
earth. But the masses are awakening to the fact 
that they were dreaming when wasting good 



wages in extravagance or dissipation or sloth, 
thinking that the "good times had come to 
stay." There were others not so short-sighted, 
who, by economic prudence, temperance, etc., 
accumulated a little money, and who foresaw 
that machinery would make the best of all slaves 
—requiring less for maintenance and doing the 
work of many. Some of these frugal, thrifty, far-seeing 
ones, by the aid of their mechanical slaves, 
have become wealthy— immensely wealthy; 
and one half of the world is now striving to 
serve these and to manufacture more slaves for 
them. Thus after the point of demand has been 
reached there comes a halt all around— a stagnation. 
And since human muscle and brain 
cannot compete against these mechanical iron 
slaves, all are dependent upon these and their 
millionaire masters, that they may work with 
these slaves. Under these circumstances, nothing 
can prevent the decline of human labor in 
every channel to a lower and yet lower level, 
until the common, unskilled laborer will scarce 
be worth his board, and must be supported by the 
charity of his fellow-creatures better equipped 
for the battle of life. Unskilled muscle is being 
crowded out by mechanical slaves, and even 
skilled muscle is beginning to feel its pressure. 
Brains, backed by machinery and money, are 
already masters of the situation, and the increase 
of machinery and of wealth is marvelous. On 
the other hand, the population of the world is 
increasing rapidly, and the increase of intelligence 
increases the skilled workmen of the world 
and their competition with each other for the 
luxuries and necessities of life, to be had only by 
serving the slave owners, the world's masters. 

Poor world! This is a gloomy outlook, yet 
one which all who can and will reason must see 
is a true view, if something does not occur to 
alter results by changing conditions or causes. 
All thinking people see this; but many stifle 
reason and reflection, and swim along as near 
to the cream and as far from the dregs of society 
as they can get. 

It is useless to reason with the wealthy owners 
of these iron slaves, for they will get the 
best of the argument,— reasoning upon the generally 
accepted basis. Their answer to those 
who would reason with them is a correct one. 
They say:— 

We are acting upon the same principles upon 

R1691 : page 263 

which you act;— we are no more selfish than you; 
—we give more generously than you to the support 



of educational and benevolent institutions; 
—we pay our employees better wages than others 
can afford to pay;— we pay more taxes than 
do others;— indeed, as society exists at present, 
our brains, capital and iron slaves are necessary 
to the well-being of the world;— we could get 
along without others, but they cannot get along 
without us;— if we, the masters of the world, 
should combine to stop our iron slaves, and close 
our establishments, the world's affairs would be 
thrown into chaos. We do not claim to do our 
business on principles of love and benevolence 
any more than do the farmers and mechanics. 
Each is trying to do the best he can for himself. 
We, like others, are ruled by selfishness; but a 
selfishness less narrow and mean— more generous 
—than that which is exercising many of our employees 
and others less successful than we. You 
can make no laws to hinder our success; for of 
necessity such laws would injure others as much 
as they would injure us, or more. We are independent, 
others are dependent. So long as 
selfishness is recognized as the rule of life, we 
must be conceded to be as generous under that 
law as any. 

Socialism and Nationalism reply that the 
remedy is to do all large business on a communistic 
scale for the public benefit. But they fail 
to see that selfish ambition for wealth, power 
and honor, which at present is pushing the world 
with lightning speed, would, by their program, 
be set aside— with nothing in its stead to take 
its place. It is but a chimerical fancy, that if 
selfish ambition were rendered powerless, loving 
benevolence would step forward in its stead and 
push the world along. Alas! too few of the 
human family have any knowledge of love as a 
motive power. Indeed, we may be sure that 
if selfish ambition were bound hand and foot, 
selfish indolence would take its place amongst 
poor and rich, until necessity would complete the 
release and re-enthronement of selfish ambition 
to keep society from miserably perishing in 
sloth. 

Indeed, the Scriptures indicate that this will 
be the very course, and that anarchy will finally 
result, and that 

THE RELIEF WILL COME ONLY WITH THE 
RETURN OF THE KING, IN POWER 
AND GREAT MAJESTY. 



We wait not for the King as the sweet babe 
of Bethlehem, nor yet as "the man Christ 



Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all;" but we 
wait for him who, having been "put to death in 
flesh, was quickened [made alive] in spirit"-- 
who was raised from death a spirit being— highly 
exalted above his condition as a man, higher 
even than his condition as a spirit-being before 
he humbled himself to become a man,— highly 
exalted, even to the divine nature, far above 
human nature and angelic nature and every 
other nature. Such is the nature and majesty 
of the King for whom we wait, and whose presence 
and Kingdom we are assured can and will 
bring order out of earth's confusion, and bring 
to the world the blessings purchased with his 
own precious blood, given when he was a man, 
once for all and forever as man's 
redemption-price. 

The same King whom Herod and his soldiers 
crowned with thorns, and in mockery clothed 

R1692: page 263 

in royal robes, and hailed, "King of the Jews!" 

the same whom Pilate crucified between two 

thieves, and over whose head he placed the inscription, 

"Jesus, the King of the Jews"— this 

same King we look for now, but no longer in a 

body of flesh, a body of humiliation, a body 

prepared for our sin-offering. He comes in 

power and great glory, the express image of the 

Father's person, and in the glory and majesty of 

the Father's person, and in the glory and majesty of 

the Father, "whom no man hath seen, nor can 

see" (1 Tim. 6:16), the same whom Saul of 

Tarsus saw, but whom his companions saw not. 

The same wise, sympathizing, loving soul (person) 

that wept and died; but greatly changed 

—resurrected and glorified by divine power; a 

new organism, but the same being; not flesh, 

but spirit; not weak, but powerful; not corruptible, 

but incorruptible; not dishonored, but honored; 

—possessing "all power in heaven and 

in earth."-See 1 Cor. 15:20,42-44,50; Phil 3:10; 

Matt. 28:18. 

Some have dreamed that selfishness is being rapidly 
swallowed up of love, throughout the world; 
but not so: it alters its outward form to meet 

R1692: page 264 

changed circumstances and conditions, but under 
the surface selfishness is still to be found 
everywhere; and in almost every heart it is the 
actual motive power of life. And so strong is 
the selfish power in mankind, so deep seated, 
that it is a vain delusion to presume that the 



preaching of the gospel will ever convert the 
world from the motive power of selfishness to 
that of love. 

True, some are thus converted; but altogether 
these are but a "little flock;" and so different 
from the masses that they are and always have 
been "peculiar people," zealous, not for self-interest, 
but for good works, for God's glory 
and for the welfare of others, regardless often 
of personal prosperity or interest. 

Man's experience is now being so arranged 
for him as to bring to the masses the proof that 
selfishness is not the proper motive power, the 
welfare of all being considered; because, in the 
present condition of physical and mental inequality, 
the mentally and physically strong 
would get all there is, while the weaker and imbecile 
would be wholly dependent upon their 
charity for existence; and as the ratio of difference 
would continue to increase, it would mean 
that ultimately the wealth and government of 
the world would all be in the hands of a few intellectual 
giants. And even if all men were 
mentally and physically perfect and equal, the 
result of the operation of selfishness would mean 
a continual strife for mastery, greatness, power 
and advantage, which would mar the bliss of a 
Paradise. 

The light of invention in this, our day, is intended 
to have this very effect;— to let things 
take this course and to let people see what would 
be the result if selfish principles were allowed 
to go to seed. Many whose senses are exercised 
can already foresee the result, and many are seeking 
the remedy, but in a wrong direction. They 
want the motive power of love substituted for 
the motive power of selfishness in those who 
have control of governments and large enterprises. 
They are seeking in others the character 
and methods of Jesus, but have never adopted 
his character and methods as their own. They 
admit the superiority of love over selfishness, 
and would like to have the wealthy adopt the 
principle of love, while they would, for a time 
at least, continue the policy of selfishness, until 
they too had become wealthy. 

They forget that love cannot become an element 
of daily life, and its controlling force, until 
it has first become an element of character 
in the individual heart. Only those whose hearts 
have been thoroughly converted to the Lord, 
and who are seeking and praying to be dead to 
self, realize what a fight is necessary to keep 
this strongly entrenched element of the fallen 
character under the control of the Word and 
spirit of Christ, our Redeemer and Pattern. 



Others see not the folly of their hopes to introduce 

by laws the rule and motive power of love, 

and to oust the rule and motive power of selfishness, 

while the hearts of the vast majority 

know nothing whatever of such a change of 

principle as a personal experience. As men 

come to realize, by further experience, the folly 

of such hopes and efforts, 

THE NUMBER OF THOSE WHO WILL SPEAK 
OF BRINGING BACK THE KING 
WILL INCREASE. 



Ah, yes! That is the remedy, and the only 
remedy at all adequate to the cure of the disease 
of selfishness, its eradication from the body 
—social, political and financial. 

But while the King of earth (whose right the 
government is, and who will shortly take unto 
himself his great power and reign, and bring 
order out of confusion) is called the "Good 
Physician," let none assume that by this is implied 
that he will cause his patient no pain 
when he lances his boils, amputates those parts 
where mortification has set in, rebreaks bones 
previously improperly set by the patient himself, 
or when he cauterizes the proud flesh of his 
sores: let him not suppose that he will give no 
bitter medicines. To be a Good Physician and 
a Great Physician means that he will cause no 
needless pain; but it also implies that he will 
spare no pains to make the treatment effective 
to the patient's recovery to perfect health. 

And so with Christ's rule and Kingdom: it 
will first of all lay bare, and cut, and scrape, 
the evils of selfish society, down to the very 
bone, exposing depths of corruption never before 

R1692: page 265 

realized by the patient; and it will be a 
fearful ordeal— "a time of trouble such as was 
not since there was a nation." The patient 
(the world) will suffer and groan, and for a 
time prefer the disease to the cure, and seek to 
be released, but he will be helpless, bound hand 
and foot; and the exposition and eradication 
of selfishness must progress until the patient 
shall have fully realized the sinfulness of 
sin and the selfishness of selfishness. Then the 
balms and ointments of love and righteousness 
will be applied; and although they will smart, 
they will begin to heal and strengthen. Then 
the cooling, refreshing, "peaceable fruits of 



righteousness" will begin to be relished, and 
the patient will soon be on the way to recovery 
and prepared for the stronger meat of knowledge 
of God's perfect will. 

Yes, the coming of the King of Earth means 
much of trouble and a general overturning of 
the Kingdoms of this world, which, although 
nominally kingdoms of God, are really under 
the control of the prince of this world— Satan 
—who now worketh in the hearts of the children 
of disobedience. (Eph. 2:2.) It means the shaking 
of society in a manner and to an extent it 
was never before shaken, and so thoroughly that 
another shaking will never be necessary. (Heb. 12:26,27.) 
It means the breaking in pieces of 

the Kingdoms of earth as a potter's vessel. (Isa. 30:12-15; 
Psa. 2:9; Rev. 2:27.) It means 
the shaking and final passing away of the present 
ecclesiastical heavens, and the fall of many 
of its bright ones (stars), and the temporary 
obscuring of the true sunlight of the gospel and 
the moonlight of the Jewish law by the thick 
clouds of worldly wisdom. It means tumult and 
raging amongst the waves of the sea (the masses 
of mankind in anarchy). It means the 
shaking of all the mountains (kingdoms); and 
the melting of some to the level of the people 
(socialism); and the carrying of others into the 
sea (revolution and anarchy). 

But while many would rejoice to see enemies 
bound and society relieved of many of its selfish, 
life-sapping ulcers, they seem to realize that 
so just and impartial a Judge and law might cut 
off some of their long-cherished sins, and might 
pain them by touching some of their personal 
selfishness. And they are right: He will bring 
to light all the hidden things of darkness, and 
correct private as well as public sin and selfishness. 
He will lay justice to the line, and 
righteousness to the plummet, and the hail [hard 
truths] shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and 
the waters [of truth] shall overflow the hiding 
places [of error].— Isa. 28:17. 

"BUT WHO MAY ABIDE THE DAY OF HIS 
COMING? AND WHO SHALL STAND WHEN 
HE APPEARETH?"-MAL. 3:2. 



The coming of the King will mean a personal, 
as well as a national and a church examination, 
judgment and treatment. "Who may abide 
the day of his coming? And who shall stand 
when he appeareth? For he is like a refiner's 
fire and like fuller's soap." (Mai. 3:2.) It will 



mean the curtailment of vice to a degree never 
attempted by any earthly reformer. There will 
be no license to be or to do evil in any form or 
degree. The only liberty will be to do right. 

Ah! No wonder that so few to-day look and 
speak for the coming back of the King! To 
some it would mean the curtailment of present 
advantages over the remainder of their fellows. 
To some others it would mean to check their 
anticipated rising to a point of advantage or 
preference or honor above their fellows. To 
others it would mean the curtailment of sins now 
indulged and enjoyed. 

Nevertheless, both the King and the Kingdom 
—for which the King taught his Church to 
pray, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done 
on earth as it is done in heaven"— are coming. 
In fact, they are here; and present troubles in 
church and state are the results of influences 
emanating from that King and Kingdom. 
Though men know it not, it is the smiting by 
this Kingdom of God that is even now preparing 
for the wreck of all the kingdoms of earth 
and the preparation thus of the hearts of men 
for the true King and his righteous government. 
Thus it was foretold by the Lord through the 
prophet.-Dan. 2:34,35. 

Worldly men know not of this, because this 
Kingdom cometh not with outward show or 
display: because they cannot say, Lo here, or 

R1692: page 266 

Lo there, they do not realize it at all. (Matt. 24:23.) 

But God's children, enlightened by 

his Word, know that thus it is written, and that 

R1693 : page 266 

the Day of the Lord will come as a thief and 
a snare upon the world; and that only God's 
people, his fully consecrated Church, will be in 
the light and will not be taken unawares. And 
many of these have been deceived by looking 
for the King again in the flesh— forgetting that 
his only object in becoming flesh was "for the 
suffering of death" as man's corresponding 
price; and that, this over now, he is highly exalted, 
and "dieth no more." They forget that 
"Though we have known Christ after the flesh, 
yet now henceforth know we him [so] no more;" 
and that we must be changed that we may "see 
him as he is,"— not as he was. We now know 
him as the King of glory— the same who was 
dead, but who is now highly exalted— the 
same seen by Saul of Tarsus, a spirit being shining 



above the brightness of the noon-day sun. 

(See Heb. 2:9; Phil. 2:9; 2 Cor. 5:16; 1 Cor. 15:51; 

1 John 3:2; Acts 26:13-15.) Another 

matter which the Lord has permitted to becloud 

this subject of the Lord's second coming, 

so that none except those who hunger and 

thirst after the truth might know, is the translation 

of the Greek word, parousia, by the 

English word, coming, whereas it should be rendered 

presence; for that is the thought. Note 

the wide difference in the sense of the following 

texts where the Greek word parousia should be 

rendered presence in every instance:— Matt. 24:3,27; 

ICor. 15:23; 1 Thes. 2:19; 3:13; 

4: 15; 5:23; 2 Thes. 2: 1,8; Jas. 5:7,8; 2 Pet. 1 : 16; 

3:4; 1 John 2:28. 

True, there is to be an earthly phase or representation 
of the Kingdom of God, visible to 
the natural eyes of men, as the spiritual government 
will be recognized by the eyes of their 
understanding; but it will be established later, 
as it is written, Ye shall see Abraham and Isaac 
and Jacob and all the prophets— all the overcomers 
of the past— in the Kingdom. (Luke 13:28.) 
The unseen Kingdom will be Christ 
and the apostles, and all the faithful overcomers 
of the Gospel age— the body of Christ. 

All that needed to be done to inaugurate the 
present strife for wealth and power, and to bring 
the festering sore of selfishness to a head, was 
to lift the vail and let men see the possibilities 
surrounding them. The lifting of the vail of 
ignorance from men's minds is a good thing of 
itself: only the selfishness of the human heart 
causes it to bring forth evil fruit. And the evil 
fruit is only partial and temporary: the sharpening 
of men's wits, possibly supernaturally as 
well as by the competitive strife for wealth, is 
preparing some of the inventions which will be 
ready for the quicker blessing of the world when 
the new King and his Millennial Kingdom shall 
have assumed full control. 

But the King of Glory waits to be prayed to 
come and take control. He will let the various 
parties and factions of society cut and lance 
and amputate each others defects and prepare 
each others physics. But it will all be under 
the King's eye, and subject to his "all-power." 
And when all are thoroughly sick, and when he, 
as the Good Physician, does come in and offer 
"the balm of Gilead," he and his Kingdom 
will generally be hailed as "the desire of all 
nations." (Hag. 2:7.) The Jews will be first: 
"They shall mourn for him as one mourneth 
for his only son." And when he shall reveal 
his presence and Kingdom, they will shout, 



"Lo! this is our God, we have waited for him, 
and he will save us." (Zech. 12:10; Isa. 25:9.) 
Then "many people shall go and say, Come, let 
us go up to the mountain [kingdom] of the 
Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and 
he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk 
in his paths."— Isa. 2:3. 

Surely, those who know that the King and his 
Kingdom are the only remedy and the best 
remedy for all the wrongs and woes of men 
should be pointing the groaning creation to this, 
rather than to the poultices of their own contriving 
which can do no real good. Tell them 
about the Return of the King! Tell them that 
he is the Great Prophet and Great Priest, as well 
as the Great King: that as Prophet [Christ, the 
head, and his Church, the body] he will cause 
an accurate knowledge of the Lord to fill the 
whole earth; and that as Priest he will be ready to 
pardon and succor all who, under that knowledge, 
shall turn from sin to righteousness. Tell 
them that his death was the redemption price 

R1693 : page 267 

for all, and that the return of the King is to 
bind Satan and set free all of his captives who 
will accept the liberty of the sons of God 
under the conditions of the New Covenant.— 
Acts 3:22,23; Gal. 3:29; 1 Cor. 6:2. 

"Tell the whole world these blessed tidings; 
Speak of the time of rest that nears: 
He who was slain on Calvary's mountain 
Soon is to reign a thousand years. 

"What if the clouds do for a moment 
Hide the blue sky where morn appears? 
Soon the glad sun of promise given 
Rises to shine a thousand years. 

"A thousand years! Earth's coming glory! 
'Tis the glad day so long foretold; 
'Tis the bright morn of Zion's glory, 
Prophets foresaw in times of old." 

-HYMNS OF DAWN. 



R1693: page 267 

FORGIVENESS VERSUS MALICE. 



"Forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's 



sake hath forgiven you."— Eph. 4:32. 

A FORGIVING spirit is a part of the spirit of 
love, a part of God's spirit, the holy spirit 
or disposition— the spirit of the truth— inculcated 
in God's Word. It is thus the opposite 
or contrary of the spirit of malice, which is a 
part of the evil spirit or disposition common 
among men in their fallen condition, the spirit 
or disposition of the world. 

A forgiving spirit is kindred to the spirit of 
love, joy, peace, meekness, patience, brotherly-kindness, 
godliness. A malicious spirit is related 
to anger, back-biting, slander, wrath, jealousy, 
hatred and all the works of the (fallen) flesh 
and the devil. 

Recognizing these two spirits in the light of 
God's Word, his people must surely desire and 
seek more and more to cultivate the forgiving 
disposition— a spirit of readiness or willingness 
to forgive, which would rather that the transgressor 
would penitently turn from his evil 
way to the way of righteousness, and which 
would take pleasure in receiving him back into 
fellowship again under such conditions. 

However, on this as upon every question, extreme 
and unscriptural views are sometimes entertained. 
Some feel that the most extreme 
view conceivable must be the right one, because 
of their desire to get as far away as possible 
from the unforgiving or malicious spirit. 
In consequence, some are continually chiding 
themselves for not being able to forgive those 
who have not repented, who have not asked 
forgiveness nor brought forth fruits (evidences) 
indicating repentance. 

This comes of the fall. Human judgments 
have become defective, so that it sometimes 
perplexes us to know how and where to draw 
the lines upon our own hearts and conduct. 
But here God comes to our rescue. He knows: 
his mind or judgment and not our own imperfect 
judgments, therefore, must be our guide or 
criterion; and his Word expresses to us his 
mind (spirit or disposition) on this and every 
subject. If we accept and use it, instead of our 
own imperfect judgments, we are said to have 
"the spirit of a sound mind."— 2 Tim. 1 :7. 

Let us study and adopt as our own the spirit 
of God's sound mind on this subject of forgiveness, 
casting aside as erroneous whatever our 
own depraved judgments may have previously 
accepted. This will be following the instructions 
of the text at the head of this article, and 
we will learn to forgive even as God forgives. 

(1) Our spirit or disposition to forgive any 



one should be of the heart prompted by the 

spirit of love and brotherly kindness. It should 

not be a forgiveness forced out of us by importunity, 

nor by the appeals of many, nor by pity 

for the wrong doers' sufferings or sorrow. It 

should be there pent up in our hearts, ready to 

pour forth upon the offender as soon as he repents 

and gives reasonable evidence of his sincerity. 

God waits to be gracious, desires to 

pardon sinners; and such must be our attitude 

toward those who trespass against us. But 

God always waits for repentance, and never 

grants his pardon to those who are unrepentant, 

nor receives them into fellowship as friends. 

True, he loved us while we were yet sinners 
(John 3:16; Rom. 5:8), and he does good even 
to the unthankful, giving sunshine and rain and 
food to all; but that is a pitying love, not a 
fellowship love, not a communing love: it is 
the sympathetic love of a benefactor. And we 

R1693 : page 268 

are to have this pity-love also, even to our 

enemies. We are to love our enemies, and do 

good to them that persecute us; but with us, 

as with God, this can be no more than pity-love: 

it cannot be fellowship-love, "for what 

fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? 

and what communion hath light with 

darkness?" Nevertheless, while we can have 

no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, 

but must rather reprove them (Eph. 5:11), 

we can still have that benevolence of heart 

which would not permit even an enemy to 

perish with hunger. "Therefore, if thine enemy 

hunger, feed him," etc. In so doing we are 

but imitating our Heavenly Father who is merciful 

even to the unthankful and despiteful. 

R1694: page 268 

(2) God's readiness or quickness to forgive 
and receive into fellowship depends upon the 
amount of light and favor sinned against. To 
the ignorant, who know not of his character, 
he sends his children as ambassadors,— evangelists, 
colporteurs, etc.,— to tell them of his love 
and his willingness to forgive their sins through 
Christ. But in proportion as any have tasted of 
the good Word of God and been made partakers 
of the holy spirit, etc., and have sinned wilfully 
against light and knowledge (Heb. 6:4-6; 
10:26-31), in that same proportion God is slow 
to forgive, and will not receive such back into 
fellowship, except they bring forth works proving 



their professed repentance to be sincere. 
And God assures us that there is a degree of 
wilful sin, against full light and ability, that he 
will never forgive— "There is a sin unto death, 
I do not say that ye shall pray for it."— 1 John 5:16. 

In this, also, we should copy our Father in 
heaven. We should be very ready to forgive 
the blunders and errors of either natural or 
spiritual childhood, and to all the weak and inexperienced, 
even before they ask we should 
manifest our willingness to forgive. And with 
all who trespass against us, our willingness to 
forgive should be proportionate to the ignorance 
and lack of wilfulness and malice on the part of 
the transgressor. Whenever malice, wilfulness 
and knowledge have been factors in the transgression, 
it is our duty to be proportionately 
slow to forgive and to require proportionately 
longer and stronger proofs of repentance. 

But this is as far as we may go. Although 
we may be able to decide what would be a sin 
unto death against God (1 John 5:16), we may 
not decide that any transgression against us is 
unforgivable; against us there are to be no unpardonable 
sins. Our imperfect knowledge, as 
well as our imperfect judgments, forbids such a 
decision. Hence our Lord said, "If thy brother 
trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, 
forgive him. And if he trespass against 
thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a 
day turn again to thee, saying, I repent, thou 
shalt forgive him." Peter said, "Lord how oft 
shall my brother sin against me and I forgive 
him? till seven times? Jesus saith unto him, I 
say not unto thee, Until seven times, but, Until 
seventy times seven."— Luke 17:3,4; 
Matt. 18:21,22. 

From these scriptures it is evident that some 
of God's people make the mistake of forgiving 
transgressors before they repent. It is as much 
the Lord's command that we rebuke the transgressor, 
and that we do not forgive until he turns 
again and repents, as it is his command that we 
do forgive, from the heart, when he does turn 
and repent. And if he trespass seventy times 
seven times he should be rebuked as often (either 
by word or conduct or both), and should repent 
in words and turn in conduct just as often. 

To require less than this is to disobey our 
Teacher's instructions and to do injury to the 
transgressor by giving him lax ideas as to his 
duty. A lack of strict justice, in this respect, 
on the part of God's people has often injured 
their children, whereas a proper exercise of justice 
with forgiveness on proper grounds would 
have helped those children the better to understand 



God's dealings, and would guard them 
against expecting his favor except upon full 
repentance; and also against tempting divine 
mercy by sinning against knowledge. 

But while some need to correct their hearts 
and conduct as above, more, probably, need to 
guard against an unforgiving spirit. Such 
should remember that Christ Jesus by the grace 
of God tasted death for every man— paid the 
price of every man's natural or inherited imperfections 
—and consider that if God can accept 
that ransom price as the full satisfaction 

R 1694 : page 269 

for all except wilful sins or the wilful portion 
of sins, then we can and should do so also; 
and all who have God's spirit or disposition 
will hold wrong-doers responsible for only their 
wilful share in sins and be ready to forgive and 
pass over quickly whatever is of Adamic depravity 
and truly repented of and thereafter shunned. 

Let such remember the words, "If we confess 
our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive 
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; 
and consider that we who accept our 
Lord Jesus' sacrifice, as being for the sins of the 
whole world, must also, if we would be faithful 
and just, forgive those who trespass against us, 
if they confess and repent, because Jesus paid 
all of their debts, to us as well as to God. 

Justice, therefore, demands of all who trust 
in the merit of Christ's sacrifice as the ground 
of their own forgiveness, that they recognize 
the same precious blood as the covering of all 
Adamic weaknesses when repented of. And 
hence the Lord assures us that unless we forgive 
those who trespass against us (when they repent), 
neither will he forgive us when we repent. 

Moreover, our forgiveness must be from the 
heart (Matt. 18:35)— not a lip forgiveness and 
a heart hatred. The forgiven one may be held 
at a distance for a time to prove the sincerity 
of his repentance; but just as soon as we have 
good cause to believe him sincere we must be 
prompt and hearty in our forgiveness— as a 
heart with a forgiving spirit or desire will 
always be glad to do. But, even then, although 
fully and heartily forgiven, we may not put such 
a one into a place of the same responsibility as 
the one from which he fell until we have seen 
a stronger and truer character developed in him. 
And this would not imply a lack of full forgiveness, 
but merely a proper caution— not only for 
our own protection, but also for the good of the 
one who transgressed and his protection from 



too strong a temptation of same kind. 

We find no mention in the Scriptures of forgiving 
on God's part without the requirement of 
repentance. The passage which reads, "Father, 
forgive them, they know not what they do" 
(Luke 23:34), might be considered to refer to 
a pardon without repentance; but we remark 
that these words are not found in the oldest 
Greek MSS.— the Sinaitic and Vatican. 

A passage frequently misunderstood is: 

"If thou comest to the altar, and there rememberest 
that thy brother hath aught against 
thee, leave there thy gift and first go and be 
reconciled to [or make amends to] thy brother, 
and then come and offer thy gifts." — 
Matt. 5:23,24. 

It should be noted that the one addressed is 
not the brother trespassed against, but the trespassing 
brother. He must leave the offering of 
his gift or prayer, until he has made amends 
to his brother for the wrong he is conscious 
of having done him, in word or deed. Not until 
then will his offering be acceptable to God. 



page 269 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1694: page 269 

THE FIRST DISCIPLES OF JESUS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON VIII., AUG. 19, JOHN 1:35-49. 

Golden Text— "We have found the Messias, which is, 
being interpreted, the Christ."— John 1:41. 

These were among the first disciples* of 
the Lord, and, being attentive hearers and 
believers on him, they received a special 
call to follow him, both as learners and assistants 
in his ministry. And having obeyed 
this call they were afterward formally ordained 



as apostles and in due time endued 

with favor from on high and with authority 

as apostles of the gospel dispensation. 

In addition to the review of the above 
subject, which we trust all will notice, it is 
also interesting to note several other features 
in the narrative before us. 

(1) Observe the humility and self-abnegation 
of John in pointing out his cousin 
according to the flesh as "The Lamb of 
God that taketh away the sin of the world," 
—the long-looked-for Messiah, whose rising 
popularity must soon eclipse his own. 
John had no ambition to be greatest, but 
esteemed it a privilege and honor to be 
simply— "a voice crying in the wilderness, 
Make straight in the desert a highway for 
our God." And when some of John's disciples 
came to him, evidently expecting to 
find in him some of the spirit of rivalry, 
saying, "Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond 
Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, 
behold the same baptizeth, and all men 
come to him, John answered and said, A 



*For a full treatment of the subject of this lesson see 
our issue of May 1, 93— "The Twelve Apostles, Their 
Calling, Office and Authority." 

R1694: page 270 

man can receive nothing except it be given 
him from heaven. Ye yourselves bear me 
witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, 
but that I am sent before him. He that 
hath the bride is the bridegroom, but the 
friend of the bridegroom which standeth 
and heareth him rejoiceth greatly, because 
of the bridegroom's voice: this my joy therefore 
is fulfilled. He [as the light] must increase, 
but I must decrease."— John 3:26-36. 

And when a deputation of priests and 
Levites came from Jerusalem to ask him— 
"Who art thou? he confessed, ...I am 
not the Christ. And they asked him, What 
then? Art thou Elias? And he saith, I am 
not. Art thou that prophet? And he answered, 
No. Then said they, Who art thou? 
that we may give an answer to them that 
sent us. What sayest thou of thyself?"— 
what a temptation there was here to claim 
to be some great one and to exalt himself 
in the estimation of his fellow-men. But 
there was no sign in him of self-exaltation. 



He said, "I am the voice of one crying in 
the wilderness, Make straight the way of 
the Lord, as said the Prophet Esaias.... 
I baptize with water, but there standeth 
one among you whom you know not; he it 
is who, coming after me, is preferred before 
me, whose shoe's latchet I am not worthy 
to unloose." 

R1695 : page 270 

How beautifully this grace of humility and 
self-abnegation shines in the characters of 
those ancient worthies whom the Lord was 
preparing for the earthly phase of his Kingdom. 
And verily, said Jesus, "among them 
that are born of women there hath not risen 
a greater than John the Baptist." (Matt. 11:11.) 
Well have the apostles Paul and 
James directed those who are called to share 
in the spiritual phase of the Kingdom to 
the patient, humble faithfulness of the ancient 
worthies (Jas. 5:10; Heb. 11), as examples 
for our imitation. 

VERSES 29-37 show how deliberately John 
turned his disciples over to Jesus. Previous 
to his baptism John knew Jesus only as his 
cousin. The spirit of God had directed him 
to baptize with water and to proclaim the 
coming Messiah; but he testifies that he 
knew not who it would be until he saw the 
promised sign fulfilled in the descent of the 
holy spirit upon his humble cousin, Jesus. 

To a proud or ambitious mind familiar 
acquaintance or relationship is generally 
more conducive to a spirit of rivalry; but 
it was not so with John. He was ready at 
once to exclaim in the presence of his disciples, 
"Behold the Lamb of God!" 

(2) Next we note the manner in which 
the several disciples here named recognized 
Jesus as the Messiah. John had specially 
drawn attention to the prophecies concerning 
him, and by his correspondencies with 
those prophesies they recognized him, saying, 
"We have found him of whom Moses 
in the law, and the prophets, did write, 
Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph." They, 
in common with others, supposed him to be 
the son of Joseph, the mystery of his incarnation 
evidently not being generally 
known at that time. 

The law and the prophets and his works 
were God's witnesses of Christ at his first 
advent; and to the same testimony we are 
referred for the evidences of his second advent.* 



In addition to the testimony of the 
law and the prophets these early disciples 
were invited to "Come and see" for themselves, 
that the power and wisdom of Jehovah 
rested upon his Anointed. And they 
came and saw, not only that the spirit of 
holiness and grace was in him, but also that 
the power of discerning of spirits (of reading 
the thoughts and intents of the hearts) 
and of working miracles was granted to 
him. (Verses 47,48.) Thus God ratified the 
testimony of his holy prophets, and fully 
convinced those who were Israelites indeed 
and in whom was no guile. Later the same 
gifts— of miracles, discerning of spirits, healings, 
prophecy, etc., were granted to the 
Apostles, and for the same purpose.— Heb. 2:3,4; 
1 Cor. 12:1,4,8-11. 

R1695: page 270 

OUR LORD'S FIRST MIRACLE. 



III. QUAR., LESSON IX., AUG. 26, JOHN 2:1-11. 

Golden Text— "This beginning of miracles did Jesus 
in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth his glory." 

The golden text of this lesson suggests its 
import: this beginning of Christ's miracles 
manifested forth or typified the glory of his 
coming Kingdom and power. The circumstance 
of our Lord providing wine for a 
festive occasion, and that, too, by the performance 
of a miracle, as if to emphasize 
the propriety of its use on such occasions, 
is quite a difficulty in the way of advocates 
of total abstinence, and quite an argument 
in the mouths of those who favor the use 
of wine as a beverage. But both the difficulty 
and the argument disappear before a 



*See M. DAWN, VOL. II., Chaps. 3,4. 

R1695: page 272 

clear conception of the object of the miracle. 

Calling to mind Matt. 26:29-that our 
Lord would no more drink of the fruit of 
the vine with his disciples until he should 
drink it new with them in the Kingdom; 
and also the prophecy of Isaiah 25:6, "In 



this mountain [the kingdom of God] shall 
the Lord of hosts make unto all people a 
feast of fat things, ...of wines on the lees 
well refined"— we recognize in the exhilarating 
wine an apt symbol of joy and gladness. 
To partake of the cup of the Lord in 
the present time signifies to share in his 
sufferings, humiliation and death; but to 
partake of his cup in the coming age will 
mean to share in his glory and joy. That 
will be the new wine in the Kingdom. 

The first miracle was given to symbolize 
this ultimate object of the work upon which 
he was then entering, which was to glorify 
his Church and then to spread a feast of 
fat things (of rich blessings) and of wine 
(of joy) before all people. How appropriate 
that such a foreshadowing of future glory 
should be the first of his wonderful works. 

In observing the typical features of the 
miracle we notice, (1) That its performance 
was on the occasion of a wedding, following 
the wedding ceremony. So the joy and 
blessings of Christ's Kingdom, both to the 
Church, his bride, and also to the world, 
will follow the marriage of the Lamb and 
his espoused virgin Church. 

(2) Next we notice that this typical 
marriage was on "the third day" (verse 1), 
reminding us very forcibly of our Lord's 
statement to some of the Pharisees (Luke 13:32): 
"Go ye and tell that fox [Herod], 

Behold I cast out devils and I do cures to-day 

and to-morrow, and the third day I 

shall be perfected; "and again (John 2:19,21,) 

"Destroy this temple ["the temple of his 

body"— the Church], and in three days I 

will raise it up." The three days here referred 

to were days of a thousand years 

each— the fifth, sixth and seventh thousand-year-days 

from creation. Jesus then lived 

in the fifth; and now, in the dawning of the 

seventh, his body will be "perfected" and 

"raised up" to kingdom power and glory. 

The marriage of the Lamb will be in the third 

day of her existence as the body of Christ, 

and in the seventh of the world's history. 

(3) We notice that the miracle consisted 
in the turning of the water in the vessels 
for purification into the desirable beverage, 
the "good wine." Water is a symbol of 
truth (Eph. 5:26), the use of which is for 
refreshing and cleansing the Lord's people; 
and it is through this very cleansing agency 
that the Church is to be glorified and the 
world blessed. Divine truth, having by its 



blessed inspiration to godliness and holiness, 
accomplished its cleansing purifying work, 
will be gloriously realized in the blessings 
and joys of the Kingdom. 

(4) The Lord's reply to Mary, who informed 
him of the lack of wine, is also significant. 
"Jesus said to her, What [is that] 
to me and to thee, O woman? Mine hour 
has not yet come." (Verse 4— Diaglott.) The 
"woman," the Church, need not yet inquire 
for the new wine of joy. The hour 
for exaltation and glory has not yet come, 
and as yet we have to do only with the 
dregs of the cup of humiliation and sacrifice. 
And if we partake of this cup now we will 
surely drink the new wine with him in the 
Kingdom. Let us take the advice of Mary— 
"Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it," and 
in due time faithful obedience to all his directions 
will be amply rewarded by the 
privilege of participating with him in the 
joys of the Kingdom, the "new wine." And 
following that will come for all people the 
feast of fat things and of wines on the lees. 

By the early disciples this typical significance 
could not have been discerned; but 
they did see in the power that could work 
such a miracle the evidence of his claim to 
be the Son of God, while to us in the light 
of the dawning Millennial day the finer lines 
of type and prophecy are due to be understood 
and are clearly manifest. 

The occurrence has no more bearing on 
the temperance question than had the taking 
of a colt to fulfill the prophecy of Zech. 9:9 
(Matt. 21:1-5) a bearing on the question of 
the rights of private property. All things 
belong to God and have their legitimate 
and illegitimate uses. Under the rule which 
Paul gives (1 Cor. 8:13), the disuse of 
wine as a beverage is certainly commendable 
under present conditions, while its limited 
use for medicinal purposes is warranted 
by 1 Tim. 5:23. 

R1695: page 271 

JESUS CLEANSING THE TEMPLE. 



III. QUAR., LESSON X., SEPT. 2, JOHN 2:13-25. 

Golden Text— "Make not my Father's house a house 
of merchandise. "--John 2:16. 



The several accounts of this action of our 
Lord by the other evangelists place the occurrence 

R1695 : page 272 

unmistakably near the close of his 
ministry, while John here mentions it in 
connection with events at the beginning of 
his public work. It would appear, however, 
that the one event was referred to by 
them all, the last verse of John's account, 
like the others, showing the hostile attitude 
of numerous opponents who sought his life, 
which disposition did not make its appearance 
in the very beginning of his ministry. 

This authoritative action of Jesus had a 
peculiar fitness as a type near the close of 
his ministry. It immediately followed his 
triumphant entry into Jerusalem in fulfilment 
of the prophecy— "Behold thy king 
cometh unto thee, etc." (Zech. 9:9); and 
this course in the temple was an assumption 
of authority consequent upon this rightful 
claim to be the king of Israel— a claim, however, 
which was rejected by the Jews. "He 

R1696: page 272 

came unto his own [people], and his own received 
him not." (John 1:11.) Then, seeing 
they put away the favor of God from them 
and proved themselves unworthy of it, he 
turned to the Gentiles to take out of them 
a people for his name, which selection has 
required the eighteen centuries of the Gospel 
age; and that fleshly house of Israel and 
this spiritual house, the Gospel Church, 
stand related to each other as type and antitype; 
both as to circumstances and time. As 
an event shortly preceding his crucifixion, 
this cleansing of the temple finds its antitype 
in a similar work here, beginning at the 
corresponding date- 1878 (See M. DAWN, 
VOL. II., page 239); viz., the casting out (from 
the spiritual temple— his body, the consecrated 
Church) of such as are unworthy to be 
of that body, while the worthy ones, the pure 
in heart, are being correspondingly blessed. 

The scourge of small cords was a fit emblem 
of the harmonious doctrines of Christ, 
which are accomplishing the cleansing 
work here. 

When asked for a sign of the authority 
by which he did these things, Jesus pointed 
forward to his future power— after his 
death and resurrection. (Verses 18-21.) He 



had no authority to begin the actual work 
then; that which he did being only typical, 
and for our profiting, not theirs. 

VERSES 23-25 (Diaglott). Though the 
people at this time seemed greatly impressed 
by his miracles, and, shouting Hosanna! before 
him, seemed ready to accept him as the 
Messiah and to proclaim him king at once 
(See also Matt. 21:9-1 1), Jesus did not trust 
them; for he knew the fickleness of their 
hearts, and having the gift also of discerning 
of spirits, he needed not that any man 
should testify of them, for he knew what 
was in them.— Luke 20:41-47. 

The Golden Text— "Make not my Father's 
house a house of merchandise"— should 
have the most careful consideration of all 
those who profess to be of his consecrated 
house,— the true temple. In this time of 
cleansing, sifting and purifying of the temple 
of God, none will be permitted to remain 
in it whose purpose is in any way to 
make merchandise of God's holy things. 

R1696: page 272 

JESUS AND NICODEMUS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON XL, SEPT. 9, JOHN 3:1-16. 

Golden Text— "God so loved the world that he gave 
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life."— John 3:16. 

For a consideration of this interview between 
the Lord and Nicodemus, see M. 
DAWN, VOL. I., Chap. xiv. In connection 
with Verse 13 see Acts 2:34 and 2 Tim. 4:8. 

VERSES 14-15. The reference here is to 
the circumstance recorded in Num. 21:4-9, 
when the bite of a fiery serpent was cured 
by a look at the brazen serpent which 
Moses raised up. The fiery serpents here 
represented Sin, from whose deadly bite all 
humanity is suffering. But Christ, who knew 
no sin, was made a sin-offering on our behalf, 
that we might be made the righteousness 
of God in him. (2 Cor. 5:21 -Diaglott.) 
He is the antitype of the brazen serpent. 
The lifting up of the serpent in the wilderness 
prefigured the lifting up of Christ on 
the cross of Calvary; and the look of faith 
to him and the merit of his sacrifice for salvation 
is the never- failing cure for sin, as it 



is also the only hope of our fallen race. 

VERSE 16 suggests the cost of the world's 
salvation to our Heavenly Father. His only 
begotten Son was the delight and treasure 
of his heart; and all the painful process of 
his humiliation and sacrifice even unto an 
ignominious and cruel death were at the 
expense of the fondest affection of him who 
loves as never man loved. With the assurance 
of this example of divine love for our 
race, the Apostle Paul (Rom. 8:31-39) would 
further encourage our faith, saying, "He 
that spared not his own Son, but delivered 
him up for us all, how shall he not with him 
also freely give us all things? If God be for 
us, who can be against us?" 



page 274 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



THE "DO YOU KNOW?" TRACT. 



The demand for this tract is phenomenal. 
Nearly a quarter of a million have already gone 
out; and the orders are still coming in at the 
rate about 2000 per day. Some good results are 
manifest, too: quite a number have been interested 
by this means. Let the good work go on. 
Let the light shine everywhere. And let all that 
you do in this and every direction be done in love 
—love for God, for his people and for his Word. 

All whose names are on the TOWER list are 
recognized as members also of the Tract Society, 
and may order free as many tracts as they 
can properly use as samples for free distribution. 
Each should also be an agent or solicitor 
for the WATCH TOWER. A TOWER subscription 
includes a subscription to these Old Theology 
Quarterly Tracts, with the privilege of ordering 
additional tracts. These tracts are published 



out of the voluntary donations to the Tract 
Fund, "Good Hopes," etc. 

Brother Otto Koetitz, now a valued helper in 
the TOWER office, has translated this tract into 
German, and it will soon be published in that 
language. 

R1682: page 274 

ROMANISM IN NEW YORK. 



The American Journal of Politics, referring 
to the way in which the Church of Rome is 
obtaining complete sway in American politics 
says: "In New York the following are Roman 
Catholics: The mayor, the sheriff, the comptroller, 
the counsel to the corporation, the whole 
Board of Assessment, the commissioner of public 
works, the superintendent of the street 
cleaning department, the clerk to the board of 
aldermen, the majority of that board, every 
member of the Board of Tax Commissioners, 
several justices of the Supreme, Superior, and 
Common Pleas Courts, the controllers of the 
Board of Estimate and Apportionment, the majority 
in many of the ward boards of trustees, 
a large portion of the Board of Education, the 
controllers of the Department of Charities and 
Corrections, the majority of the police force, 
the controllers of the fire department, of the 
Board of Street Openings, the whole of the 
Armoury Board, the registrar of deeds, the commissioner 
of jurors, one-half of the commissioners 
of accounts, the supervisor of the city 
records, the collector of the port, the sub-treasurer, 
a majority of the commissioners of the 
Sinking Fund, and, finally, the majority of the 
delegates to Congress, and in the State Senate, 
and Assembly."— Evangelical Churchman. 



R1696: page 275 

VOL. XV. SEPTEMBER 1, 1894. NO. 17. 

"IF YE BE CHRIST'S." 



"If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, 
and heirs according to the promise."— Gal. 3:29. 

THESE words were addressed by the inspired 



Apostle to Christians, and they apply with 
equal force to the same class to-day. He does 
not say— "If ye be Jews;" although like all the 
early Christian churches, those of Galatia were 
no doubt composed in good proportion of 
Hebrews of various tribes. That was not the 
ground, or condition, upon which they might 
consider themselves heirs of the promise made 
to Abraham. 

Neither does he say— "If ye be Anglo-Israelites." 
He knew nothing about such kinship 
according to the flesh having anything 
whatever to do with a joint-heirship in the 
promise. Quite to the contrary indeed: for 
under divine inspiration he tells us— 

"Though the number of the children of 
Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant 
[only] shall be saved [from their blindness predicted.]" 
"For they stumbled at that stumbling 
stone;" and "the Gentiles, which followed 
not after righteousness, have attained to the 
righteousness which is by faith." "I have great 
heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart. 
For I could wish that myself were accursed from 
Christ [if by losing this joint-heirship myself 
I might gain it] for my brethren, my kinsmen 
according to the flesh, who are Israelites. "-- 
Rom. 9:27,32,30,2-4. 

Still discussing the blindness of Israel and 
their fall from divine favor, which opened the 
door of favor to the Gentiles, the Apostle assures 
us that the vessels of God's mercy prepared 
unto glory are "us whom he hath called, 
not of Jews only, but also of the Gentiles." 
(Rom. 9:23,24.) "Israel [as a nation, the 
twelve tribes] hath not obtained that which he 
seeketh for; but the election hath obtained it, 
and the rest were blinded."— Rom. 1 1:7. 

Keeping up the same discussion he asks, "Have 
they [the fleshly seed] stumbled that they should 
fall [utterly]?" He answers, "God forbid: 
but rather that through their fall [as the natural 
seed to which the promise first was made] salvation 
is come to the Gentiles, for to provoke 
them to jealousy." And it has had, and will yet 
more have, this effect. Since the preaching of 
the Gospel to the Gentiles, Israel no longer 
goes after Baal, Moloch and other idolatries. 
That people seem to be growing more and 
more jealous of Christianity, and are now claiming 
and quoting Jesus as a Jew, as shown in our 
issue of Apr. 15, page 1 14, and June 11, page 162. 

Thus "the fall of them [is] the riches of the 
world; and the diminishing of them [the selecting 
of only a few, a remnant from them results 
in] the enriching of the Gentiles [proportionately 



--Gal. 3:14.] And if the cutting off 

of that people resulted in such blessing to 

others, how much greater blessings may we expect 

as a result of Israel's ultimate full regathering 

to God as a result of the jealousy? (Rom. 11:12.) 

Blindness in part [temporary blindness] 

has happened unto Israel [—except the remnant 

which accepted Christ; and that blindness will 

last] until the fulness of [the completeness of the 

R1696: page 276 

elect Church, selected from] the Gentiles be 
come in. And so [thus or then] all Israel shall 
be saved [from the blindness which happened 
to them eighteen centuries ago]: as it is written, 
There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer 
[Christ, the head, and his Church, the body], 
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob 
[Israel after the flesh]. For this is my covenant 
[agreement] with them when I shall take away 
their sins."— Verses 25-27. 

Satisfied that the Apostle did not in our text 
refer to all Israel that stumbled and that is to 
be saved from blindness by and by, nor to their 
children according to the flesh, lost or found, 
we settle it in our minds that the Apostle meant 
the words of our text to apply to consecrated 
believers in Christ, only; for whether Jew or 
Gentile, bond or free, all who are in Christ 
Jesus are one; joint-heirs of the promise made 
to Abraham.-Rom. 10:12; Gal. 3:28. 

But notice, again, very particularly, the words 
of our text. The Apostle begins the statement 
with that small but very significant word, if: 
"If ye be Christ's." It was not sufficient to 

R1697: page 276 

be known as a regular attendant of one of the 
congregations of believers in Galatia— a brother 
in good standing with fellow Christians and of 
good moral character. Nor did it avail anything 
that the great Apostle Paul recognized 
those congregations of believers in Galatia as 
"brethren" and "sons of God." (Gal. 3:15,26; 
4:6,12,31; 5:1 1,13; 6:1,18.) Notwithstanding 
all this, the inspired writer says, "if." 

To "be Christ's," therefore, evidently means 
a great deal more than faith, respectability and 
good endorsement. It means to belong to Christ; 
—to be his, body, soul and spirit;— to be his 
to-day and forever; his servant, to do his will 
in his way and at his time; when convenient 
and pleasurable, and when inconvenient, painful 
and difficult. 



It means, furthermore, that we cannot belong 
to anyone else in this complete sense, for no 
man can serve two masters. Here comes in a 
difficulty for those who belong to secret or other 
Societies. The laws, professions and customs 
of these are almost certain to conflict with or 
infringe upon a full consecration to Christ. 
They profess some things which Christ condemns, 
and if we would speak as his oracles we 
would offend. Their laws and customs are 
worldly, or at least conformed to this world, 
and our Master has laid down as his law that we 
be not conformed to this world, but that we be 
"transformed by the renewing of our minds- 
proving [ascertaining] the good and acceptable 
and perfect will of God." These Societies inculcate 
the wisdom of pleasing the world: our 
Master tells all that are his, "Ye are not of the 
world, even as I am not of this world." "If 
any man love the world, the love of the Father 
is not in him." In a word he says to us, 
"Choose ye this day whom ye will serve." 
"Ye cannot serve God and Mammon." 

These observations apply as truly to religious 
societies, churches, etc., as to others: indeed, 
more so, because the latter affect to represent 
Christ and to speak for him, which, surely, they 
have no right or authority to do; for our Master 
still speaks to those that are his through the 
Gospels and the words of his inspired Twelve 
Apostles. See article on "The Twelve Apostles," 
in TOWER, May 1, '93, p. 131. 

Almost all denominations have formulated 
Confessions of Faith to which all who belong 
to them either directly or indirectly give assent. 
And these uniformly conflict with the doctrines 
of Christ. They demand consecrated time and 
money, as well as name and influence, for 
these, which are false doctrines, and hence in 
opposition to Christ's doctrines. If we "be 
Christ's" only and fully, we cannot compromise 
with the world, nor with its policy and 
spirit amongst Christ's disciples. Not to compromisers, 
but to "overcomers," Christ's very 
own, is given the promise of a share with him 
in his throne as fellow-members of the Seed of 
Abraham and heirs according to that promise 
or covenant. 

Finally, and most important of all, the Christian 
must learn that, "if he be Christ's" servant 
and disciple, he is not his own;— not his 
servant to do his own will in his own way and 
time, nor his own teacher to make his own 
theology and code of laws and philosophies. 
He is simply a disciple or pupil in the School 
of Christ, under instruction upon every subject; 



—he is a know-nothing, a fool, according to the 

R1697: page 277 

wisdom of this world, in order that he may gain 
the true, heavenly wisdom. He is to be emptied 
of self in every sense, that he may "be 
Christ's" completely— dead to self, and alive 
toward God through Jesus Christ, his Lord. 
Few such? Ah! yes; and this the Master 
foretold us, saying, "Fear not, little flock, it is 
the Father's good pleasure to give you the 
Kingdom." 

"Not my own, but saved by Jesus, 
Who redeemed me by his blood, 

Gladly I accept the message; 
I belong to Christ, the Lord. 

"Not my own! to Christ, my Savior, 

I, believing, trust my soul; 
Everything to him committed, 

While eternal ages roll. 

"Not my own! my time, my talent, 

Freely all to Christ I bring, 
To be used in joyful service 

For the glory of my King. 

"Not my own! Oh, not my own! 

Jesus, I belong to thee! 
All I have and all I hope for, 

Thine for all eternity." 

But what is it to be "Abraham's seed and 
heirs according to the promise" made to 
Abraham? 

The promise made to Abraham was the first 
distinct statement of the Gospel of which we have 
any record. It reads, "In thee and thy seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 
This was good tidings to Abraham, as it would 
be indeed to all who have generous, godlike 
hearts; and hence the Apostle says that "God 
preached the gospel beforehand to Abraham, 
saying, 'In thy seed shall all the families of 
the earth be blessed.'" 

This gospel is still beforehand, in the sense 
that all the families of the earth have not yet 
been blest; but it may be said to be a present 
gospel to the few who now have "ears to 
hear,"— to appreciate it. 

To hear it fully and clearly is to appreciate 
the fact that a Millennium of blessing was provided 
for by the death of Christ as man's ransom 
or substitute, and that consequently a blessing 



is to come to all the families of the earth. 
This blessing will consist of a full opportunity 
to know God and to come into harmony with 
him under the conditions of the New Covenant 
(sealed with the precious blood), and thus to 
have everlasting life. 

To those who appreciate this gospel, and who 
thus judge that if one died for all, then were 
all dead [legally], and that we who live [through 
Christ's promise and work] should not henceforth 
live unto ourselves, but unto him who 
loved us and died for us;— to these the Lord 
makes known the exceeding riches of his grace, 
and offers a share with him in that work 
of blessing all the families of the earth, because 
they appreciate his work. And the further 
they go in obedience, self-denial and self-sacrifice 
in his service, the more he communicates 
of his gracious, loving plan, whose lengths 
and breadths and heights and depths are far 
beyond the comprehension of the natural man; 
but God reveals them by his spirit to those who 
are "Christ's."-2 Cor. 5:14,15; 1 Cor. 2:9,10. 



R1697: page 277 

"ONCE IN GRACE ALWAYS IN GRACE." 



THAT monstrous doctrine of "eternal torment," 
a blasphemy on the name and character 
of Jehovah God, has led God's people to 
some very illogical conclusions on other subjects 
as well; amongst others, to the view that whoever 
becomes a true child of God can never become 
a "castaway" from divine favor. Thus 
does Satan use the fear of torment to hinder 
love to God, while he operates reversely, through 
the same fear, upon the minds of the same people 
to make them feel secure and careless, though 
they so dread God that true love is impossible. 

The human mind is so constituted that it 
can by sophistry or false reasoning convince itself 
of error: hence the only safe position for 
any of us is to have absolutely no will or preference 
of our own, and thus to come to the 
Word of God free from all prejudice, intent 
simply upon knowing his will and plan: otherwise 
we are in constant danger of deceiving 
ourselves into whatever view we prefer; for "the 
heart is deceitful above all things." 

R1697: page 278 



Of course the Scriptures are appealed to as 
proof of this theory, that all are forever safe 
and sure of heaven who have been begotten of 
the spirit of truth. Hence we should examine 
carefully the Scriptures bearing upon this question, 
that we be not deceived. We read:— 

(1) "Whosoever is born [begotten] of God 
doth not commit sin; for [or because] his seed 
remaineth in him: and he cannot sin, because he 
is born [begotten] of God. In this the children 
of God are manifest, and the children of the 
devil: whosoever doeth not righteousness is not 
of God, neither he that loveth not his brother." 
--1 John 3:9,10. 

(2) "Whosoever is born [begotten] of God 
sinneth not; but he that is begotten of God 
keepeth himself, and the wicked one toucheth 
[catcheth] him not."— 1 John 5:18. 

(3) "Being born [begotten] again, not of 
corruptible seed but of incorruptible, by the 
Word of God, which liveth and abideth forever." 
-IPet. 1:23. 

(4) "No man can come to me except the 
Father which hath sent me draw him: and him 
that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out." 
-John 6:44,37. 

(5) "My Father, who gave them me, is 
greater than all; and no man is able to pluck 
them out of my Father's hand."— John 10:29. 

(6) "Whom he did foreknow, he also did 
predestinate to be conformed to the image of 
his Son."-Rom. 8:29. 

(7) "The Lord knoweth them that are 
his."-2 Tim. 2:19. 

(8) "It is God which worketh in you both 
to will and to do of his good pleasure."— 
Phil. 2:13. 

R1698: page 278 

(9) "If ye do these things, ye shall never 
fall; for so an entrance shall be ministered unto 
you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom 
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ."— 

2 Pet. 1:10,11. 

(10) "To deliver such a one unto Satan 
for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit 
may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus."— 
1 Cor. 5:5. 

The first four of these texts are supposed to 
teach that at our conversion we get from God 
an atom of himself, the seed of the new being; 
and this seed is presumed to be indestructible, 
incorruptible, unimpairable. It is claimed that 
although this seed may lie dormant awhile, or 



be hindered from development by a sinful course 
of life, it will ultimately, surely develop into a 
true and noble spiritual being. 

But these texts do not so teach. They do 
not teach that the new nature, begotten by the 
holy seed, the truth, cannot corrupt, cannot 
die;— that the convert cannot fall from grace. 
The contrary is the suggestion and lesson of 
the figure used— natural begetting. It shows 
us the possibility of misconception, miscarriage, 
still-birth, etc., after the spiritual begetting as 
after the natural begetting. Thus the figure 
used contradicts the theory sought to be built 
upon it. 

They do teach, that if our begetting is genuine, 
it must be a begetting or inspiring by the 
truth, and not by error; and that if we are 
really begotten by God's precious promises to 
new hopes, and new ambitions, and a new 
course of living, our natural preference for sin 
(by reason of the fall) having given place to a 
preference for righteousness, we cannot sin 
(wilfully);— and to them that are accepted in 
Christ nothing is reckoned sin that is contrary 
to their will, uncontrollable weaknesses, resulting 
from the fall, being covered from God's 
sight by the ransom.— Rom. 4:7,8. 

Hence, if any man sin (wilfully, intentionally), 
it is a sign that at that time he is not begotten 
of God by the Word of truth. If he 
ever were begotten to a holy, consecrated will, 
the seed of truth must have died; for so long as 
it remains he could not take pleasure in wilful 
disobedience. 

The truth-seed itself is incorruptible, but not 
so the newness of life begotten by it. The 
truth may be let slip, and leave us as though we 
had not known it. "We have this treasure [the 
spirit of the truth and the new wills begotten 
of it] in earthen vessels," as the Apostle says. 
(2 Cor. 4:7.) And our earthen vessels are all 
more or less cracked by the fall, so that we are 
unable to contain or to retain a full measure of 
the spirit of the truth,— with all the daubing 
and patching we can do; at best they are leaky 
vessels. Therefore, the Apostle again says, 

R1698: page 279 

"We ought to give the more earnest heed lest 
we should let these things slip [leak out]." 

The possibility of falling away, after having 
come into full fellowship with the Lord and 
been reckoned members of his "body," is very 
clearly taught by our Lord as well as by the 
apostles. In fact, the only ones in danger of 



falling away from divine favor are those who 
have been lifted up to that favor, and not the 
world still groveling in sin, "without God and 
without hope." The Apostle Paul says, 

"If we [the consecrated Church] sin wilfully, 
after that we have received a knowledge of the 
truth, there remaineth no more a sacrifice for 
sins [we having enjoyed our share of grace under 
the one sacrifice], but a fearful looking for 
of judgment and fiery indignation which shall 
devour [not preserve, nor purify, but destroy 
such wilful sinners as] the adversaries [of God]." 
--Heb. 10:26,27. 

Again, he declares, It is impossible to renew 
unto repentance those once enlightened, who 
have been made partakers of the holy spirit, 
etc., if they shall fall away. (Heb. 6:4-8.) But 
so infatuated and so deceived by their own 
hearts are those whose views we criticise, 
that to these words they reply, Yes, but the 
Apostle says if; whereas he knew that they 
could not fall away, and is merely citing an 
impossible case. Such people can only be left 
to the blindness which their own wilfulness and 
prejudice has induced. Whoever can read this 
citation, and still claim that the Apostle was 
teaching the impossibility of Christians falling 
from divine favor, is surely lacking either in 
intelligence or conscientiousness; and it would 
be useless for us to try to convince him. For 
he who could and would so distort the divine 
record would have no difficulty in getting rid 
of any arguments we or others might frame. 

The Apostle Peter speaks of this same class, 
saying, "For if, after they have escaped the pollutions 
of the world, through the knowledge of 
the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ [i.e., by being 
"begotten by the Word of God"], they 
are again entangled therein, and overcome, the 
latter end is worse with them than the beginning. 
For it had been better for them not to 
have known the way of righteousness, than, 
after they have known it [been "begotten by the 
Word of God"] to turn from the holy commandment 
delivered unto them. But it is happened 
unto them according to the true proverb, 
The dog is turned to his own vomit again; and 
the sow that was washed to her wallowing in 
the mire. "-2 Pet. 2:20-22. 

Our Lord taught the same lesson in his parables. 
He represented the state of the justified 
who backslide, by a man out of whom the devil 
had been cast and which, returning, found the 
heart swept and garnished, but unoccupied, 
and, entering in with others, made "the last 
end of that man worse than the first."— 



Matt. 12:43-45. 

In the parable of the wedding guests (Matt. 22:1 1-13) 
the Lord shows one (who represents a 
class), who evidently came in among the others, 
clothed in the provided "wedding garment," 
and who was fully recognized as a guest and 
"friend" by the host until he removed the 
garment [which typifies Christ's imputed robe 
of righteousness]; and then he was cast out of 
the special light and favor into the outer darkness 
from which he originally came in. 

In the parable of the sower our Lord shows 
how the good seed (the Word of God that liveth 
and abideth forever) might be received upon 
stony ground and sprout into being, and that 
new being afterward die, and how the same 
good, incorruptible seed in other cases is choked 
by the thorns of worldly business, pleasure and 
ambition.-Matt. 13:3-9,18-23. 

In the parable of the Vine (John 15:1-8) he 
shows that one may be begotten by the Word 
of God, and even become a member of the elect 
Church, the true Vine, and be recognized as such 
by the husbandman, God, and that yet, if he fail 
to bring forth the fruits of the spirit, he will in 
due time be cut off from that elect Church or 
true Vine. For the present state of our membership 
is not final, but a probationary one,— 
His "house are we, if we hold fast the confidence 
and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end." 
(Heb. 3:6.) We are justified by God's grace 
and called to be his sons, and "he is faithful that 
promised." (Heb. 10:23.) If there be failure 
or unfaithfulness, it will be on our part. Hence 
in receiving us as sons he is taking us at our 

R1698: page 280 

Covenant: and whoever becomes a "castaway" 
must become such of his own wilful act,~"If 
we sin wilfully," etc. 

Our Lord mentions some such whom he will 
disown, saying, Many shall say unto me in 
that day, Lord, Lord, have we not done many 
wonderful works in thy name, and in thy name 
cast out devils. 

Again, he tells us of one fully recognized as 
a servant and entrusted with a talent for service, 
who, because unfaithful, will have it taken from 
him and be himself cast into outer darkness: 
not because he never was a real servant, but 
because, being really a servant, he proved unfaithful. 
--Matt. 25:14-28. 

Let us now glance at the other texts cited to 
prove this theory that a true Christian cannot 
fall from divine favor. 



The fourth is a simple statement that the 
Word and providence of God alone can draw 
men to Christ, the Life-giver, and that Christ 
will not refuse any coming as the result of 
such a drawing. It says not one word about 
his holding men who come so that they cannot 
go from him again, crucify him afresh and do 
despite to the spirit of God's favor. 

The fifth text merely asserts God's willingness 
and ability to shield and keep all who desire 
to be kept— who abide under the shadow of the 
Almighty. It does not at all imply an imprisonment 
of those in God's care, so that they 
cannot go from him as they came to him, by 
the exercise of their own free wills. 

The sixth text merely mentions that the class 
foreknown to the Lord as those who will be 
joint-heirs with Christ, he has foreordained 
must have characters like that of Christ— must 
be copies of him. See a further treatment of 
this text in Z.W. TOWER, Feb. 1, '94. 

The seventh text declares that God cannot 
be deceived. He knows those who become his, 
by being begotten by the Word, and he knows 
equally well whenever any lose the spirit of the 
truth and cease to will and to do according to 
his good pleasure. 

The eighth text shows our continual dependence 
upon the Lord, not only for our first impulses 
toward holiness when we are begotten by 
his Word to newness of life, but also when we 
need the encouragement and promptings to 
deeds of righteousness which his exceeding great 
and precious promises continually inspire. God's 
Word is "the power of God unto salvation [by 
which he works in us first to will aright and 
then to do right] to every one that believeth" 
—receiving the spirit of that Word into good 
and honest hearts.— Compare 1 Pet. 1 :23 with 
2 Pet. 1:4 and Rom. 1:16. 

The ninth text shows that our continuance 
in safety depends upon our own course of conduct 
after God has done his part through his 
Word and providences; if then we do these 
things, if we cultivate the spirit of Christ and 
are "not barren nor unfruitful," but "give diligence 

R1699: page 280 

to make our calling and election sure," 
then, under such conditions, we "shall never 
fall;" for God will not suffer us to be tempted 
above that we are able, but will with the temptation 
provide a way of escape.— See TOWER, 
Oct. 15, '92. 
The tenth text is the only one that gives even 



a slight support to the doctrine claimed. Here 
one of the begotten or consecrated Church has 
committed sin; not necessarily a wilful sin, but 
quite probably in part at least a sin of ignorance; 
the transgressor was probably a "babe" 
in Christ and in the knowledge of the divine 
will, or had mistaken the liberty wherewith 
Christ makes free for license to sin, or both. 
At all events, the Apostle's language indicates 
that his case was not a hopeless one, as it would 
have been had the sinner transgressed against 
full light and knowledge, wilfully. For the 
same Apostle declares that such cannot be renewed 
unto repentance.— Heb. 6:4-6. Compare 
Uohn5:16. 

The Apostle would show the Church the importance 
of prompt and decisive action to correct 
such an error. The wrong-doer should 
not be temporized with, nor coaxed and advised, 
nor remonstrated against, but should be promptly 
disfellowshipped by all the pure-minded, refused 
all recognition and all privileges of fellowship, 
no matter what his professions or knowledge 
or talents: thus left to the world and the 
devil for fellowship, he would be the more likely 
to see his condition and reform. That in the 
case mentioned the man did not have a bad spirit, 

R1699: page 281 

but still had some love for God and his people and 
a desire for spiritual things, is shown by the Apostle's 
words, "That the spirit may be saved in the 
day of the Lord Jesus." If his spirit had been 
bad, the Apostle would not suggest its being saved 
—all that is evil must be destroyed. This man's 
spirit was good— his will was to do God's will, 
but from some cause he did not allow the exceeding 
great and precious promises of God's 
Word work in him to do right. The purity of 
the Church demanded that he be dealt with 
rigorously; and his own future depended upon 
whether or not the animal nature which was 
ruling him should be mortified— put to death. -- 
Rom. 8:13; Col. 3:5. 

The mortifying of the flesh implies that we 
cease to do evil and learn to do well; becoming 
dead as to sin, but alive unto righteousness. 
Only those who attain to such conditions will 
ever have everlasting life upon any plane of being. 

But there are two ways of reaching the same 
end. The more desirable and more noble of 
the two is this; viz., after justification and peace 
with God, by faith in the great atonement, we 
should consider ourselves as bought with a 
price, even the precious blood of Christ, and 



hence no longer our own, and should present 
our bodies living sacrifices to the service of the 
Lord— to be used, not according to our former 
will of the flesh, but according to the will (the 
Lord's will) to which we have been begotten 
by the word of truth. Such will not fulfil the 
desires of the flesh— sacrificed and reckoned 
dead, but the desires of their new spirit. The 
mind of Christ dwelling in them richly will 
control them more and more, and accomplish 
the sacrifice of the flesh in God's service. The 
class who so do, during this Gospel age, are 
called "Overcomers;" and to them will be fulfilled 
all the richest of God's promises; and, as 
joint-heirs with Christ, they shall inherit all 
things. These are in all a "little flock," because 
their path is a narrow one. 

The other way of reaching the same result, 
viz., of becoming dead to sin and alive toward 
righteousness is followed by many; but it is an 
ignoble way, an unsatisfactory way and in every 
sense undesirable. It is this: After gaining justification 
and peace through Christ, to make a 
covenant of self-sacrifice, and then by yielding to 
temptations and weaknesses to fail to overcome; 
and yet to hold tightly to the Lord, at the same 
time not resisting the desires of the flesh— not 
crucifying the flesh with its affections and desires, 
good and bad. This is the attitude of the 
majority of truly consecrated Christians— they 
are seeking to serve God and mammon, to 
please self and worldly friends as well as the 
Lord, some going to one extreme and some to 
another. The result of their course is that they 
please nobody. The world endures them, but 
despises their religious aspirations as "cant," 
and themselves as hypocrites. They are always 
dissatisfied with themselves, feeling conscience-smitten 
that they are violating the spirit of their 
consecration. They do not please the Lord, 
but he has pity on them. He sees that if right-doing 
were just as easy as wrong-doing, this 
class would choose the right; and in sympathetic 
pity he does for them the only thing that can 
be done further. He delivers them to Satan; 
he permits the great enemy of righteousness to 
attack them;— he permits their cherished ambitions 
to ensnare them and pinch them, their 
idols to fall, their earthly sweets to turn to 
bitterness, until, heart-sick and disappointed, 
the spirit may turn fully to the Lord, not an 
"overcomer," not a sacrifice, but one in whom 
the flesh has been destroyed by bitter experience, 
crying, 

"I have sought the world around, 

Peace and comfort nowhere found. 



Now to Christ my spirit turns, 
Turns a fugitive unblest." 

But such a result is by no means a certainty; 
instead of the buffetings and troubles turning 
the heart to the Lord, it may and often does 
result in utter loss of the spirit of Christ and a 
total cutting off and destruction of the unfruitful 
branch. 

The Apostle says, "that the spirit may be 
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." The result 
is at best an uncertainty— it may or may not be 
saved ultimately. The only way to save such as 
will not sacrifice is to put them through troubles 
which will destroy the flesh and develop the spirit; 
and this heroic remedy the Lord applies. 

This is the secret of much of the trouble 
through which God's people pass:— they are 

R1699: page 282 

not overcomers, and he is putting them through 

troublous experiences to destroy the will of the 

flesh and its control of them as "new creatures," 

and save them from their old selves. 

For the "great company" (mentioned in Rev. 7:9,10) 

refers not merely to some of this class 

now living, who, because not overcomers, not 

self-sacrificers, will not be saved from the great 

"time of trouble such as was not since there 

was a nation," but go into it and "have their 

portion with the hypocrites" and the world, in 

order that they may have the love of fleshly things 

—worldly ambitions, etc.,— entirely burned out: 

it refers as well to a similar class passing 

through trouble during all this Gospel age. To 

those rightly exercised a reward, a blessing, will 

be granted and everlasting life— although all 

such will lose the great prize to which all called 

in this age might attain, with far less pain and 

trouble, if obedient to their covenant,— self-sacrificers. 

But if, notwithstanding this discipline 

and experience, any still choose to live 

after the flesh, the Apostle's warning is that such 

"shall die" (Rom. 8:13); and he refers to the 

second death evidently, because the first death 

(Adamic death) passed upon all. 

But let it not be forgotten that the "overcomers" 
also "suffer," pass through "fiery 
trials" and "endure a great fight of afflictions," 
partly in their own persons and partly in their 
fellowship with others misused. (See Heb. 10:33,34.) 
There is a difference, however, a great 
difference between these sufferings of the sacrificers 
and those sufferings previously mentioned, 
of the class having their flesh destroyed. 
The sufferings of the self-sacrificing class are 



for godliness, for righteousness' sake, and in the 
interest of the Lord, his people and his truth, 
directly or indirectly: and such sufferings are 
accompanied by a joy and peace which make 
them, however severe, to appear but "light 
afflictions" and "but for a moment." (Compare 
Acts 16:22-25; 2 Cor. 4:17; Rom. 8:18; 
Acts 5:41.) But joy and rejoicing are properly 
lacking in the sufferings for correction in 
righteousness, and for unfaithfulness to the covenant 
of self-sacrificers: the destruction of the 
flesh is therefore doubly painful; and for every 
reason those who have been called to suffer 
with Christ as joint-sacrificers, and by and by 
to be his joint-heirs, should lay aside every 
hindrance and weight and run in the race,— 
that they may make their calling and election 
sure and win the prize. 

In this tenth text, therefore, there is nothing 
to indicate that all who obtain the grace of 
God will never fall from it: it does, however, 
show God's longsuffering mercy, his unwillingness 
that any should perish in whom an acceptable 
character can be developed at any cost. 

In conclusion, then, we exhort you, "that ye 
receive not the grace of God in vain." "Let 
us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left us 
of entering into his rest, any of you should seem 
to come short of it." (2 Cor. 6:1; Heb. 4:1.) 
The crown of life is promised to those faithful 
until death.-Compare Ezek. 33:13,14; Rev. 2:10,11,26; 
3:5. 



R1700: page 282 

DISINTEGRATION IN THE CHURCH OF ROME. 

ORGANIZING AN INDEPENDENT CHURCH. 



A PROCLAMATION inviting the discontented 

Roman Catholics and Catholics 

other than Roman in the United States to unite 

has been issued in Cleveland. It is signed 

by Rev. A. F. Kolaszewski, president, and M. 

A. Chrostowski, secretary of the Polish National 

Church Committee. They headed the revolt 

from St. Stanislaus' Roman Catholic church in 

that city, which led to the establishment of an 

independent church on Fremont street. They 

propose not to limit the movement to any nationality, 

but to bring together all who desire 

to enter the independent fold. Fifty thousand 



copies of the proclamation will be distributed 

through the country, and in a short time a convention 

of delegates representing Polish congregations 

throughout the country will be held. 

After this convention has organized a new denomination, 

discontents of other nationalities 

will be invited to join it. The proclamation reads: 

R1700: page 283 

PROCLAMATION OF THE POLISH NATIONAL CHURCH 
COMMITTEE OF THE CATHOLICS IN THE 
UNITED STATES. 

Fellow citizens and co-religionists: The Poles 
of the United States, and all who have found 
out from years of bitter experience what a curse 
to their national interests, to their enlightenment 
and progress, their allegiance to the 
church of Rome is, have decided to throw away 
the hateful yoke covered with moss of ages of 
fanaticism and tyranny. Therefore, they have 
decided to establish the Polish Independent 
Catholic Church of America. Our religion, our 
faith, will remain essentially the same; but we 
want to be our own masters relative to the 
management of our worldly affairs. The principles 
laid down for the establishment of the 
Independent Catholic Church are as follows:— 

First. All the church property belongs to 
the congregation, and not the bishops. 

Second. The congregations will elect their 
own priests, or approve the ones sent by the 
bishop. 

Third. The congregations will exercise perfect 
freedom in regard to the education of their 
children. There should be no compulsion in 
regard to the sending of their children to parochial 
schools. The parochial schools should be 
furnished with American textbooks and the 
American system of teaching. 

Fourth. Perfect freedom of the press. 

These are the principles laid down by us for 
the establishment of an Independent Catholic 
Church in this country. We have already, upon 
these principles, established one church in 
Cleveland, O. Others are being organized in 
Baltimore, Chicago, Buffalo, Nanticoke and 
Reading, Pa. In a few years hence we are 
sure of having an independent congregation in 
every Polish settlement in this country. But 
our aim is broader still. We do not want to 
confine this work of reform to our nationality 
alone. We want to spread it all over the 
country; we want to reach every catholic citizen 
of the United States whose heart beats for 



freedom and who is opposed to the tyranny and 
fanaticism on which the church of Rome is 
founded. For the purpose of carrying on the 
propaganda of religious freedom among the 
Poles, the Polish National Church Committee 
was elected. This committee was authorized to 
confer with the catholics in this country, composed 
of other nationalities. This committee, 
representing about 125,000 Poles who are worshiping 
already in the independent spirit, makes 
an appeal to you, fellow citizens and co-religionists, 
and invites you to join in the movement. 
We have not the least doubt that many thousands 
of American catholics— Bohemian, German, 
Irishmen, Frenchmen, and others— are dissatisfied 
with the arbitrary rulings of the church of 
Rome, which is represented in this country by 
the whimsical, despotic, and shallow-minded 
American bishops. We have not the least doubt 
that many of you are opposed to the church 
property being owned exclusively by the bishops. 
This is simply absurd. This only shows 
to what degree extends the greed for money of 
our high church officials. 

We have no doubt, also, that you would be 
willing to have for your spiritual adviser a priest 
who would really care for his flock, and not 
for the bishop's interests, as it is at present. 
We draw the example from the state of matters 
existing among us. In our Polish congregations 
we have had many examples where our 
priests were treated in most unjust, most cruel, 
most diabolical manner by their superiors, the 
bishops. And we know that the only reason 
for this was that the priest really cared for the 
good of his flock, and did not want to enrich 
the bishop at the expense of his congregation. 
We presume that more or less the same state 
of things exists among all the catholics in this 
country. Therefore, when we say that we want 
the election of the priest to be reserved for the 
congregation— if not exclusively, then partially, 
at least— we are sure we touch the keynote 
of the question. Then come the schools. The 
superiority in everything of the public schools 
formed on the American system of school teaching 
is so apparent to everybody that we will 
not dwell upon this subject at all. 

So, fellow citizens and co-religionists, you 
can plainly see that we do not wish to change 
our faith— our denomination. We wish to remain 
as we are, catholics, but we want our 
church, just as all the institutions in this country 
are, to be governed by the spirit of freedom. 
We want it to be governed by the free and 
glorious Constitution of the United States. We 



will remain catholics, but the worldly affairs of 
our own church will be solely and exclusively 
in our own hands. We do not want to organize 
any other congregations but the catholic, 
but they must be self-governed, dictated to by 
the majority of the people, and not by the arbitrary 
bishop, despotic Satolli, or infallible 
pope of Rome. 

These are our principles, and they sooner or 
later will be recognized as a religious standard 
by all the noble, thinking catholics of America. 

On the road to the great religious freedom 
and deliverance, however, we will find many 
hard obstacles. The church of Rome is great 
and powerful even in this country. While the 
centuries passed away it remained the same, unchanged 
and unmoved, and now it is even more 

R1700: page 284 

grim, fanatical and arbitrary than centuries ago. 

R1701 : page 284 

Its power, as hundreds of years ago, is founded 

upon ignorance, superstition and fanaticism, 

and there is small wonder that even in this 

country it is so great. This church of Rome 

will do its utmost to stop our work of reform. 

It will beg, it will pray, or it will curse and excommunicate, 

or it will strain every nerve in 

its gigantic body to stop or crush us to the 

dust. 

Fellow citizens and brother catholics! United 
we would stand— withstand all the onslaughts 
of this mighty enemy of freedom— divided, separated, 
we would fall, accomplish nothing, or 
very little, at the end. We invite, therefore, 
most earnestly, every one of you who thinks 
more or less the same as we do, to join in this 
grand stride for religious liberty. Instead of 
having a committee composed of one nationality 
for the carrying on of this propaganda, we 
must have a national American church committee, 
composed of all nationalities, with different 
branches— that is, Polish, Bohemian, German, 
Irish, and others. To bring about this we must 
first have a convention, where all the plans for 
the future work of reform will be discussed and 
the above committee organized. Therefore, we 
invite all who will take interest in this proclamation 
to come to a convention which we propose 
to hold in Cleveland for the purpose of 
discussing all the matters pertaining to the establishment 
of the independent catholic church 
in America. We propose the city of Cleveland 



for the place of convention, because in this city 
the great movement was first begun a year ago. 
In this city, too, we have already established 
an independent catholic congregation, known 
as the congregation of the Immaculate Heart 
of the Blessed Virgin Mary. This congregation, 
in spite of the excommunication by the 
bishop of the Cleveland diocese, in spite of the 
repeated appeals by Satolli, whose despotical 
and whimsical inclinations are best shown by 
his order expelling all the saloonkeepers from 
the catholic societies, grows larger every day, 
gaining new members. We beg of all of you 
who are willing to take part in this great convention 
to notify of your intention one of the 
following officers of our committee, who, after 
the list of those ready to participate will be 
more or less completed, will name the clerk of 
the convention. 

All the newspapers in the country desirous of 
helping this good work along, we beg to copy 
this proclamation. 

In the name of the Polish National Church 
Committee, 

Rev. A. F. Kolaszewski, Pres., 
M. A. Chrostowski, Secretary. 

THE REVOLT SPREADING. 



A large Catholic congregation in Baltimore, 
Md., known as The Church of the Holy Rosary, 
and numbering about three thousand members, 
has decided to follow the example set at Detroit 
and Cleveland;— organize an Independent 
Church, place its affairs in the hands of a committee, 
engage its own pastor, etc. Two of its 
members were sent as a committee to Cleveland 
to investigate the conduct of affairs there, and 
made a glowing report of the success of the 
movement. They report that about thirty 
priests are ready to accept positions as soon as 
they are offered. It was to prevent just such a 
movement and keep peace in the Roman Catholic 
family that Satolli was sent here as the representative 
of the pope. His mission was only 
partially successful in the healing of the McGlynn 
schism. A similar Independent Catholic 
movement is on foot in Europe. 

A NATIONAL ORGANIZATION EFFECTED. 



In harmony with the foregoing a general Convention 



met at Cleveland on Aug. 20, at which 
were delegates from congregations of Polish 
Catholic secessionists in fourteen cities of the 
U.S.— those of Baltimore, Cleveland, Detroit, 
St. Louis and Buffalo being the largest. The latter 
was reported by its delegates as 8000 strong. 

Archbishop Vilatte was chosen the head of the 
new church; and while some favored a name 
indicating the Polish origin of the new denomination, 
it was finally decided that as Catholics 
of all nationalities would be invited to join it the 
name should be, The American Catholic Church. 

A resolution renouncing forever allegiance 
to the Pope of Rome was voted down,— the 
Archbishop declaring, "We will always recognize 
the primacy of the pope. That does not 
imply that we believe in his infallibility or supremacy. 
The pope is nothing, but we respect 
him for his primacy." 

Archbishop Vilatte in a speech said, "We 
are met together to exclaim, 'Great is the truth, 
and it shall prevail.' We are met to proclaim 
all over the land, 'Beware of despotism, if you 
love liberty.' The American Catholic Church 
will be composed of different nationalities." 



R1699: page 285 

RELIGION IN AMERICA: A JAPANESE VIEW. 



THE Nation's Friend, a leading Japanese 
monthly published at Tokio, has a paper 
by Professor K. Ukita of the Doshisha College, 
on "Religion in America," which has been 
translated for The New York Independent. 
Professor Ukita studied at Yale University for 
a period of two years, and he gives his opinion 
as the result of personal observation. 

R1700: page 285 

Mr. Ukita noticed that the lower classes in 
America do not attend church. This is not a 
phenomenon of one district only. After noticing 
the real condition of society, he found 
that there is a proper cause for this phenomenon. 
There is a custom in America of restricting 
the seats in the religious temples; they 
are sold to certain persons, and, even in the 
churches with free seats, it is generally the custom 
to take up collections for the maintenance 
of the services; and, moreover, it is the custom 



for ladies to wear fine dresses. Such being the 
custom, those who have not much money and 
wear coarse clothes are ashamed to enter the 
churches. Civilization is progressing, but it 
shows no mercy to the laborer. The Gospel is 
preached, but the laborers cannot hear it. Ah! 
the words, "Blessed are the poor," and "The 
Gospel is preached to the poor," are no longer 
true; they are simply recorded in a Bible which 
is chained to the pulpit. In some extreme cases 
the Christian Church excludes poor people from 
coming into the Church. The Gospel of the 
Saviour has become an almost exclusive possession 
of the rich and middle classes. 

The people by whom the present Church is 
organized are capitalists and people of the middle 
class. The day when they meet with people 
of the lower class is not on the Sabbath 
when the all-loving and merciful God and 
Christ are remembered. Although they give 
money to the Church on Sunday, on the weekdays 
they do not remember the golden words 
of Christ; they only know the economical principle 
that they should buy in the cheapest market 
and sell in the dearest market. 

It is not proper to say that those outside of 
the Church are not Christians. There are 
many people who make the true God and Christ 
their moral ideal, and yet who do not attend 
church. Even among the lower class of people 
whose names are not written on the church-rolls, 
there are many who hold the same ideal. 
In one society in New York, when a speaker 
pronounces the word Church, the audience hiss, 
but when he speaks the name of Christ they applaud; 
so that it is clear that the present Church 
has lost its power to attract men, and especially 
to attract the heart of the lower classes. But 
this is not a sign of the decline of Christianity. 
This fact simply shows that the creed and system 
hitherto prevailing are antiquated and do 
not keep pace with the general current of the 
Nineteenth Century. 

If the Christian Church cannot reform its 
creed and system very radically, it may come 
to stand in the same position in the coming 
revolution as it did in the time of the French 
Revolution. It is true that the Church in 
America is separated from the State; but, on 
the other hand, it makes a league with the capitalists, 
and the rich organize a church by themselves 
and the poor by themselves. Although 
there is no difference of Jew and Greek, slave 
and free, male and female, and even no difference 
of race in the Kingdom of Heaven, the 
present Church in America not only refuses to 



allow the poor to come in, but it is a fact that 
the white people and the black are opposing 
each other. The great future revolution of the 
world will be not merely religious and political, 
but also a great social revolution, consisting of 
economical and race reformation. 
—Literary Digest. 



R1701 : page 285 

"UPON THIS GENERATION." 



"That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed 
upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto 
the blood of Zacharias, son of Barachias, whom ye 
slew between the temple and the altar. Verily I 
say unto you, All these things shall come 
upon this generation."— Matt. 23:35,36. 

AT first glance it appears unjust on God's 
part to thus visit punishment for the sins 
of the parents upon their children, centuries 
after. Nor can we suppose that the evil-doers 
—Cain and his successors— would be excused 
from further responsibility even after their children 
had suffered, for it would be as unjust to 
let the real culprit go free of punishment as it 
would be to punish him and his children both 
for the same sins. Neither of these unjust and 
unreasonable views can be the proper explanation 
of these, our Lord's words. 

The thought is this,— That generation (the 
one in which our Lord lived) had so many advantages 

R1701 : page 286 

over every previous generation, in general 
intelligence, as well as from the special 
teachings of Christ and his followers, that its 

R1702: page 286 

responsibility was only proportionate. As it 
had more advantages than all previous generations 
combined, so the punishment for its 
course of sin must injustice be all and more 
than equivalent to the punishments visited upon 
past transgressions all combined. 

But let us not confuse these national and 
generational judgments with individual judgments. 
They were distinct. For instance, a 
certain immediate judgment came upon Cain for 



the murder of his brother; and so with every 

crime there seems to go a certain amount of 

present-life punishment, entirely distinct from 

the future retribution. What "stripes" may 

yet be due to Cain we cannot surely know, except 

that it will be "a just recompense." And 

so in the case before us in our text, only the 

immediate and visible consequences of sin are 

referred to. The outward and immediate consequences 

of the rejection and murder of Christ 

would be, and properly, more severe than all 

the outward and immediate punishments of all 

previous transgressions against God's people 

combined. 

This statement in no way involves the future 
retribution of the people of that generation. 
In that future retribution they will not be judged 
nationally, nor as a generation, but each individual 
will be held responsible for his own conduct 
in proportion as he transgressed against 
the light; and each, through the merit of the 
"ransom for all," will be offered a credit proportionate 
to the weaknesses he had sustained 
from the fall. These conclusions are sustained 
by the words of the Apostle Peter.— 
Acts 2:23,37-40. 

Our Lord's statement in our text was corroborated 
by the Apostle Paul, who declared, 
"wrath is come upon them to the uttermost" 
(1 Thes. 2:16); confirming the Prophet Daniel's 
words, "He shall make it desolate until 
the consummation, and that determined shall 
be poured upon the desolate." (Dan. 9:27.) 
And secular history estimates the trouble which 
came upon Israel, upon that generation, within 
forty years of our Lord's utterance above 
quoted, as the most awful that had thus far occurred 
amongst men;— thus attesting the correctness 
of our Lord's prediction. 

But when we remember that Israel according 
to the flesh was a typical people, and that 
God's promises to them, dealings with them 
and judgments upon them were typical or illustrative 
of similar promises, dealings and judgments, 
but on a wider and grander scale, made 
to the Gospel Church— the antitypical people 
of God, the true Israel— we are led to expect 
similar things upon the closing generation of 
the Gospel age. And we find it predicted of 
these two houses of Israel, by God through his 
prophets, that only a remnant, a "little flock," 
from each will prove worthy, while the majority 
will stumble; and that upon them will come 
an awful trouble in the end of the Gospel age, 
"a time of trouble such as was not since there 
was a nation. "—Dan. 12:1. 



As not all Israelites were Israelites indeed, 
so not all Christians in name are Christians indeed. 
As the true Israelites were gathered out 
of, or separated from, nominal Israel, first in 
spirit or intent and afterward literally, before 
the great trouble came, so here, in the end of 
this age, there must be a separation of true 
wheat from tare imitations, first in spirit and 
afterward actually, so that they be not partakers 
of the plagues or troubles predicted.— 
Rev. 18:4. 

And as a punishment equivalent to all other 
punishments combined for shedding of righteous 
blood was exacted of the closing generation 
of typical Israel, just so it will be with the 
closing generation of this Gospel age;— the 
present generation. The knowledge and advantages 
every way of the present generation, 
above those of all previous generations, make 
its responsibility correspondingly great; and 
its penalty for hardness of heart, unreadiness to 
receive the Lord and his Kingdom, and resistance 
of the truth, now shining out upon every 
side as never before, is to be equivalent to the 
combined judgments upon all who have despised, 
rejected and persecuted God's people, 
throughout the age. And thus we read, that 
when Babylon's fall is complete, after God's 
people, heeding his voice, have come out of her, 
then, in her overthrow, will be found— "the 
blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that 
were slain upon the earth." (Rev. 18:24.) No 
wonder, then, that her fall will mean a "time 
of trouble such as was not since there was a 
nation!" 



R1701 : page 287 
MISSIONARY LIFE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The following is 
a copy of a letter recently received by a friend 
of mine from another old, intimate, personal 
friend, who is now in India as missionary for the 
Baptists. It illustrates wonderfully the blind 
gropings of the spiritual leaders of nominal 
Christendom. (The italics are his.) 

Yours in Christian love, F. B. UTLEY. 
India, May 22nd, '94. 

My Dear Friend:— Every time I open my 
writing case, your letter is seen by me. I was very 
glad to get it and to learn so much of Y.M.C.A. 



work in Ontario. Every one who writes makes 
some such statement as follows:— "Well, I need 
not tell you of Y.M.C.A. affairs, as others will 
have written you on that subject;" and between 
them all they keep me well in the dark. 

A good many people in writing the missionary, 
too, imagine they must assume a commiserating 
air, or rather tone, and talk of self-sacrifice, 
burden, and all sorts of sentiment. I 
know people at home look on the foreign mission 
field as a horrible pit, into which, amid 
the supplications of home friends for his safety, 
the heroic missionary descends with only a forlorn 
hope of being spared to ascend again. 
And I know the missionaries largely like to 
have it so. But, as a matter of fact, it is one of 
the highest deceptions in all creation; and a very 
rude shock my wife and self received when we 
came to Madras, and afterwards to our own fellow-missionaries 
in Cocauade, Tuni, etc., and 
saw the comfort they lived in. [See Z.W. 
TOWER for January 1, '92.] Don't misunderstand 
me— the missionary has as much right 
(and certainly more need) to live comfortably 
as the workers at home; but my contention is 
that the truth should be told, and a little of the 
sentimental rubbish which pervades, at times, 
even that unique denominational paper which 
is published in T , should be "sat on." 

I am not in the least to be pitied here or 
commiserated with. Why, on Saturday evenings 
lately I have been literally howling with delight. 
People are coming in in large numbers, 
young men sit down and hear me through attentively. 
Then we lack nothing, have abundance 
of food, a house suited to the hard climate, and 
plenty of servants to do the running for us. 
We live not like niggers here: we live and dress 
as Europeans, and are looked up to by the people; 
though our truth is not believed. And in 
these days of fast and cheap travel we may entertain 
a reasonable expectation, if the Lord will, 
of going home at fair intervals in life to see old 
faces and places. If I'm spared to come home 
ever, I'll tell up mission life as it is, or else forever 
hold my peace. The church is very ripe 
for judgment. The world is uneasy. Europe is 
an armed camp. Society shakes in its shoes— 
the clay and iron has proved itself thoroughly 
wanting in cohesive qualities, as per the divine 
Record. The Jews, God's heritage, are casting 
longing eyes toward the city of David, and God 
is certainly drawing attention to the ancient 
land in ways that are marvelous— railways, increased 
commerce, amazing immigration, increasing 
fertility, all around us expectancy of a 



great something, the world cannot tell what. 
What does it mean? Is he, the Beloved, at the 
doors? At any rate, it becomes us to gird up 
our loins as men who wait for their Lord. 

Yours in the one body, and in hope of his 
coming, F. W. G . 



R1702: page 287 

ANOTHER BRANCH OF THE WORK. 



THE Editor receives frequent urgent requests 
to visit various little groups and preach, especially 
for the benefit of outsiders who might be 
awakened. We are obliged to decline these 
invitations—for the present at least— believing 
that the general work of the TOWER office which 
demands our attention is still more important, 
because it is for a larger number. Besides, it 
is a part of your work and privilege to tell the 
glad tidings wisely and lovingly to your fellow 
Christians and neighbors who have not yet 
learned the present truth. Love for them and 
for the truth and of the Lord's approval should 
take you into Y.M.C.A. Meetings, Class Meetings 
and Prayer Meetings regularly to scatter 
the truth by word or by printed page, or as 
best you can— but always wisely and lovingly, 
so as not to stumble and offend, but to bless. 

But realizing that you may need help in preparation 
for such work of ministry, we have arranged 
lately to have several brethren travel, 
some giving a part, and some all of their time 
in visiting you for the purpose of building you 
up in the truth and in its spirit. 

We have sought to choose for this work 
brethren of (1) unexceptional character, polished 
with the truth; (2) of meekness— that 
they might not be puffed up and thus be injured 
themselves, while seeking to help you; (3) of 
clear conception of the Lord's great plan and 
fully imbued with its spirit; (4) of ability to 
impart the truth to others in its own power 

R1702: page 288 

and simplicity (not necessarily orators); (5) of 
known fidelity to the ransom; (6) of humble 
mind who seek not to preach themselves, but 
Christ— not to air their own knowledge, but 
his Word in its simplicity and power; (7) students 
of the Word, of cultivated thought, well 



founded and settled;— not wondering novices— 
not teachers of speculations and fancies, nor of 
Anglo-Israelism, Socialism, Politics, astronomical 
theories, etc., but (8) teachers of the One 
Lord, One Faith and One Baptism— the one 
gospel authorized by and based upon the one 
sacrifice, given once for all. 

If any of these Brethren come your way they 
will introduce themselves by showing a printed 
and signed Certificate from the Watch Tower 
Tract Society (renewed yearly); whereupon we 
are sure they will be granted the leadership of 
the meetings. Nevertheless prove all things 
they may say by the only infallible authority— 
the Word of God. Should you deem their 
teachings in conflict with the Word in any particular, 
the differences should be promptly and 
clearly stated in a letter to the WATCH TOWER. 
The question would receive attention either by 
letter or, if of general interest, would be treated 
in the TOWER. 

Some of these Brethren are so situated as to 
be able to give fragments of their time to this 
work, and that free of expense to the Tract 
Fund; others will receive some assistance; and 
still others, giving all of their time, will be 
wholly at the expense of the Tract Fund;— a 
portion of your "Good Hopes" donations to 
the Tract Fund being thus used for the benefit 
of yourself and others. We desire to divest the 
truth of all subserviency to money and begging 
—often so injurious to such work. And consequently 
let it be understood from the first that 
collections or other solicitations of money are 
neither authorized nor approved by this Society. 

This branch of the work is only an experiment 
and we shall watch for results and for the 
Lord's further leading. While you and the 
Colporteurs and the O.T. Tracts and the 
Dawns are arousing attention and interest, and 
the TOWER and you are strengthening and upbuilding 
the "body," this new feature should 
further assist in the same great work;— the 
Bride making herself ready for joint-heirship 
with the Bridegroom.— Rev. 19:7. 

Of course all cannot be visited; and it is 
purposed that for the present it will be unwise 
to stop at any place having less than five TOWER 
subscribers; for we esteem that any one at all 
interested in present truth will want the TOWER; 
as its terms make it possible for all to be on 
our list. 



page 288 



STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS. -- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1702: page 288 

JESUS AT JACOB'S WELL. 



III. QUAR., LESSON XII., SEP. 16, JOHN 4:9-26. 

Golden Text— "Whosoever drinketh of the water that 
I shall give him shall never thirst."— John 4: 14. 

As we read these gracious words of the 
Master, and especially his reply to the 
woman's reference to the Messiah, the hope 
of Israel— "I that speak unto thee am he"— 
our hearts also thrill with a solemn gladness; 
for the blessings of his advent and the water 
of life which he gives have come to us also. 

Several points in this lesson are worthy 
of special notice. (1) Observe the simple 
condescension of the Lord in thus endeavoring 
to make plain the way of life to one 
who had strayed far from the path of rectitude; 
(2) the natural and earnest manner 

R1703: page 288 

of introducing the subject and pointing the 
lesson; and (3) the teaching. 

He offers the water of life— the refreshing 
hope of life through faith in him as the 
Redeemer, which hope would be like a 
perennial well-spring continually rising up 
in her heart. (Verse 14.) So it is now; but 
by and by when the hopes of the believing 
Church are realized and God's Kingdom is 
fully established, these wells will flow together, 
and a mighty river of the water of 
life will come forth from underneath the 
throne of God for the refreshment of all 
who will partake of it.— Rev. 22:1. 

Then— in that Millennial age of glory and 
blessing— all who worship God will worship 
him in the spirit of the truth.— Ver. 24. 



We who have partaken of the water of 
life and truth which Christ has furnished 
us can truly say, It satisfies our longing souls 
as nothing else could do. And those who 
are drinking of it have no cravings for the 
vain philosophies of men which make void 
the Word of God. We are still drinking; 
but according to our Lord's words we shall 
soon be satisfied (Matt. 5:6)— when we 
awake in his likeness, in the first resurrection 
-Psa. 17:15; Phil. 3:11. 



page 290 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



"WHY HAST THOU FORSAKEN ME?" 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-One of our 
dear friends writes of disappointment, in a 
small town, among strangers; and of lonesomeness, 
with no companionship but the 



Savior. Christians must follow Christ. He 
trod the wine press alone, absolutely alone: 
without companionship even of the Father, 
who hitherto had been one with him. Happiness 
in the society of many sympathizing 
friends may be taken as indication of weakness, 
and of necessity for such sympathy. 
The wind is tempered to the shorn, weak 
lambs. 

Some, who appear to have much company, 
really do not. Some, earnest for the 
truth, appear to stand in the midst of large 
and ever increasing groups of friends. But 
they really each stand alone; snow-capped 
and clear above the clouds, like bleak 
mountain tops, towering their grand, neighboring 
but isolated peaks above, and always 
higher than the aspiring, friendly, 
lesser mountains and hills composing their 
chain. 

Alone! What an awful significance! 
And to think that he whose righteousness 
was not imputed did really agonize alone. 
Absolutely without companionship! In his 
excruciating despair he cried, "My God! 
My God! Why hast thou forsaken me!" 
What wonder, then, that he who was justified 
to live, but was permitted to lay down 
his life, should thus cry out in agony when 
he yielded up the spirit of life! 

Why should any who aspire to be with 
and like him, in the glorious immortality of 
the Divine Nature, hope to escape similar 
experience? The thorns, the cross and the 
piercing nails may not be from the bush, 
the tree or the mine; but they will, none 
the less, be real, tangible and terror striking. 
We may pray that, if possible and without 
drinking, this cup may pass from us, assured 
also that, if possible, the request will be 
granted; but we must also add with resignation, 
if not with cheerfulness, "Nevertheless, 
not as I will, but as thou wilt." 
W. M. WRIGHT. 



TRACT NO. 21 --DO YOU KNOW?-is being 
prepared in German. Order in advance what 
you can use judiciously. The English edition is 
exhausted; but a new lot is under way, which 
will run the total above half a million copies. 



R1703: page 291 



VOL. XV. SEPTEMBER 15, 1894. NO. 18. 
"THINK ON THESE THINGS." 



"Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever 
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever 
things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, 
whatsoever things are of good report; if there 
be any virtue, and if there be any praise, 
think on these things."— Phil. 4:8. 

"KEEP thy heart with all diligence; for out 

of it are the issues of life," is one of the 

wise sayings of the inspired Word (Prov. 4:23); 

and it was with the same thought in mind 

that the Apostle penned the above words to 

the Church at Philippi, whom he addressed 

with great affection and appreciation as his 

"joy and crown." (4:1.) The little company 

of consecrated believers there were the firstfruits 

of his ministry, and were specially remarkable 

for their loyalty and faithfulness to 

the Lord, the truth and the beloved Apostle, 

who at this time was a prisoner in Rome. 

Thither, in his time of need, they sent 

their gifts, and these expressed their love and 

sympathy and care for his temporal welfare, 

which they had always been forward to do 

while he ministered to them in spiritual things. 

(4:10-19.) In them the Apostle was comforted 

and cheered, and he rejoiced even in his afflictions 

in that they also were for their sakes; for 

the example of his patience in tribulation and joy 

and in self-sacrifice was as valuable a lesson to 

the saints as were any of his most profound and 

logical instructions. 

Being desirous that these disciples should 
continue to manifest the fruits of the spirit and 
to grow in grace, this epistle is one of encouragement 
and wise counsel—to stand fast in the 
faith and spirit of the gospel and to learn more 
fully how to deny themselves even as Christ did 
(1:27,29; 2:1-1 1); to work out their salvation 
with fear and trembling (2: 12); to beware 
of false teachers and evil workers (3:2,18,19); 
and to seek to be all of the same mind— the 
mind which was in Christ Jesus; to esteem 
each other in the Lord; and to do nothing even 
for the cause of Christ through any spirit of 
strife or vain-glory. 

Then follows this beautiful final admonition 
of our text, so in keeping with the thought that 
out of the heart are the issues of life. The 



heart represents the will, the intentions. The 
will must be kept true and centered in God: it 
is the governing power of the whole man. 
Blessed are the pure in heart— those of fixed, 
uncompromising purpose. Yet though the will 
is the controlling power of the man, it is also 
subject to influences. If the thoughts be impure, 
unjust or unholy, the power of the will 
becomes more and more impaired. Hence the 
wisdom of the Apostle's advice as to what should 
be the character of our thoughts. In those who 
are striving to perfect holiness in the fear of 
the Lord—to adorn themselves with the beauty 
of holiness— the thoughts must not be neglected 
and permitted to browse in every pasture, 
but must be disciplined to feed upon convenient 
and healthful food, such as the Apostle directs, 
viz.:— 

(1) "Whatsoever things are true." That 
would exclude indulgence in visionary and foolish 
fiction, which does so much to corrupt the 
mind and squander time. It would also exclude 

R1703: page 292 

all the idle speculative theories of men 

who, ignoring the true gospel, seek to draw 

away disciples after them. It would banish also 

the vain philosophies of the creeds of "Christendom," 

when once the symmetry and beauty 

of the divine plan of the ages has been seen. 

It would avoid all idle gossip and evil surmisings; 

and, having escaped the gloom and discontent 

and the perplexity, care and worry 

consequent upon entertaining such thoughts, the 

mind can be at peaceful leisure for the contemplation 

of that which is true. Then it may 

draw from the abundant storehouse which our 

bountiful God has supplied, both in his Word 

of law and prophecy and precept and promise 

and in the open book of Nature. 

How richly the mind is rewarded that dwells 
upon these things. The law of God and its 
application to all the minutiae of life's affairs 
should be the most constant theme of meditation 
among the saints, since it is to be applied 
in all our business and social relations; and its 
often intricate problems require close discernment 
and discrimination. "Oh, how love I thy 
law! it is my meditation all the day," is the 
sentiment which the inspired Psalmist (1 19:97) 
would put into the mouth of all the Lord's 
people. Then the prophecies, so laden with 
good tidings of great joy for all people, and the 
promises, so exceeding great and precious, how 
full of blessing they are to all who delight in 



their contemplation! And in the light of the 
glorious gospel nature itself wears a brighter 
face and speaks a loftier language, emphasizing 
the love and power and praise of our God. 
Whatsoever things are true, brethren, think on 
these things. 

(2) "Whatsoever things are honest." That 
would exclude all deceit and hypocrisy, all evil 
scheming and intrigue, as well as thoughts of 
deliberate plunder of falsehood or evil speaking, 
giving place to frank and open honesty of 
thought, developing daily into good and noble 
deeds. 

(3) "Whatsoever things are just." This 
would discard all unjust weights and balances 
in estimating the character and motives of our 
fellow-men, and particularly our brethren in 
Christ. It would make all due allowances for 
the infirmities of the flesh, remembering that 
we also are subject to infirmity, if not so much 
in one direction, then in another. It would 

R1704: page 292 

consider surroundings, estimate the bias of influences 

and calculate the force of temptations, 

in order to find, if possible, extenuating circumstances 

for favorable judgment. Yet it 

would not ignore facts, and so blindly encourage 

evil. 

The mind, where justice is enthroned, not 
only seeks always to judge justly, but it has also 
a fine appreciation of justice. It delights to 
trace the lines of justice in God's wonderful 
plan of human salvation. It so clearly sees the 
value of justice, which is the very foundation 
principle of God's throne, that the value of the 
precious blood of Christ in satisfying the demands 
of justice and thus reclaiming the forfeited 
life of the world is keenly appreciated. 
And so fully is this feature of the divine plan 
and the grandeur of the principle of justice seen 
and realized, that no vain philosophy of men, 
which suggests other schemes of salvation which 
ignore the just claims of justice, can be tolerated. 
No other plan but this, which is founded 
injustice and executed in love, can claim the 
attention of those whose habit of thought is 
just and to whom the divine plan has been 
revealed. 

(4) "Whatsoever things are pure." Blessed 
are the pure in heart and mind. Pure 
thoughts, devoid of the slime and filth of sin, 
how they invigorate and energize the soul in 
every high and noble work! The pure mind 
demands a pure body and clean clothing, though 



it may be ever so coarse. It courts the society 

of only the pure and good and shuns the contamination 

of all others. It seeks also only that 

which is pure, in literature or in art. The vile 

insinuation, the rude jest, the unchaste in art, 

are alike an abomination to the pure mind. 

The pure mind finds delight in the society of 

the pure and in the contemplation of the virtues 

and graces and of the true and beautiful. The 

blessedness of such a condition of mind and 

heart is too far above the comprehension of the 

impure to be to any extent appreciated. Its 

happifying and ennobling influence is best illustrated 

by the effects upon the body of thorough 

R1704: page 293 

cleansing and clean clothing which give new 
energy and vigor to the physical man. 

(5) "Whatsoever things are lovely; whatsoever 
things are of good report [worthy of 
praise]; if there be any virtue, and if there be 
any praise, think on these things." Added to 
all the solid virtues of truth, honesty, justice and 
purity, let all the lovely graces and adornments 
of meekness, patience, faith, godliness, benevolence, 
kindness and charity occupy our thoughts. 
And as we hold these virtues before the mind's 
eye as a mirror, they gradually become more 
and more assimilated, and the transforming work 
goes on in our own characters. Thus, too, the 
will is strengthened and inspired with fresh 
energy to fulfil its great work in governing and 
controlling the whole man. 

This the Apostle saw to be the philosophy of 
the influence of the thoughts upon the will and 
vice versa. Therefore, he would have us set a 
watch and a governor upon our thoughts and 
feed them with wholesome and life-giving food, 
that thus the thoughts may re-inforce the will, 
and the will may govern and control the 
thoughts to the end that both the present and 
the future blessing of the pure in heart may be 
realized by those who are diligently seeking for 
them. --Matt. 5:8. 



R1703 : page 293 

THESE MANY YEARS. 

--DEUT. 8:2.- 

THESE many years! What lessons they unfold 
Of grace and guidance through the wilderness, 



From the same God that Israel of old 
In the Shekinah glory did possess. 
How faithful he, through all my griefs and fears 
And constant murmurings, these many years! 

God of the Covenant! From first to last, 

From when I stood within that sprinkled door 

And o'er my guilt the avenging angel passed, 
Thy better angel has gone on before; 

And naught but goodness all the way appears, 

Unmerited and free, these many years! 

Thy presence wrought a pathway through the sea; 

Thy presence made the bitter water sweet; 
And daily have thy hands prepared for me 

Sweet, precious morsels— lying at my feet. 
'Twas but to stoop and taste the grace that cheers, 
And start refreshed, through all these many years! 

What time I thirsted and earth's streams were dry, 
What time I wandered and my hope was gone, 

Thy hand has brought a pure and full supply, 
And, by a loving pressure, lured me on. 

How oft that hand hath wiped away my tears 

And written "Pardoned!" all these many years! 

And what of discipline thy love ordained 
Fell ever gently on this heart of mine; 

Around its briers was my spirit trained 

To bring forth fruits of righteousness divine; 

Wisdom in every check, and love appears 

In every stroke throughout these many years! 

Lord, what I might have been my spirit knows— 
Rebellious, petulant, and apt to stray: 

Lord, what I am, in spite of flesh and foes, 
I owe to grace that kept me in the way. 

Thine be the glory! Merit disappears 

As back I look upon these many years. 

Thine be the glory! Thou shalt have the praise 
For all thy dealings, to my latest breath; 

A daily Ebenezer will I raise, 

And sing Salvation through the vale of death— 

To where the palm, the golden harp appears, 

There to rehearse thy love through endless years. 
—The Christian. 



R1704: page 293 

THE POPE'S ENCYCLICAL. 



POPE Leo XIII's recent encyclical letter is 

one of those remarkable features which, in 

company with other striking events and circumstances, 

distinguishes this day of the Lord from 

all previous times. The letter is addressed, not 

to the bishops and clergy, nor even to the 

Catholic community at large, but "principibus 

populisque universis"— "to the princes and 

peoples of the earth," and was evidently suggested 

by the fact, now so manifest, and long 

ago predicted by the Lord (Luke 21:26), that 

men's hearts are failing them for fear and for 

looking after those things which are coming on 

the earth. Out of this very fear, which the 

shaking of this present order of things, preparatory 

to its final removal (Heb. 12:26,27), engenders, 

Satan, whose masterpiece of iniquity 

and religious deception the church of Rome is, 

desires to make some capital wherewith to bolster 

up the tottering walls of his ancient fortress 

and protect his kingdom from ruin in the 

midst of the great time of trouble. 

R1704: page 294 

Consequently, the poor, deceived old man at 
the Vatican, who, as the professed Vicar of Jesus 
Christ, stands at the head of the great counterfeit 
Christian church, addresses himself to the 
whole world, inviting all men everywhere to 
come into the Roman fold, under the pastoral 
care of the Pope, so that thus the words of 
Christ may be fulfilled— "There shall be one 
fold and one shepherd." This, he says, he 
does in imitation of Christ, who, on the eve of 
his ascension, prayed that his disciples might 
be united. So, at the end of his life, he desires 
to invite all men, without respect to race 
or nationality, to come into the one fold, the 
Catholic church. 

Referring to the heathen first, he recalls past 
missionary efforts of the church, declares his 
deep concern for the conversion of the heathen, 
and prays that the number of missionaries for 
the extension of "Christ's kingdom" may be 
multiplied. 

The letter then deals with the various Christian 
nations, and expresses the grief of the Pope 
that flourishing nations have, by religious dissensions 
in the past, been torn from the bosom 
of the church, and adds,— "We turn towards 
these nations and, of our fatherly charity, we 
beg them and implore them to wipe out all 
traces of dissensions, and return to unity." 

An urgent appeal is then made to the Eastern 
churches— the Greek, Armenian, Nestorian, 



Jacobite, Coptic, and Abyssinian Catholics- 
urging upon their attention the primacy of the 
Roman Pontiff; and, while recognizing their 
friendly disposition toward the church of Rome, 
he promises that in the event of their return to 
the Roman communion, they need fear no diminution 
of their rights, of the privileges of 
their patriarchates, or of the rites and customs 
of their several churches; "for," he continues, 
"it has been, and will ever be, the purpose of 
the Apostolic See, and according to its traditions, 
to be condescending to all peoples and to 
respect generously their origins and customs." 

The Protestants are next addressed, not as 
heretics, as of old, but as "dear brethren." 
Their separation from the church of Rome in 
the trying times of Luther and his associates 
is palliated and excused; the divisions and discords 
and wide diversity and conflict of faith 
among them is sympathetically pointed out; 
and while the recent efforts to secure union 
among the various sects on the basis of Christian 
charity, regardless of doctrine, is commended 
as a step in the right direction, the question is 
put— "How could perfect charity join hearts, 
if faith does not unite our spirits?" And that 
necessary faith is, of course, claimed to be in 
the church of Rome, to which all Protestants are 
invited in the following words,— "Our heart, 
more even than our voice, calls to you, dear 
brethren, who for three centuries past have been 
at issue with us in the Christian faith. Whoever 
you are, if for any reason you have parted 
from us, join with us in the unity of the faith 
and in the knowledge of the Son of God. Let 
us hold out to you our hand affectionately and 
invite you to the unity which never failed the 
Catholic church, and which nothing can take 
from it. Long has our common mother called 
you to her breast: long have all the Catholics 
of the universe awaited you with the anxiety of 
brotherly love, hoping that you would serve 
God with us in the unity of the one gospel, one 
faith, one hope, one perfect charity." 

Catholics everywhere are then urged to faithfulness 
and obedience to the authority of the 
church, and warned against the perils outside of 
her communion. Then Free Masonry is condemned; 
and the rights of the church and state 
and the duty and advantages of their mutual 
co-operation are discussed, with the usual complaint 
that the church is oppressed by the state 
and restrained from the exercise of its rightful 
authority, and that thereby the latter is preparing 
lamentable catastrophes for society. 

The encyclical closes by disclaiming ambition 



for power and professing to seek only the preservation 

of virtue among men, and by this 

means to secure their salvation. It implores 

princes and rulers, in the name of their political 

foresight and solicitude for the interests of their 

peoples, "to weigh the Pope's designs" for religious 

union "equitably, and to second them 

by their favor and authority," in the hope that 

at least some benefit might accrue "amid the 

present rapid downfall of all things, when to the 

prevailing unrest is joined fear of the future." 

R1704: page 295 

Who cannot discern between the lines of this 
gauzy manifesto the policy-spirit which would 
lick the dust or play the tyrant as circumstances 
might require or permit, if by any means it 
might gain its unholy ends. 

But aside from the Papal policy, this document, 
as before intimated, is a peculiar sign of 
the times. The Pope knows the fear and perplexity 
of rulers and statesmen, and how nervously 
they are casting about for some potent 
arm to assist them in the great struggle with the 
awakening and discontented masses of the 
people, and how disorganized and shattered are 
the ranks of the various religious denominations; 
and therefore, in this carefully prepared 
document, he would suggest that the influence 
of all be united to reinstate the old and formerly 
potent power of the persecuting church of 
Rome. 

The plan which the Pope suggests is one which 
certainly does commend itself to the worldly-wise 

R1705: page 295 

who desire to perpetuate the present order 
of things. In nothing but the power of ignorance 
and superstition and such tyranny as the 
Church of Rome exercises over her subjects can 
there be any reasonable hope of perpetuating 
present social institutions. And it is on this 
account that kings and rulers pay their respects 
to the head of that iniquitous system whose 
history and principles they despise and hate. 
It is this idea, and the fear that some day they 
may need to invoke the power of the Pope, that 
occasionally calls forth such demonstrations as 
those on the event of the Papal Jubilee a few 
years ago; and that is leading to the reinstatement 
of the Jesuits in Germany. In fear of 
greater evils from widespread anarchy, they are 
loth to part with the old tyrant of the Tiber 
who formerly ruled them with a rod of iron. 



From the world's conservative standpoint it 
surely would be wise to help to keep the reins 
of government of the masses of the people in some 
strong hands; but such is not God's purpose. 
Men may thus exert themselves to the utmost, 
but their councils and schemes will avail nothing 
in the day of the Lord's anger. 

But so far as the selection and development 
of the "little flock," the true Church, is concerned, 
it would be far better if all religious denominational 
lines were broken up and each 
individual Christian were thus led individually 
to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has 
made us free— taking God's Word as his rule 
of faith and practice and accepting such helps 
to the understanding of that Word as God in 
his providence supplies. 

Commenting on this encyclical, the N.Y. 
Sun says, "Unquestionably the time is ripe, or 
soon will be, for a moral co-operation of all 
men calling themselves Christians against revolutionary 
teachings which threaten the destruction 
alike of religion and of civilization. The 
necessity of such a combination against anti-social 
forces has been repeatedly affirmed by 
Leo XIII., and is proclaimed with special anxiety 
and fervor in what perhaps will prove to be 
his last encyclical." 

The lameness of the law of selfishness is here 
manifested. Those who have some possessions 
of this world and who have some hopes and 
facilities for their increase, fear the growing intelligence 
of the lower strata of society, which, 
having nothing, has "nothing to lose." This 
latter class is gradually learning its power, and 
daily comes more into sympathy with socialism, 
anarchy, or any thing which promises them a 
larger share of the necessaries and luxuries of 
life. It is the realization of this that is leading 
the conservative and wealthy classes of men to 
combine for the preservation of society upon its 
present basis, which is found to be favorable to 
their interests and ambition. They recognize 
religion as the strongest influence for the peaceable 
control of humanity; and they see that 
with the growing intelligence of our day and 
the growing independence of thought and action, 
the influence of all the different religious 
teachings over the lower classes of society is on 
the decrease; and they begin to fear the results. 
Hence we have just that condition of things 
which the Lord predicted (Luke 21:26), men's 
hearts failing them for fear and for looking 
after those things which are coming on the earth; 
because the powers of the heaven (the religious 
systems) are being shaken. This is true of all 



Protestant denominations, and increasingly so 
of the Roman Catholic church also, in which 
there are various splits progressing. 

R1705: page 296 

The Pope's encyclical is the result of his 
heart failing him for fear of the things coming; 
and he expresses the fears and sentiments of 
many others— Protestants, as well as Catholics, 
who, neither seeing nor being in harmony with 
the divine plan, are greatly disconcerted at the 
evident failure of present arrangements, which 
they had supposed would usher in the Millennium 
by converting the world. 

As heretofore shown, the Scriptures clearly 
indicate that just such a combination of religious 
systems as the Pope advocates will eventually 
take place, except that it will be in two 
distinct parts. Catholicism under the Papal head 
will doubtless absorb the Greek, Armenian and 
other eastern churches, and quite possibly the high 
church Episcopalians; the other division being a 
grand federation of the chief Protestant denominations. 
And these two great systems, for fear 
and for self-preservation, will heartily co-operate 
in order that the "peace and safety" of 
present institutions and arrangements may be 
continued. This thought is set forth in the 
Scriptures in strong symbolic language, and the 
event is located in this day of wrath and time 
of trouble:— "Come near, all ye nations, to 
hear; and hearken, ye people: let the earth 
hear and all that is therein, the world and all 
things that come forth of it; for the indignation 
of the Lord is upon all nations and his 
fury upon all their armies: he hath condemned 
them to destruction, he hath delivered them to 
the slaughter.. ..And all the host of heaven 
[religious societies] shall be dissolved, and the 
heavens shall be rolled together [not in one 
great roll, but] as a scroll [in two separate divisions 
or parts,— Catholicism one part and Protestantism 
the other, in close affiliation and cooperation, 
so that whatever passes from the one 
passes to the other]."— See Isa. 34:1-4; also 
Rev. 6:14-17. 

The Scriptures plainly show that the present 
order and condition of society cannot, even by 
such combinations of power as proposed, be 
long sustained, but that shortly after this great 
religious federation has been perfected, the 
upheavals of socialism and anarchy will suddenly 
destroy them and ultimately every vestige 
of the present system. And no sooner will 
these elements be thus brought together than 



they will begin to realize what the Prophet Nahum 
suggests, that they are thorns in each 
other's sides:— "What do ye imagine against 
the Lord? he will make an utter end [of this 
present order of things]: affliction shall not 
rise up the second time. For while they be 
folden together as thorns, and while they are 
drunken as drunkards [intoxicated with the 
spirit of this world— the spirit of selfishness and 
tyranny], they shall be devoured as stubble fully 
dry."-Nahum 1:9,10. 

Thus the way will be prepared for the establishment 
of a new social arrangement ["the 
new earth"], on the basis of love and righteousness, 
and under the influence and control of the 
glorified Church of Christ (the "new heavens," 
or spiritual power) in which righteousness and 
love will control and prevail. 



R1705 : page 296 

SUNDAY EVENING REVERY. 

-SIGNS OF HIS COMING.- 

FOR twenty years last past the earth has been 
full of preparation for that time prayed for 
when Christ's will shall be done on earth as in 
heaven. For twenty years to come those preparations 
will continue and will culminate in the 
Kingdom. We are nearly in the middle of the 
harvest now— the time of trouble— "the end 
of the age." 

The time of the end simply means the end 
of the failures and fallacies of man rule; the leveling 
of present forms of government; the blotting 
out of present forms of sectarianism; the radical 
annulment of present forms of business and 
social usurpation; the destruction of caste and 
wealth differences; the overthrow of pride, arrogance 
and sordid ambitions; and the iron- 
golden rule of King Christ. 



But, says one, twenty years is a short time in 
which to close up all the kingdoms and other 
governments; all the denominational isms and 
religious oligarchies and all the other evils of 
6,000 years. I reply, it is long enough. The 
last twenty years have been peaceful but full of 
preparation— material, mental, spiritual. The 
stone is rolling; the hill is steepening; the impetus 
becomes terrible very soon, and twenty 



years will amply suffice to destroy old things 
R1705: page 297 

and fit the earth for the new.— Dan. 2:34. 

Most of people in Christendom are conservative 
to-day— all were conservative twenty years 
ago. There will be no conservatives twenty 
years from now. 

Most of the distant nations are peaceful to-day. 
None of them have had war (practically 
none) for twenty years; all will have war within 
the next twenty years. The last twenty 
years have consolidated, but at the same time 
greatly weakened, sectarianism. Within the 
next twenty years dogmatism will seek to become 
despotism in the interest of harmonious settlement 
and will utterly fail and fall to pieces. 

Twenty years ago labor and capital began to 
organize. To-day they are ready to give each 
other trouble; within twenty years they will 
weary each other and the public of the world 
with incessant strife until labor will droop exhausted 
with excesses and wealth will be eager 
to throw away its last dollar and faint in the 
arms of peace. 

A helpless earth twenty years from now will 
invite the kingdom of God. 

And it will come. 



Will Christ reign in visible form on earth 
twenty years from now? Certainly not; Christ 
on earth eighteen hundred and eighty years 
ago, was a human being, Christ risen and ascended 
to his Father is made a divine being far 
more exalted than spiritual beings and infinitely 
above the human plane; and yet his elect of 
the Gospel age are to be so grandly exalted with 
him as to be "seated with him on his throne, 
even as he is seated with his Father on his Father's 
throne"— these partake with him of the 
divine nature (far above angels) and are to be 

R1706: page 297 

with Christ the divine (but invisible) agencies 
in ruling the world— and in bringing all the 
nations of the earth, living and resurrected, into 
acquaintance and spiritual relationship with 
God during the Millennium of 1000 years. 



Who will be the earthly agents of the rule of 



Christ? Devout men— not any supernatural 
agencies, except as resurrected men may be regarded 
as supernatural—for many of these coming 
rulers will be men who have lived and learned 
to rule in this world hundreds of years ago. 

But the resurrection will be found to be a 
natural awakening, as death is the natural going 
into a long breathless sleep. Moses will "stand 
in his lot in the latter days." So will David, 
so will Elijah, so will Isaiah, Jeremiah and 
Daniel— their reproduction will come about 
naturally, as the power of electricity always existed 
although not discovered until recently. 
The power of reproducing life (God's power in 
the same sense that all others are God's powers) 
will be a natural revelation (possibly a natural 
discovery) within the next twenty years. 

Some one asks now: "Are you a prophet?" 
No, only a student and a watchman. I am 
taught these things, first, from the Word of God. 
The five books of Moses are a source of wonderful 
types, shadows and chronologies. David 
was a far-seeing prophet as well as a poet and 
king. Isaiah and all the prophets saw the 
world's restoration in the Millennial time, but 
it is Christ and his apostles that convey to me 
the words that designate the signs in the earth 
most completely. Then I look round me and 
see those signs as they have indicated them. 
The fields are ripe, and the harvesters are at 
work, and possibly I may live to see the change. 
In these conclusions I have been assisted by a 
series of books, called Millennial Dawn, and 
a periodical called Zion's Watch Tower, which 
carefully read and mentally prove and compare 
with the Scriptures. I am not advertising those 
works, but candor demands their mention when 
such tremendous predictions are made as I 
have ventured in this reverie. 

—Grand Army Advocate. 



R1706: page 297 

INTRODUCING T.T. SOCIETY REPRESENTATIVES. 



"Need we, as some others, epistles of commendation to you, 
or letters of commendation from you?"— 2 Cor. 3:1. 

WE introduce again the subject of certificates 
mentioned in our last issue by the following 
letter just received from our very dear and 
very cautious Brother Owen. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--Brother McPhail 
has come and gone, and all bear testimony to 
the benefits derived from his meetings here. He 
held four meetings at our house and two in West 
Indianapolis, all but one of which I attended. 
I feel that I was benefitted by each meeting. At 
the close of the meeting I expressed my intention 
of sending in a small contribution to the Tract 
Fund as a substantial mode of expressing my 
approval of the new venture, and, without urging 
the matter, asked all who felt so disposed 
and who had the ability to do so, to hand to 
me at the close of the meeting such sums as they 
felt like contributing towards meeting the extra 
expense incurred by the Tract Society, in sending 
out ministers. Our voluntary offering amounted 
to $12.50, which I enclose. 

After the meeting was over, Sister Owen took 
me to task about taking up a collection, saying 

R1706: page 298 

among other things that people had already contributed 

to the Tract Fund what they felt able 

to do and that to set the example and thus 

establish a precedent might prove burdensome 

to some of the little groups, or at least make 

them feel that they ought to follow our example, 

when perhaps they would not be able to do so, 

and that under such circumstances the visits of 

brethren might prove to be just the reverse of a 

blessing. I was quite careful, however, to make 

all feel that they were entirely free to act just as 

their feelings and circumstances might dictate. 

I wish to say that Brother McPhail did not 
even hint at a collection being taken, and when 
some offered to help defray his expenses he refused 
the money, saying to such, "If you have 
any thing to give, send it to the Tract Fund." 

I wish to make a friendly criticism of the article 
in last TOWER: "Another Branch of the 
work." It seems to me that to have the brethren 
introduce themselves by a certificate of character 
from the Tract Society is extra cautious, and that 
your enemies will seize upon this to give coloring 
to their charges of "Popery," etc. 

After the experience you have had with some 
of those you trusted most, it is but natural that 
you be more cautious where you place your confidence. 
And this is right. 

I fully appreciate the difficulties of your position; 
my heart goes out to you in love; and I certainly 
do not feel in the least critical. You, my dear 
brother, wield a power with the true Church which 
is remarkable— the result I think of your disinterested 
service and devotion to its interest, and 



the absence of any dictatorial spirit on your 
part. You are and have been indeed the servant 
of all, and this service makes you master in a 
way that no other power under the heavens could 
do. So have a care, brother, lest Satan tempt 
you to over-cautiousness. Better too much liberty 
than not enough. 

Sister O. joins me in love to all. As ever, 
yours in our dear Redeemer, C. A. OWEN. 

Our dear Brother's solicitude for the interests 
of Zion, and the kindly way in which he offers 
his suggestions, are greatly appreciated. But we 
do not share his fears, and will show that there 
is no foundation for them. There is surely no 
real difference between a personal introduction 
of one brother to another and an introduction 
of distant brethren by letter. Nor does it alter 
matters whether the introduction or letter is from 
one person to another person, or from the Tract 
Society to many persons, readers of the WATCH 
TOWER publications. Nor could it make a whit 
of difference to the travelling brother whether 
he said, "I call upon you as a representative of 
Zion's Watch Tower Tract Society," and showed 
no certificate, or whether he produced a signed 
letter from the Society,— except that the latter 
would assure him the warm confidence of the 
friends, whereas without it there might be a doubt 
as to whether he was a self-appointed representative 
of the Tract Society, or whether he was 
acknowledged as a representative by the Society, 
through its officers. 

Besides, it is expected that the accredited representatives 
will take many new subscriptions 
for ZION'S WATCH TOWER from parties newly or 
more deeply interested through their labors, and 
a certificate would be an evidence that the stranger 
who receives the money is truly a representative 
of Z.W.T.T.S. Some years ago a man took 
hundreds of TOWER subscriptions and sent the 
names to us for sample copies merely, and fraudulently 
retained the money for his own use. 
We made good all such losses so far as we learned 
of them, and finally by threats of arrest got the 
man stopped. Every one knows that there are 
such characters, and it is not right to expect people 
to receive strangers into their confidence without 
some introduction from those they do know. 

In the text at the head of this article the 
Apostle remarks that he did not need letters of 
introduction; but this was because he was well 
known by them, their faith being God's workmanship 
through him; but his words show that 
he considered himself an exception to the rule, 
and that he approved as necessary the giving and 
receiving of letters of commendation, as between 



teachers and churches visited. 

The only dangers we can imagine would be ( 1) 
in case the church receiving a brother thus commended 
should accept his utterances without proper 
scrutiny and scripture proving; or (2) in case 
the having a certificate should be considered necessary 
as an authorization or permission to preach. 

We wish to warn all against any such views 
of our letters of commendation, by whomsoever 
presented. They do not signify that the owner 
is an infallible teacher, but that he is one who 
has written to us of his full sympathy with the 
eight simple qualifications named in the article 
in our last issue, headed "Another Branch of 
the Work," and who stated that he possesses those 
qualifications by the grace of God; and that the 

R1706: page 299 

Tower Tract Society believed him to be a true-hearted 
brother in Christ, clear in his views of the 
fundamentals of the Gospel and fully consecrated 
to the will and service of the Lord. 

Nor do these letters of commendation signify 
that others have not an equal authority from the 
Lord to preach the Word. The commission to 
preach, yea, the duty of preaching publicly or 
privately, orally or by the printed page is upon 
all who hear,— upon all who receive the truth in 
the love of it. But you must prove all teachers 
and teachings before fully receiving them into 
your hearts. "By their fruits ye shall know them," 
and by proving their doctrines— measuring both 
with the letter and the spirit of God's Word. 

But such a proving may take considerable 
time, and if the brother be with you but a day 
or two and be a stranger, you may hesitate to 
ask him the plain, simple questions propounded 
in our last issue,— whether he is a believer in the 
ransom (in the sense of a corresponding price, its 
only true significance); and whether he is fully 
consecrated to the Lord in will and service. On 
the other hand, if he has a certificate you will at 
once know that he has confessed all this to the 
Tract Society's officers as your representatives. 
We do not say that you should reject or refuse any 
brother coming to you without our letter of introduction 
and commendation, but that you may 

R1707: page 299 

receive with special readiness and quicker confidence 
those who do come so introduced; knowing 
what they have professed and what we believe 
concerning their character, consecration, etc. 
So far from this being a popish method, it is 



the very reverse; for Papacy affects to give its 

ministers the right and power to "create Christ" 

in the mass, and anathematizes all who attempt 

to teach without its authorization. On the contrary, 

this introduction by letter, as a safe-guard 

against "false brethren" and "wolves in sheep's 

clothing," was the custom of the primitive Church, 

practiced by the Apostles (See Acts 18:27; Phil. 2:19-25-29; 

Col. 4:10,11; Philemon 10-17) 

and mentioned approvingly in the text at the 

head of this article. Satan would doubtless be 

glad to drive us from every precautionary measure 

by a fear of what enemies would say; but we 

remember that the Lord was called Beelzebub, 

by those whom Satan deluded and used, and that 

he forewarned us that they would say all manner 

of evil falsely against all of his faithful servants. 

People who have "the spirit of a sound mind" 

(2 Tim. 1:7) will not be deceived by these enemies, 

who, under the lead of the great enemy, 

Satan, would fain have us cast away all safe-guards 

which the word of God and common sense approve, 

in order that the wolves in sheep's clothing 

might ravage the flock and fatten themselves. 

We here give a copy of these certificates. Notice 
how simple the statements: the ordination 
is of God in the Scriptures, and is common to all 
of his people, and the certificate merely declares 
that the TRACT SOCIETY recognizes the owner in 
the capacity named:— 

Allegheny, Pa., U.S.A., 189 . 

TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN: 

This is to Certify that during the year above 

written of , is regularly ordained a 

minister of the "Church of the Living God" 

(1 Tim. 3:15; Phil. 4:3); that is serving 

as a Missionary and Evangelist under the auspices 

of this Society; that has full authority to teach 

and preach publicly and privately, orally and by 

the printed page; and that is authorized to 

administer to others of the household of faith, 
upon suitable occasions and after proper confession 
of faith, the ordinances of Baptism and the 
Lord's Supper— according to all and singular 
the commands and teachings of this Church as 
laid down in the Holy Scriptures. 

Witness the signatures of the officers of the 
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Allegheny 
City, Pa., U.S.A., and the corporate 
seal thereof. 

President. 

Secretary. 

With the exception of four brethren, it is 
proposed that this work shall have its start from 



the first of next year. Meantime, we hope to 

hear from all brethren who have time that they can 

donate to the Lord in some such service, and who 

would take pleasure in so doing. We will take 

pleasure in co-operating with these, to the extent 

of our judgment of the Lord's will in the matter. 

But for the sake of uniformity, and for the assurance 

of the brethren to whom such shall go, we 

must require of all such a clear, unequivocal declaration 

that they believe themselves, by the 

grace of God, possessed of the eight qualifications 

for this ministry, specified in the Sept. 1 TOWER; 

because we believe that the child of God who 

cannot in the fear of God say for himself what is 

R1707: page 300 

there simply set forth would be a totally unfit 
person to commend to the Church as to any 
extent an instructor in divine things, or as likely 
to do good rather than harm in his use 
of the sword of the spirit, the Word of God. 

Probably we shall have more offers for this 
service than we can wisely accept; but we will have 
another method of service to suggest to some. 



R1707 : page 300 
PALESTINIAN COLONIZATION. 



THE movement looking to the colonization 
of Palestine by Jews of various countries 
has more to commend it than a sentiment, however 
laudable that may be. It is of no political 
importance whatsoever, but it is the outcome 
of the deliberate purpose of thoughtful men to 
provide a settlement for Jews, which shall be 
both sure of success and always under their 
watchful care and thus free from the many dangers 
which have made so many other experiments 
practically failures. This is the aim of 
the "Lovers of Zion" societies, of which there 
are so many flourishing in England, and of 
which we know so little in this country. Yet 
they can hardly be said to be either visionary 
or to involve their abettors in schemes of which 
they must be well ashamed if they pretend to be 
patriots. Lord Rothschild is one of the many 
notables in Victoria's realm who have taken the 
project under their wing with an enthusiasm 
which means all earnestness. 
There is, of course, no little of the Jewish 



fondness for the land of their fathers in this 
undertaking, and perhaps not a few hope for a 
restoration of the glory of Jerusalem, as depicted 
by the prophets of the Bible, which will 
include, perhaps, the blood-sacrifices and the 
royal splendor of the Solomonic period. This 
is but natural; and the religious enthusiasm is 
shared by Christians and Mohammedans as well, 
though, of course, for somewhat different reasons. 
Still it must be said that of all countries in the 
world there is none in which so many people 
have so lively, so direct, an almost personal interest, 
for which they will, if need be, make 
sacrifices greater or less in degree. Herein lies 
the security of any local government which may 
be established on the historic soil; and from 
being the fighting pit of the nations of antiquity, 
it will have guaranteed it an independence 
which nineteenth century enlightenment and 
international jealousy will prompt. Thus the 
colonist will be spared the dangers of civil war 
and foreign invasion, or if the Turk remain in 
control, he will have the protection afforded by 
consuls on the spot. 

The prospect of the establishment of a government 
which, following the prophecy of Isaiah, 
shall act as the arbiter among the nations, is not 
seriously considered by the largest number of 
those active in the movement. 

Political hopes are given something far more 
tangible and practical at this juncture. Nor is 
the other beautiful idea held to of making Jerusalem's 
Temple the place of the assembly in 
which all peoples shall have their common ideal 
religion. As with Messianic ideas, which likewise 
it is urged must follow a miraculous interposition 
and a divine deliverance, this, too, is set aside 
for the more practical ideas of the colonists. 

It has been demonstrated that the soil is sufficiently 
fertile to maintain colonists, and there 
is no doubt that the opening up of the railroads 
and steamships will furnish ample markets. 
The Jews from being the dromedaries of civilization 
will take the place of the Phoenicians 
of history and become the burden bearers of 
commerce in the same sense that the last great 
nation was. Not content with building up 
slowly for future use, some of the more enthusiastic 
are raising funds to return themselves, as 
soon as possible, to the Promised Land of milk 
and honey. They mean to put their theories 
to a severe test and by heroic measures. 

It cannot be that the distance between the 
older citizens among American Jews and the 
new-comers is responsible for the lack of interest 
shown for what is really a big movement in 



the great cities of the country, for the Lovers 
of Zion have branches and are collecting money 
everywhere. The people here know little apparently 
of it, however, and their indifference 
takes the form of contempt, and then ofttimes 
a little side light makes them mistrust it because 
it is either an attempt, so they say, to compromise 
them into swearing allegiance to two flags 
or is visionary and opposed to their doctrinal 
views or Messianic hopes. The flag of Judah 
is not to be flung to the breeze shortly, but 
whereas it has cost tens of thousands of dollars 
to experiment in the United States and in Argentine, 
with the result still in doubt, it is 
hoped to carry successful farming in the sacred 
land to its furthest point, the Jews can find no 
safer, no better haven anywhere on the globe. 
The members of the colonization society do not 
want the Jews of the world to go en masse, but 
they would go in small companies themselves. 
This is an earnest of good faith, and if assistance 
is needed when the aims and purposes are 
well understood, money to aid them will be 
forthcoming. —Jewish Exponent. 



R1707: page 301 
HONORABLE SERVICE. 



"If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, 
there shall also my servant be: if any man serve me, 
him will my Father honor."— John 12:26. 

THE idea of service is one which is becoming 
more and more obnoxious to the minds of 
all classes of people. Both nations and individuals 
seem permeated with such a spirit of 
antagonism that their service one to another is 
only that which self-interest demands, and is 
generally rendered grudgingly and stintedly, 
the understood motto being— The least possible 
service for the largest compensation. 

But the very reverse of this is the spirit of 
Christ, whose pleasure it was, in the execution 

R1708: page 301 

of God's plan of salvation and blessing, to render 

the greatest possible service without money 

and without price— making himself a living sacrifice, 

not receiving even the thanks, but, on 

the contrary, the reproaches, of those he served. 



"If any man serve me, let him follow me," he 
says. To serve Christ is to enlist under his 
captaincy in the very service to which he devoted 
all his energies, even unto death,— the 
service of mankind along the exact lines of the 
divine plan. Therefore he refers us to his 
own sacrificing service. He does not say, Go 
in yonder way of humiliation and self-sacrificing 
service; but he says, Come, follow, where I 
have led the way! I have not despised humble 
service, and the servant is not greater than his 
Lord. "Take my yoke upon you and learn of 
me; for I am meek and lowly of heart." A 
proud spirit cannot follow Christ. The current 
of thought and feeling must be changed to that 
of meekness, gentleness and love. The proud, 
haughty spirit must be converted, and with 
that conversion will come rest, peace and joy 
in following the Master's footsteps of faithful, 
untiring and self-sacrificing service. 

Those who despise service, and long for release 
from all its restraints and its supposed dishonor, 
never made a greater mistake; for the 
only men and women worthy of remembrance 
when they have passed away are those who have 
faithfully and ably served their fellow-men. It 
is only such persons whose names come down 
through history covered with glory, while those 
who lived in selfish ease were long ago forgotten. 

Among the shining lights of the world in 
their day were such noble servants as Moses, 
Elijah and Paul— men who braved every danger 
and hazarded their lives to serve God's purposes 
in the interests of their fellow-men. Consider 
Moses, burdened with the care of that mighty 
host of stiff-necked Israelites: with what indifference 
to his own ease or rest of mind or body, 
he gave his whole energy to the service of his 
people. Then consider Paul, with the care of all 
the churches upon him, and the great work of 
spreading the gospel among the Gentiles in the 
face of determined opposition and persecution 
which constantly imperilled his life and never 
allowed him the quiet ease so desirable to all men. 

Then, in more recent times, we have the 
noble examples of reformers and martyrs and 
guards and defenders of human rights and liberties 
at immense cost to themselves. Prominent 
among the latter are the honored names of 
Washington and Lincoln, two men whom the 
providence of God evidently raised up in times 
of great peril and conflict, the former to secure 
this great American asylum for the oppressed 
of all nations, and the latter to deliver it from 
the curse of human slavery and defend it against 
disunion and disintegration. 



With the divine plan in mind, one cannot 
read the history of this country without seeing 
in it the over-ruling power of God in providing 
and keeping in this land, for the elect's 
sake, a safe asylum where truth untrammelled 
could be freely disseminated and some measure 
of the glorious liberty of the sons of God enjoyed. 
Especially is this noticeable in view of 
the fact that the harvest work began and centered 
in this country. Grandly in the dawn of 
its existence, when it was menaced by a hostile 
foreign power and by savages within its borders, 
that noble Christian soldier, George Washington, 
self-sacrificingly threw himself with all his 
energies into the breach. Looking to God for 
help, and urging the nation to do the same, he 
became the human instrument for the salvation 
of this nation from the power of oppression. 

R1708: page 302 

Then when slavery had defiled the land, and the 
wails of oppression from four millions of our 
fellow-creatures came into the ears of the Lord 
of armies, he raised up Abraham Lincoln, who 
nobly bore upon his heart and mind the burdens 
of all the oppressed; and, looking to God and 
urging the nation to do the same, Lincoln sacrificed 
himself in the interests of his fellow-men 
and thus in the service of God. 

But aside from these there are many more or 
less widely known who have considered service 
an honor, following the example of Christ. 
"If any man serve me, let him follow me; and 
where I am, there shall my servant be." The 
reward of a close following of the Lord— partaking 
of his spirit and entering heartily and 
self-sacrificingly into his service— is the sharing 
in due time in his glory and kingdom. "If 
any man serve me, him will my Father honor." 
"Fear not, little flock, it is your Father's good 
pleasure to give you the kingdom." 

Those who have proved their devotion to God 
and to his benevolent plan for the salvation and 
blessing of humanity will not lose their reward. 
God's eye is upon all such; he is marking their 
conduct in all the peculiar circumstances and 
conditions in which they are placed; and 
no one who is faithfully and diligently acting 
his part, however humble that part may be, can 
escape his notice. All such will receive abundance 
of honor in due time; but the crown must 
not be looked for until the cross has been borne 
to the end. On this side the vail that separates 
the present from the future lies the pathway of 
humiliation and self-sacrifice, but beyond are 



glory and peace and praise and joy forevermore. 
Beloved, keep the promises in mind that you 
may gather from them the inspiration you will 
need more and more as the trials of this present 
time and service increase in number and 
severity.-2 Tim. 2:3; Rom. 6:4,5; 8:17,18; 
1 John 3:3. 



page 302 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS. - 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1708: page 302 

DANIEL AND HIS COMPANIONS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON XIII., SEPT. 23, DAN. 1:8-20. 

Golden Text— "Daniel purposed in his heart that he 
would not defile himself."— Dan. 1:8. 

In this lesson we have before us four 
more of those beautiful characters among 
the ancient worthies whose examples the 
Apostles taught us to emulate (Jas. 5:10; 
Heb. 11.) In these four men we see the grandeur 
of the fixed purpose of noble and loyal 
hearts. Severe temptations were set before 
them, but not for an instant did they sway 
them from the path of rectitude. 

At an early age, at the beginning of the 
seventy years captivity of Israel in Babylon, 
they were carried to Babylon and obliged 
to enter the service of the royal court, where 
the king's command as to their course of 
life was such as implied the forsaking of 
their own religion and their God, even their 
names being changed to those of idolatrous 
significance. The luxurious diet of the king, 
of course, would not be subject to the restrictions 
of the Jewish law (Lev. 11; Deut. 12:23-25); 
and this first command, which 
conflicted with the law of God, they sought 



if possible to avoid,— no doubt praying 
God's providential favor to this end. 

In this they self-denyingly ignored the 
luxuries, and ran the risk of encountering 
the wrath of a despotic king in whose hands 
was the power of death, to be executed on 
the merest caprice; while on the other hand 
his favor was likely to advance them to 
honorable distinction in the kingdom. 

God favored them so that the wrath of 
the king was not incurred, and they became, 
to that great Gentile nation, living witnesses 
of the power and grace of the God of Israel. 
But the time came in the case of each of 
these four witnesses when they were called 
upon to seal their testimony with their 
blood; and they met those tests of fidelity 
with an unflinching, resolute purpose. Notwithstanding 
the king's command to pray 
to him and to no other god, Daniel still adhered 
to his usual custom of praying to the 
true God three times a day with his window 
open and his face toward Jerusalem; 
and for his fidelity he calmly yielded to the 
persecuting spirit which cast him into a 

R1708: page 303 

den of lions. His three companions with 
equal fortitude refused to worship the golden 
image which Nebuchadnezzar had set up, 
and paid the penalty by going into a burning, 
fiery furnace, saying, Our God is able to 
deliver us if it please him, but, leaving the 
matter of deliverance or destruction to his 
will, of one thing we are sure, We will not 
serve thy gods, nor worship the golden 
image which thou hast set up. 

What heroic examples of godly zeal and 
fortitude, and of friendship cemented by the 
bonds of a common noble purpose. Four 
young men devoted to God mutually agree 
to set their faces like a flint against temptation, 
and to live righteously and godly in the 
midst of a crooked and perverse generation; 
and truly they have shone as lights, not 
only in their own day, but down even to 
the present time. In youth they chose the 
right ways of the Lord, and they gave a life-long 
testimony to the praise of his grace. 

Let our purpose be like theirs, and as the 
Psalmist expresses it, —"My heart is fixed, 
O God, my heart is fixed."— Psa. 57:7. 

page 303 



REVIEW. 



III. QUAR., LESSON XIV., SEPT. 30. 

Golden Text— "The kingdom of God is at hand: repent 
ye, and believe the gospel."— Mark 1:15. 

A thoughtful, reverent, prayerful review 
of the lessons of this quarter on the incidents 
and teachings of our Lord's earthly 
life cannot fail to bring the soul into fuller 
sympathy and fellowship with him, and 
thus prepare us for his Kingdom, now so 
close at hand,— not merely in its embryo 
condition, but in its completeness and glory. 



R1708: page 303 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Just a few lines 
to let you know how the Lord is blessing 
me as a partaker in his harvest work. 

Acting on your advice in Z.W.T., I have 
been attending the various meetings held 
here on Sunday, that I may thereby get acquainted 
with some of the Lord's children 
and give them a tract or DAWN. I have 
not only had just such opportunity, but also 
the privilege to lead the Y.M.C.A. 
meeting one Sunday; and although the subject 
provided hedged me in considerably, 
yet I managed to give them some truth on 
the ransom, and how it was necessary for 

R1709: page 303 

Christ to suffer. Following is the lesson: 

GREATNESS THROUGH GENTLENESS. 

2 SAM. 22:36. 

David was truly great. 
Great in physical strength. 

(a) Slays the lion and the bear.— 
1 Sam. 17:36. 

(b) Slays the giant.- 1 Sam. 17:48-50. 
Great in his loyalty to his king.— 

1 Sam. 26:7-12. 



Great in his high position. 

Elevated to the throne.— 2 Sam. 2:4. 

Great in God's estimation. 

A man after his own heart.— 1 Sam. 13:14; 
Acts 13:22. 

True greatness does not consist in what 
we possess, but in what we are. 

We may never be kings, but all may be 
kingly. 

David's greatness consisted in his willingness 
to submit himself to God. 

His constant prayer was "Teach me thy 
ways." 

Christ is the most perfect example of 
greatness. 

Christ is the most perfect example of 
gentleness. 

His character is love. 

Love is always patient, always gentle- 
never weak. 

Love is always great. If we would be 
great, we must allow the love and gentleness 
of Christ to lead us. 

If our lives are entirely submitted to him, 
we cannot limit his power to usward. 
Christ's pattern of greatness.— Matt. 18:4. 
Gentleness the fruit of the spirit.— Gal. 5:22. 
Study lives of Moses, Paul, Peter, John, 
Joshua and others. 

Yesterday I was called again to make a 
few remarks after the paper read by the 
leader. (Subject: Jesus, the young man's 
best friend.) I opened the Scriptures at Rom. 5:7,8, 
showing them in which way Jesus 
was the young man's friend, and also friend 
to all them who by faith appropriate to 
themselves the merits of his sacrifice. I also 
explained the "equivalent price," and its 
necessity. 

Going to the Presbyterian church, I was 
delighted to hear an old minister preaching 
the unvarnished truth from the text, "If 

R1709: page 304 

any man will come after me, let him deny 
himself, and take up his cross," etc. His 
prayers were short and very good, and the 
burden of them was to be guided by God's 
Word, his truth, that he may have no opinions 
of his own. You can imagine how my 
heart warmed toward him. Since then I have 
become very friendly with him, and have 
found him to be very well posted in truth, 
and waiting with expectancy the return of 
our Lord and Master. I had quite a talk 



with him on this truth. He gave me a book 
to read, and I gave him in exchange DAWN, 
VOL. II. I know it is against your advice, 
but I thought that, as he was deeply interested 
in the coming of Christ, and as he 
was greatly pleased with the tract, "Do 
You Know," he may have his appetite 
whetted for more and so get ready for 
VOL. I. And my conclusions were correct: 
he is deeply interested, and is hurrying up 
to get it. I pray he may have his prayer 
answered, just to know God's way and not 
his own opinions; and I pray that I may be 
kept humble, knowing how many have 
stumbled over spiritual pride. 

Find enclosed a small order for MILLENNIAL 
DAWNS. 

Yours in Christian love, 

ALEX. ALLAN. 

[Such methods we commend to all— in proportion 
as they possess the requisite ability. 
Each one blessed by the truth should feel it his 
privilege as well as his duty to serve it and his 
fellow-pilgrims to the Heavenly Kingdom. He 
whose heart does not burn with a desire to tell 
the good tidings either has not learned it or 
else has received only its letter and not its 
spirit. But all should remember the Lord's 
caution "Be ye wise as serpents, and harmless as 
doves;" and the Apostle's admonition to speak 
the truth in love. Such efforts for those who 
are yet in darkness are well supplemented by 
weekly gatherings for prayer, praise and interchange 
of testimony by those who have emerged 
into the "marvelous light" of present truth. 
-EDITOR.] 



page 304 



DEAR BROTHER:-In regard to yourself 
and work, I want to say I am in perfect accord. 
Since reading DAWN, VOL. I., I have 
had mingled feelings of joy and sadness: 
Sadness that I was so long in darkness, and 
joy that the light has dawned upon me. 
The DAWNS and TOWERS are a continual 
blessing to us. I say to us, for I am glad 
to tell you that my dear wife has also, after 
due consideration, embraced the truth. So 
you see I have great cause for gratitude. 
Together we can study and plan little deeds 
that we think may be of help to some one. 
We agree with you that the time is short, 



and that what we do must be done quickly. 

I have consecrated my time, talents, voice, 
pen and all to God and the spread of present 
truth— "meat in due season," and I am 
glad to be able to say that (since doing 
this) God has led me in a wonderful way; 
and we rejoice that through our humble efforts 
many have been led to a serious consideration 
of this most important truth. 
For the past year we have been holding an 
unsectarian meeting for gospel purposes 
and Bible study. The numbers have kept 
up fairly well, and the interest has always 
been good. Our meetings are attended by 
a mixed class: many who were never interested 
in the gospel and some of the different 
shades of Adventists. All are made 
welcome. They listen with a good deal of 
interest, and sometimes take a minor part. 
The doctrines of the ransom and the restitution 
are always kept prominent. We 
use blackboard and chart, and alway try to 
vary our meeting. Other work consists in 
tract distribution, loaning of DAWNS, answering 
enquiries (sometimes in writing), 
visiting in a quiet way, engaging those in 
conversation whom we think will be interested. 
It is indeed a great work, and we 
are so glad that we have a fair field. Some 
disappointment has been expressed at our 
not seeking a church home. Two pastors 
visited us, and received in plain talk from 
God's Word some good reasons for our 
course. Dear Brother, observation proves 
more and more that "Babylon" is fallen. 
What a mercy to be delivered! On Sunday, 
Aug. 5, our subject will be, The National 
Restoration of Israel (in accordance to VOL. 
III., Chap. 8); the next Sunday, The Signs 
of the Times. 

I hope and pray that you will long be 
spared, and that we, as co-workers with 
God in this glorious harvest work, may be 
faithful, and led to glorious victory at last. 
"Do You Know," we think is especially 
good. I do not expect an answer. This is 
only a little by way of greeting to you and 
Sister Russell. Yours in the work, 

JOHN & FRANCES DUFTY. 



page 306 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1709: page 306 

CHURCH AND STATE IN ITALY. 



AN UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN THEM FORESHADOWED 
BY PREMIER CRISPI. 

Premier Crispi inaugurated in Naples to-day 
the memorial erected in honor of King Humbert's 
visit to the city during the cholera epidemic 
of 1884. He made a notable speech, beginning 
with a historical review of recent Italian 
politics, and closing with a declaration as to the 
social problems of to-day, especially the revolutionary 
movement. The social system was now 
passing, he said, through a momentous crisis. 
The situation had become so acute that it 
seemed absolutely necessary for civil and religious 
authority to unite and work harmoniously 
against that infamous band on whose flag were 



inscribed the words, "No God, no King." This 
band had declared war on society. Let society 
accept the declaration and shout back the battle-cry, 
"For God, King and Country!" 

The politicians and clergy here regard this 
speech as the weightiest utterance of years. Its 
whole letter and spirit, they say, suggest the approach 
to an understanding between the Government 
and the church. — N.Y. Tribune. 

The above foreshadows what we have for 
some time pointed out as the tendency of civilization 
—to retrace its steps toward a fuller recognition 
of ecclesiasticism in politics. This 
change of front is not because of a growth of 
religion or of religious superstition, but from 
a fear that unless the church controls the people 
through superstition, etc., the entire social fabric 
will go to wreck. This calls our attention 
afresh to our Lord's prophecy of present conditions 
—"Men's hearts failing them for fear 
and for looking after the things coming upon 
the earth [society] ; for the powers of the heavens 
[ecclesiasticism] shall be shaken." 

Ecclesiasticism will be given an increasingly 
prominent place in politics and will become 
a branch of or element in civil government, 
throughout "Christendom," until finally when 
one falls both will fall, in the great time of 
trouble, predicted in the Scriptures, whose shadow 
is already stealing over the world. 

"When ye see all these things come to pass, 
then lift up your heads and rejoice, knowing 
that your redemption is at hand." 



R1709: page 307 

VOL. XV. OCTOBER 1, 1894. NO. 19. 

BISHOP FOSTER'S NEW GOSPEL. 



ON Sunday, September 23rd, Bishop Foster 

preached before the Pittsburg Annual Conference 

of the M.E. Church, over whose sessions 

he has presided. We give extracts from 

his discourse as reported by two of Pittsburg's 

daily papers, as follows:— 

"If I could concede for a moment that the 
world as I know it, and I know it from rim to 
rim, having traveled in all its lands, having 
seen its dissolute, despicable millions, having 
seen it in shame and filth, and if I were 
compelled to think that my God, whom I worship, 



would by any possible method of condemnation 
send down to hades 1,200,000,000 of my 
brothers, that know not their right hand from 
their left, and save a few of us who are a little 
better perhaps in our morals, I would not go into 
heaven if I could. I could not worship such 
a God as that. I would join the hosts of hades 
in rebelling against such a God. Our God is 
not a God of that kind. God is love, and is 
trying to save men."— Pittsburg Dispatch. 

"If I believed that God would send down to 
a hopeless eternity 1 ,200,000,000 of my brothers 
who are little worse than I am, I would not worship 
him. I have seen the world all over, know 
it from rim to rim, have seen its desolate and 
despicable people, and these I speak of hardly 
know their right hand from their left. God won't 
condemn all these. He's saving all men that he 
can. If I thought he would condemn all these, 
I would join the forces of the devil in hell, in 
rebellion against such an act."— Pittsburg Post. 

The accounts of the two reporters are sufficiently 
alike to insure us that no serious mistake 
has been made as to the tenor of the Bishop's 
expression. But surely it is a remarkable expression, 
coming as it does from the foremost bishop 
of the M. E. Church. The bishop is, as he 
declares, well posted upon the condition of the 
vast heathen world— four- fifths of the living 
human family. He is well posted also respecting 
the missionary machinery for the civilization 
and conversion of these millions. He knows 
that while it was never before so complete as at 
present, yet, even now, the natural increase is 
proportionately far greater than the ratio of 
conversion. The bishop sees no hope for the 
heathen through the preaching of the gospel, 
and hence "flies the track," and leaves the 
Bible plan of salvation,— faith in Christ's redemptive 
work, a faith that comes by hearing 
of the word of God, the Gospel of salvation, a 

R1710: page 307 

gospel which is the power of God unto salvation 
to every one that believeth.— Rom. 10:17; 1:16. 
Why should this intelligent man, a leader of 
thought amongst a very intelligent class of Christians, 
thus leave the gospel of the Bible? a gospel 
which declares: "Without faith it is impossible 
to please God;" "He that believeth shall be 
saved, and he that believeth not shall be condemned;" 
"He that hath the Son hath life, 
and he that hath not the Son shall not see life, 
but the wrath of God abideth on him;" "Believe 
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be 



saved;" etc., etc. Why should he, as above, 
preach another gospel— the gospel of the merit 
of ignorance? The gospel of salvation without 
faith?—the gospel of salvation by works?— the 
gospel of a salvation without a Redeemer? for, 
if the heathen are to be saved because God could 
not do otherwise than save those who "know not 

R1710: page 308 

their right hand from their left," or to keep the 
bishop from joining "the forces of the devil in 
hell in rebellion against such an act," then 
Christ's death was in vain: it certainly is no 
factor in the gospel which the bishop is preaching 
(of a general heathen salvation in ignorance 
of the only "name given under heaven or 
amongst men whereby we must be saved,") even 
though his text was, "When the fulness of time 
was come, God sent forth his Son." 

The reason is that the bishop's intelligence 
has outgrown his theology. He has spent more 
time and honest mental effort in viewing the 
world from rim to rim and studying its social 
and moral questions than he has spent in studying 
his Bible from cover to cover with an honest 
desire to learn God's explanation, in it, of 
his purposes for the blessing, of the world of mankind 
through faith in Christ! 

The bishop's new gospel will strike a responsive 
chord in many hearts— in the hearts of 
missionaries who know better than others how 
little they really accomplish;— in the hearts of 
worldly people, who will say, That is what I always 
believed; faith never saves anybody; it is 
works or nothing;— in the hearts of worldly 
Christians, who will say, that relieves me greatly; 
I believe that our great religious leaders are 
advancing far beyond the old-fogy faith ideas 
of the past, to see that it is not what we know 
or believe merely, but what we do, or God's 
free grace, that saves us. The modern agnostic 
and higher-critic will say, That is the way to talk; 
it is time people were being taught to cut loose 
from those narrow expressions of the Bible which 
so evidence the narrowness of the minds of the 
Lord and the apostles. Indeed, almost all classes 
will be prepared to welcome the bishop's new 
gospel. 

How strange that all of these are so averse to 
the Scriptural explanations of these questions 
which trouble the bishop and all men who are 
even beginning to think! How strange that 
those who will applaud the bishop's new gospel 
will entirely overlook one feature of it, which, 
if true, would certainly stamp it as bad tidings 



to all the holy ones who through patient perseverance 

in well doing have cultivated faith, 

trust, hope and love, and developed character 

from grace to grace and from glory to glory! 

What would these, who, through the faith that 

overcometh the world and by much tribulation, 

enter the Kingdom of Heaven, think of it, if 

within the pearly gates, where they had anticipated 

so much of love and pleasure, they were 

to find the hundreds of millions and billions of 

ignorant, degraded, depraved and characterless 

of heathendom pouring in upon them and outnumbering 

them to such an extent that a saint 

would be a hundred times harder to find in 

heaven than now on earth! To say the least, 

they would be astounded; and if an explanation 

were asked, and Bishop Foster were given the 

opportunity to reply, and had not changed his 

opinion, he doubtless would say that, after having 

done all he could for them on earth without 

success, and fearing that the bishop would join 

the forces of the devil and thus make a bad 

matter worse, God did not know what else to do 

with the heathen than take them to heaven. 

Would that the good-hearted, but benighted, 
bishop would face about and see the Millennial 
dawn, the increasing light of the Sun of Righteousness 
now shining forth! He then would 
see what he does not see now, that God's plan 
as presented in the Bible is transcendently more 
reasonable, more benevolent, more just and more 
practicable than any which he or other human 
beings could possibly concoct or outline. 

What would he see? Briefly this: That God's 
time for giving the heathen to Christ (Psa. 2:8) 
is in the Millennial age and not in this Gospel 
age; that when God undertakes the work 
of causing the knowledge of himself to fill the 
whole earth, it will be done; for his Word shall 
not return unto him void, it shall accomplish 
that which he pleases and prosper in the thing 
whereto he sent it. (Isa. 55: 11.) He would see 
that this knowledge of God is to reach, not only 
the very ignorant heathen of foreign lands, 
but, as well, the very ignorant of civilized lands; 
for "all shall know God from the least to the 
greatest." He would learn that the Millennial 
age will not only be a time for gaining knowledge 
of God, but a time when the obedient will 
be blessed with restitution to all the privileges 
and qualities and powers of mind and body lost 
by disobedience by Adam for himself and all 

R1710: page 309 

his posterity;— redeemed by the Second Adam's 



sacrifice for sin, once for all. He would thus 
see that the Millennial age will be the great 
purgatory time in which the world in general 
will be permitted, if they will, to wash at the 
fountain opened in the House of David for sin 
and uncleanness (Zech. 13:1);— by faith in the 
blood of Christ to be made every whit whole, 
and fit for the fellowship of angels and saints. 

The bishop would learn, moreover, that nothing 
unclean or unholy can enter God's presence 
and be acceptable with him, and that, as the 
Church is now called to be saints and to practice 
holiness ("without which no man shall see 
the Lord"), so it must be with the heathen 
when, during the Millennium, they are called, 
taught and released from the blinding influences 
of Satan. Only the pure in heart shall ever see 
God or enjoy the bountiful provisions prepared 
for those who love him. 

Then Bishop Foster would be prepared to 
learn something respecting God's purpose in the 
call of the Church, and what is the hope of her 
calling. (Eph. 1:18.) Soon he would see that 
as God selected one class of servants during previous 
ages, to be used in his great plan for the 
future blessing of the world, so during the Gospel 
age he has been selecting a household of 
sons to be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, the 
Lord and Head and Redeemer, in the Millennial 
Kingdom and its work of binding Satan 
and opening the eyes of the world so long 
blinded by Satan.-Gen. 12:3; Heb. 1 1:40; 
Acts 15:14; Rev. 20:1-4. 

Soon the Bishop would be not only studying 
this blessed gospel of the Bible, but circulating 
these truths amongst his friends, and in every 
way preaching the old gospel, the old theology 
—that "Christ Jesus by the grace of God tasted 
death for every man," that he "gave himself 
a ransom for all, to be testified in due time;" 
and that eventually the "true Light" will lighten 
"every man that cometh into the world." 
-Heb. 2:9; 1 Tim. 2:4-6; John 1:9. 

We will comment on further quotations from 
this remarkable sermon in our next issue. 



R1710: page 309 

"THOU HAST THE WORDS OF ETERNAL LIFE." 



"From that time many of his disciples went back, and 
walked no more with him. Then said Jesus unto the 



twelve, Will ye also go away? 
"Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall 
we go? Thou hast the words of eternal life." 
--John 6:66-68.- 

THERE is just a tinge of disappointment in 
our Master's words here recorded— "Will 
ye also go away?" Accustomed to look for 
a reason for every action and word, we inquire, 
Why did the loss of a number of followers make 
our Lord feel sad? Was he ambitious for a 
large following? Did his confidence rest in 
numbers? Did he say to himself, Now what will 
the Pharisees say when after three years of my 
teaching they see me deserted by many of my 
followers? Was it that he feared the deflection 
might curtail his revenues? No, it was none 
of these things; for he had already made himself 
of no reputation. He had already said to 
his disciples, Woe unto you when all men speak 
well of you, for so did their fathers to the false 
prophets. He had also the power by which two 
small fishes and three barley loaves could be 
made sufficient to feed five thousand people. 
And he already knew that his faithful followers 
were to be, in all, but a "little flock," and who 
of the multitude believed not.— Verse 64. 

Why then, did his words express sadness at 
the loss of a number from his company? It 
was because he was true and noble and sympathetic, 
and loved his friends, and seeing the 
hour approaching when the Shepherd would be 
smitten and all the sheep be scattered (as it was 
afterward fulfilled when "all forsook him and 
fled"), the lonely sadness crept over him and 
found expression in the words, Will ye also go 
away? Love of sympathy, fellowship of friends, 
etc., are not weaknesses, but, on the contrary, 
are elements of a true character. But it would 
have shown weakness had our Lord allowed 
the turning back of his disciples to have influenced 
or swerved his course from the path of 
sacrifice marked out for him in the Father's 
plan. No such weakness ever manifested itself. 
On the contrary, but a few days after, when 
Peter who here spoke so nobly, attempted to 
dissuade our Lord from sacrifice, he promptly 

R1710: page 310 

answered, Get thee behind me, adversary, thou 
savorest not the things of God, but of men. 

R1711 : page 310 

The Apostle Peter's words, "Lord, to whom 



shall we go? Thou hast the words of eternal 

life," are full of meaning. He had known what 

it meant to seek God's favor and everlasting life 

through keeping the Law, and, like most of the 

Jews of the humbler class, had been discouraged, 

finding himself condemned both by the 

doctrines of the Pharisees and by his own conscience. 

Doubtless, also, he knew something 

of the various heathen philosophies respecting 

a future life; and, if so, he knew them to be 

merely human speculations or guesses. 

But for three years he had known Jesus and 
heard his words on this subject of eternal life. 
His teaching was not speculative guessing as to 
what might be. "He taught them with authority, 
and not as the scribes." Nor did he teach 
them to hope for eternal life through the keeping 
of the Law (which they knew to be an impossibility). 
His teaching, on the contrary, was 
different from that of every other teacher. He 
taught them that he had come into the world, 
not to be served or honored and titled, but to 
serve men and to finally give his life a ransom 
or purchase-price for the forfeited lives of all 
who lost the right to life in Adam's trial and 
disobedience. (Matt. 20:28.) His teaching was 
that as a result of this ransom-sacrifice, which, 
by divine love and arrangement, he was about 
to give for all, all shall have the opportunity of 
everlasting life through obedience under the 
gracious terms of the New Covenant; and that 
to this end not only they, but also, "All that 
are in the graves shall hear the voice of the 
Son of Man, and come forth, and they that 
hear [obey] shall live"— attain perfect life. 
(John 5:25,28,29.) Peter had heard this simple 
and beautiful gospel— this, the only real good 
tidings of everlasting life; he recognized Jesus 
as the Messiah sent of God to be the Life-giver 
to the world, the true light that shall ultimately 
lighten every man that cometh into the world. 
-John 1:9. 

What wonder, then, in view of this, that Peter 
answered as he did, "Lord, to whom shall we 
go? Thou hast the words of eternal life." 
Peter's faith and hope had found in the doctrines 
of Christ a foundation and anchorage which 
they could not find elsewhere. 

And the same is true of all intelligent believers 
to-day, in proportion as they have heard 
and understood the wonderful words of life, of 
which Christ's death is the central theme, the 
hub, whose spokes are the love and favor 
of God, including all his exceeding great and 
precious promises reaching to the circumference 
—everlasting life. Having once seen the truth, 



having once heard the good tidings—the words 
of everlasting life— for what would they exchange 
it? 

Looking abroad, we still find the philosophies 
of Confucius, Buddha, Brahma and Zoroaster, 
but they satisfy us not. We hear the wisdom 
of this world speculating about an evolution 
which it surmises has already progressed from a 
protoplasm to a tadpole and from a tadpole to 
a monkey and from a monkey to a man and 
which it hopes, guesses and tries to assure itself 
will continue to progress to planes of being 
still higher than man. It assures us that whether 
there was or was not an intelligent God at the 
beginning, there will be millions of wise and 
powerful gods eventually, when they get evolved. 
But our hearts turn from such wild speculations 
back to the wonderful words of life spoken by 
him who spoke as never man spoke before or 
since. In those words is the rest and peace which 
the world can neither give nor take away. 

Following the instructions of this same great 
Teacher, we are learning more and more 
about this eternal life which he has provided 
for all. As meat in due season he has 
taught us that this gift of eternal life is only for 
those that love him;— that a little flock of the 
ransomed world, called and proved worthy by 
their loving obedience during the Gospel age, 
are to be his joint-heirs in the glory, honor 
and immortality of the divine nature, and that 
he with these will in the next age, the Millennium, 
bless all the families of the earth with 
the knowledge of and opportunity to attain restitution 
to human perfection with everlasting 
life conditioned only upon faith and hearty obedience 
under the New Covenant, sealed with 
the blood of the ransom-sacrifice. This is the 
same gospel as of yore: these are the same words 

R1711 : page 311 

of everlasting life, only amplified and magnified 
as we get nearer to their grand consummation. 
In the harvest of the Jewish age, it was after 
our Lord had spoken to his followers the 
"words of eternal life" that he permitted "offenses" 
to come to sift them as wheat, saying, 
"It must needs be that offenses come." Those 
trials came to prove which were ripe wheat and 
which chaff and undeveloped wheat. Two classes 
specially were sifted out— the merely curious 
and slightly interested class, and a consecrated 
class which had not much depth of character, 
represented in our Lord's parable (Matt. 13:5,6,20,21) 
as the stony ground hearers, which 



received the message with joy, but not having 
depth of heart-soil and earnest love and consecration 
to the truth, when tribulation or persecution 
arose they were at once offended, and 
turned back and walked no more with the Lord 
and the faithful. 

The same is true now, in the present harvest 
of the Gospel age. Blessed have been our eyes, 
for they have seen many of the "deep things" 
in the divine plan of the ages; and blessed 
have been our ears, for they have heard with 
wonderful clearness the lessons of the great 
Teacher— the words of glory, honor and immortality 
—words of eternal life. And now in 
the Lord's order we are to be ready for trials 
and sittings. Now, again, offenses must needs 
come to prove all, and to turn back those who 
are not consecrated and those who have no 
depth of character, who are unwilling to bear 
the reproaches and afflictions of the Christ. 
So it was with Gideon's typical army. All who 
shall be owned of the Lord as joint-heirs with 
Christ must be a select class, a peculiarly zealous 
people;— and no wonder: Marvel not 
therefore at the fiery trials which shall try you, 
as though some strange thing happened unto 
you. In fact, that is the very purpose of the 
permission of offenses and divisions: "that 
they which are approved [by God, because they 
endure the tests and stand fast in the truth] 
may be made manifest among you."— 
1 Cor. 11:18,19. 

Those who will stand the test here will be 
just like those for whom Peter spoke in the 
previous harvest testing. Should any feeling 
of faintness or discouragement come over them, 
they will also ask, "Lord to whom shall we 
go?" Looking about them they see the delusions 
of Spiritism and various doctrines of devils, 
and the blindness and contradictions of reason 
as well as of Scripture among agnostics, and in 
the various denominations of Christendom. The 
glance is sufficient for the class which the Lord 
desires to select. They could not go away, they 
could not be forced to leave the army of the 
Lord. Truly, where should we go? Our Leader, 
and he alone, has the words of eternal life. 
Since we have heard his words, all other gospels 
have lost their charm. We will abide with and 
follow the great Captain of our salvation: in 
his words and in his love and in his service we 
live and move and have our being as the elect 
of God. 

"How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word. 
What more can he say than to you he hath said, 



You who unto Jesus for refuge have fled." 



R1712: page 311 

JUDGMENT-ITS USE AND ABUSE. 



"Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment 

ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure 

ye mete, it shall be measured to you again."— Matt. 7:1,2. 

A VERY unlovely disposition in the eyes of 

God, and of all fair-minded men, is that 

which assumes the obligation of sitting in uncharitable 

judgment upon all the affairs and 

conduct of fellow-men, either within the Church 

or outside of it. 

That our Lord referred to this abuse of judgment, 
and not to the legitimate use of that 
noble faculty, is very manifest from succeeding 
verses (3-5), which warn against the hypocrisy 
of condemning others for faults no greater than 
those which exist in one's self, but to which 
self-love is wilfully blind; and also from 
verses 15-20, which bid us beware of wolves in 
sheep's clothing, or, in other words, to use 
sound judgment in discriminating between the 
truly consecrated and faithful children of God, 
whose hearts are pure and free from guile, and 

R1712: page 312 

those who studiously cover up a wolf-like character 
with the outward professions of godliness, 
in order to deceive and lead astray the unwary. 

"By their fruits ye shall know them," said 
the Lord; and to use candid and unbiased judgment 
in comparing their fruits— of character, 
conduct or teaching— with their professions and 
with the Word of God, is necessary to the safety 
and protection of the Lord's people. This, 
therefore, is a very legitimate use of judgment; 
and those who, disregarding the Lord's warning, 
either recklessly or wilfully, fail so to exercise 
judgment, expose themselves to the deceitful 
snares of the great adversary. The wolf is not to be 
tolerated, nor his sheep's clothing respected: he 
has no rightful place in the assemblies of the true 
sheep until his character is changed by repentance 
and submission to the will of God. His 
presence can only bring reproach upon all associated 
with him, and sow the seeds of error 
and discord; and, learning the shibboleth of the 



saints, he will deceitfully make merchandise of 
their holy things and demand that Christian charity 
should let him alone in his nefarious work. 

Alas! many simple ones, ignoring the Lord's 
counsel, weakly yield to this demand, to their 
great detriment spiritually. They give that 
which is holy unto the dogs and cast their pearls 
before the swine; and the wolf is often tolerated 
out of respect for his sheep's clothing. It 
is not real charity to such characters to permit 
them to pursue their course unmolested; nor is 
it true loyalty to the cause of Christ. To firmly 
and candidly let such persons know that we 
recognize their character and refuse to fellowship 
or company with them until a change of 
heart is manifested, and to positively and openly 
resist their influence, is the noblest and truest 
charity, both to them and to the cause of Christ 
in general, though such a course will assuredly 
bring persecution in some shape. 

To deal thus candidly and fairly may in some 
cases wake up the erring to a sense of their 
wickedness, and, by making it unprofitable to 
them, may lessen the temptations to continue 
the evil course. At all events, it gives the 
sheep and lambs of the Lord's flock warning of 
the dangers to be expected from such sources. 
To encourage or assist such, is to become partakers 
of their evil deeds. (2 John 11.) Nor 
would Christian charity demand that the wicked 
or the profligate should be protected against 
the natural rewards of their evil course. To 
thus aid them is only to interfere with the divine 
arrangement by which sin brings its own 
retribution for the correction of the sinner. 
Thus, for instance, if when a profligate son 
spends his substance in riotous living, an unwise 
father makes up his loss and starts him anew, 
not allowing him to realize the evil effects of 
his course, the son misses the lesson and proceeds 
to greater lengths in an evil course. The 
love of God is not thus unwise: if it were, he 
would not permit the great time of trouble, now 
impending, to come upon the world. But he 
will permit it, and when the judgments of the 
Lord are thus abroad in the earth, the inhabitants 
of the world will learn righteousness. 
(Isa. 26:9.) It is not our part, however, to 
bring evil upon the evil-doers; for vengeance 
belongs to God. Nor would it be contrary 
to the spirit of the Lord to show pity and to 
alleviate the dire wants of those in distress from 
their own folly. This would not interfere with 
the needed lesson, but, on the contrary, would 
tend to soften the heart and make it more susceptible 
to the lesson. 



While the legitimate use of judgment for wise 
and holy ends is plainly taught in this sermon 
of our Lord, the first verse of this chapter expressly 
commands that we should not reckon 
ourselves as the competent judges of men's 
hearts, to uncharitably condemn them on our 
own responsibility. But when their course of 
conduct is in manifest opposition to and defiance 
of God's law, as in cases of disguised 
"wolves," "swine" and "dogs," the condemnation 
of that law, which is God's judgment, 
not ours merely, should always be recognized. 

As a matter of fact, if we have the spirit of 
the Lord, our judgment will coincide with his 
—approving what he approves, and condemning 
what he condemns: we will judge righteous 
judgment, which makes every possible allowance 
for the infirmities of the flesh, the strength of 
temptation and the imperfections of knowledge, 
and which, ever bearing in mind that 
we also are far short of perfection, never forgets 

R1712: page 313 

the golden rule— "Whatsoever ye would that 
men should do to you, do ye even so to them; 
for this is the law and the prophets."— Verse 12; 
Lev. 19:18; Matt. 22:40; Rom. 13:8,9,10; 
Gal. 5:14; 1 Tim. 1:5. 

Verse 2 makes very imperative the application 
of this golden rule in such cases— "For with 
what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; 
and with what measure ye mete, it shall be 
measured to you again." Oh, if men and women 
would always consider these things, how much 
uncharitable judgment and evil-speaking, and 
how many bitter words, would be spared! If 
each could recognize in the other the spirit of 
love and candor, how quickly wrongs could be 
righted! If reproofs were always expressed in 
the spirit of the golden rule, how much more 
effective they would be than when they are colored 
with the glare of hatred and revenge! 

"How wise are God's commands! 

How sure his precepts are!" 
Let us ponder them well, and cultivate more 
and more in our own hearts the spirit of God's 
love and kindness— the spirit of his holy law. 



R1711 : page 313 

"IF THOU KNEWEST THE GIFT OF GOD." 



"If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith 
to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked 
of him, and he would have given 
thee living water."— John 4:10. 

THE woman of Samaria failed to recognize in 

the weary sojourner who sat by the well, 

the anointed Son of God, whose presence in the 

world at that time had been foretold by all the 

holy prophets for four thousand years previous. 

And few indeed, even of those who knew of his 

claims and his teachings, as well as of the divine 

testimonies at his birth and baptism— that 

this was the beloved Son of God and the bringer 

of good tidings of great joy to all people (Luke 2:9-14; 

Matt. 3:17)— could appreciate this fact, 

because of the meek humility which bore no 

similarity to any thing that men were accustomed 

to call great. Even John the baptist 

sent and inquired, "Art thou he that should 

come, or look we for another?" 

No wonder that the woman of Samaria did 
not recognize him. And, not recognizing him, 
how could she realize her privilege of service to 
him as a gift of God. Had she known and 
been able to appreciate her privilege of giving 
a cup of cold water to the only begotten and 
well-beloved Son of God, how gladly would she 
have rendered the service requested! And not 
only so, but had she realized who it was that 
requested the favor, she would have seen her 
opportunity of applying to him for the water of 
life, the great salvation. 

But the woman did not know the gift of God 
so close at hand. Thinking of the stranger 
merely as a Jew, and one of a class who refused 
to have any dealings with the Samaritans, the 
request for a drink of water seemed only to 
arouse a measure of the old animosity of her race 
against this one, whom she probably thought 
of as one willing to receive a favor in his extremity, 
but at other times regarding her and 
her people as too far beneath him to have any 
dealings with her. 

The Lord recognized the foundation for this 
feeling of animosity, and did not resent it, but 

R1712: page 313 

patiently led her first to suspect, and then to 
realize, that this was indeed the Christ; and she 
went forth joyfully to proclaim this truth, and 
to bring others to him. This woman was a sinful 
woman, and a type of thousands of others, 
men and women, who would act very differently 



if they only knew. If the Jews had only 
known, they would not have crucified the Lord 
of glory. (1 Cor. 2:8.) That which prevented 
them from knowing was the god of this 
world, who blinded their eyes and prejudiced 
their minds so that they could not believe. 
(2 Cor. 4:4.) Consequently they failed to 
perceive the gift of God in their privilege of 
service to Christ and of receiving from him the 
water of life. 

The same is true also to-day of the world in 
regard to the body of Christ, the Church. They 
do not know that the Lord has his representatives 
in the world. Like their Lord, these are not 
invested with the glory of this world, but they 
are despised and rejected of men, and are not 
known as the future judges of the earth. But 

R1712: page 314 

those who do know them should appreciate the 
privilege of service, since the Lord has said, "Inasmuch 
as ye have done it unto one of the least 
of these, my brethren, ye have done it unto 
me." (Matt. 25:40.) Whatever, therefore, we 
do for the least of God's people we are doing 
for him. How this should make us appreciate 
our privileges of service one to another! 

But if the world knows us not, and has not 
yet learned to appreciate the refreshing water 
of life we have to bear to them, it is no cause 
of surprise. If they failed to recognize the 
Master who was perfect, how could we expect 
them to recognize us, in whom are many imperfections 
still, although in God's sight through 
grace we are reckoned holy? If the god of this 
world has blinded the eyes of many, it is our 
privilege, as it was that of the Master, to help 
remove the blindness and let the glorious light 
of the gospel of peace shine in upon their minds. 
Let us offer the water of life to all as opportunities 
may present themselves. In so doing 
we also will be blest, as was the Master.— 
John 4:31-34. 



R1713 : page 314 

"AGREE WITH THINE ADVERSARY QUICKLY." 



"Agree with thine adversary quickly, while thou art in 
the way with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver 
thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the 



officer, and thou be cast into prison. Verily, I say 
unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come 
out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost 
farthing."-Matt. 5:25,26. 

"When thou goest with thine adversary to the magistrate, 
as thou art in the way, give diligence that thou mayest 
be delivered from him; lest he hale thee to the judge, 
and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and 
the officer cast thee into prison. I tell thee, 
thou shalt not depart thence, till thou hast 
paid the very last mite."— Luke 12:58,59. 

WE are asked whether these Scriptures can 
be understood to teach that those who 
do not make peace with the Lord in the present 
life will be held under compulsion to make 
full payment for all their debts by purgatorial 
sufferings in the Millennial age, and then be 
released to everlasting life. 

We reply that we cannot so understand them, 
because such a construction would be in contradiction 
of the Scripture teachings respecting 
the wages of sin. Since the penalty, or "wages 
of sin, is death," to pay that penalty to the uttermost 
farthing would mean everlasting death, 
—extinction. And if these Scriptures be so applied 
they would necessarily mean, Thou shalt 
never come forth! 

But viewing these statements from the standpoint 
of their contexts, we regard them differently. 
In Matt. 5: 17-20 the Law is held up 
as the great standard of authority, at that time 
the accuser of all; for it was the accuser of the 
Scribes and Pharisees, outwardly the most religious 
and devout Law-keepers. The attitude 
of every Jew should have been one of penitence. 
Realizing that they had all sinned and come 
far short of the requirements of the Law Covenant, 
they all should have been in a very 
contrite state of heart, ready and anxious to 
confess their shortcomings and to compromise 
the matter, if possible, whilst yet in the way 
with their accuser (adversary), the Law, and 
before final sentence would be pronounced. 

Had the Jewish Church realized their condition, 
thus, they would have been glad, yea, anxious, 
to hear the message which Christ had for 
them. Confessing their inability to comply 
with all the terms of the Law Covenant, they 
would have been pleading for mercy, and 
would have been prepared to hear of God's 
provision for them in "the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sins of the world." 

Those who did thus plead for mercy did receive 
Christ as the sent of God— the way, the 



truth and the life,— the deliverer from the condemnation 
of their Law Covenant. These were 
delivered into the liberty wherewith Christ 
makes free, and became sons of God under the 
New Covenant which Christ sealed with his 
blood— his death. 

But those who did not realize the situation, 
who discerned not the time of their visitation 
(Luke 19:44) as a nation, were blinded. Only 
the "remnant" of that nation, which made 
peace quickly, in the way to judgment, were delivered. 
(Rom. 9:27-29; 11:5,7-11.) And 
upon that nation, except the remnant, which 

R1713: page 315 

made peace in the way, the full weight of their 
judgment fell— they were blinded and cast off 
from divine favor for a "double," for a period of 
disfavor equal in length to their previous period 
of favor, 1845 years. Thus they were forced 
to pay the "uttermost farthing;" for, as the 
Apostle Paul states the matter,— "wrath is come 
upon them to the uttermost."— 1 Thes. 2:16. 

The context in Luke's account (12:54-57) 
strongly supports the foregoing. There our 
Lord's words reported are, "Ye hypocrites, ye 
can discern the face of the sky and of the earth; 
but how is it that ye do not discern this time?" 
—Why do you not know that you are living in 
the day of visitation and testing, and that you 
as a people are even now en route to judgment. 
Why do you not confess that you are unable to 
keep the Law Covenant, and, instead of boasting 
in the Law, why do you not seek and obtain 
the mercy which is just at the door? It is 
because you are proud and hypocritical, and 
draw nigh to God with your lips while your 
hearts are far from him. It is because you are 
not Israelites indeed without guile or hypocrisy. 

In this light the above texts may be briefly 
explained thus:— Addressing the Jewish nation, 
our Lord said, "Agree with thine adversary [the 
divine Law which condemned all to death 
(Rom. 7:10); i.e., admit the justice of its 
condemnation, because you have come short of 
its righteous requirements] quickly, while thou 
art in the way with him [while the offer of 
mercy is made to you as a nation, through faith 
in Christ who by his sacrifice offers an atonement 
for you], lest at any time the adversary 
[the Law, whose demands you fail to meet, 
though you claim to meet them] deliver thee to 
the judge [to the just judgment of God], and 
the judge deliver thee to the officer [to some 
power that would execute the penalty], and thou 



be cast into prison [into a position of disfavor, 
—such as that nation has experienced ever since 
their rejection of Messiah. As a nation they have 
been cut off, blinded, and imprisoned ever since 
they rejected Christ and said, 'His blood be 
upon us and upon our children']. Verily,... 
Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till 
thou hast paid the uttermost farthing [until the 
privileges of the Gospel age, the high calling, 
first offered to Israel, shall have ceased, having 
been bestowed upon the worthy Gentiles, and 
the worthy remnant of Israel who heeded this 
counsel. Then their blindness will be turned 
away; but they will have paid the uttermost 
farthing in the forfeiture of the chief blessing, 
which was offered to them first, but which they 
rejected]." 

THE UNMERCIFUL SERVANT. 

--MATT. 18:23-35.-- 

This parable has no relationship whatever to 
the foregoing: we treat it here merely because 
some of its expressions resemble expressions 
quoted in the above, and to avoid any confusion 
thereby. 

The parable shows the conduct of an earthly 
king. He was generous temporarily, and forgave 
the debtor, allowing him time and opportunity 
to keep his word and pay the debt in full. But 
when he heard how ungenerously that debtor 
had unmercifully abused and refused compassion 
and extension of time to a still poorer man, who 
owed him a much less amount, the king was indignant 
and withdrew his mercy, cancelled the 
extension, and put the debtor into the hands of 
exactors until his debt in full should be paid. 

This king's conduct does not in all respects 
represent our Heavenly Father's course; but in 
some respects it illustrates it. Our Heavenly 
Father does not forgive us our sins, nor grant 
us an extension of time in which to pay the 
price of our transgressions. He, on the contrary, 
"heareth not sinners;" but, having committed 
all judgment unto the Son, the Heavenly 
Father refers all supplicants to him— the way, 
the truth and the life. The only access and 
reconciliation to the Heavenly Father will be 
by the Son, who bought us with his own precious 
blood, and in whom alone we may have 
forgiveness, the remission of sins. Those who 
come unto the Father by him are already 
acceptable to the Father, in the beloved— i.e., 
reckonedly— but they will not be fully and actually 
presented until the Son shall have cleansed 



and perfected them, that he may present them 
blameless and unreprovable in love before him. 
--See Col. 1:22; Phil. 2:15. 

The parable does, however, express or illustrate 
the Heavenly Father's attitude on the point 

R1713: page 316 

in question. He also would be indignant that 

one for whom he has in Christ provided complete 

forgiveness, and not merely an extension of time 

for payment, should be unmerciful to a fellow-servant; 

and he will do to such as did the king 

in the parable. He will exact the full debt 

from the unmerciful, showing him no mercy 

who showed no mercy toward others.— 

Matt. 7:1,2,12. 

This will mean the death-penalty upon the 
unmerciful— the second death— "everlasting destruction 
from the presence of the Lord and from 
the glory of his power." 

Nor should we expect otherwise; for he who 
is not merciful and sympathetic has not the love 
of God— has not the spirit of Christ. And "if 
any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none 
of his." And only those in whom love instead 
of selfishness shall become the mastering sentiment 
have the promise of life everlasting on 
any plane of being. "Blessed are the merciful— 
they shall obtain mercy!" 



R1713 : page 316 

ALEXANDER CAMPBELL'S VIEWS. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-As many readers of 
the WATCH TOWER, like myself, are warm admirers 
of that renowned champion of the Bible, 
Alexander Campbell, and are always interested 
in anything from his pen touching the mysteries 
of the Book, I beg leave to give below a scrap 
from his writings on the Prophecies, directly 
bearing upon the thoughts uppermost in our 
minds, and showing the drift of his investigations 
in that line. He says:— 

"What now if we should attempt to prove 
arithmetically, the certainty of the prophecies 
concerning the final consummation of all things? 

The expectation of Christendom is notorious. 
It is this: that sometime soon, perhaps in the 
present century, a new order of things in the 
political and religious relations of society will 



commence; that it will pervade the whole human 
family; that after its full introduction, it 
will continue a thousand years; and that soon 

R1714: page 316 

after its completion, the present state of things 
will terminate and the multiplication of human 
beings cease forever. Without going minutely 
into detail, such is the general expectation of 
Christendom built upon those writings called 
prophecies. 

Well, now, should we prove by an arithmetical 
calculation the certainty of such conclusions 
relative to the final consummation— what 
will the skeptics say? The premises or data 
are these: the present population of the earth 
is estimated, say, at one thousand millions. Now 
I will leave it to them to furnish the data, or to 
state what the population was two, three or four 
thousand years ago. They may even furnish 
me data from the census of any nation of Europe 
for two, three, four or five hundred years back. 
It will give the same result. We shall take the 
Bible data until they furnish another. According 
to the Bible data the whole human family, 
about four thousand years ago, was composed 
of eight individuals, four males and four females; 
and to keep our calculations in whole 
numbers, we shall evacuate Europe and America 
of all their population and place them in Asia 
and Africa on the population there, which will 
fill that half as full of human beings as can subsist 
upon its surface. We have now got, say, 
the half of our globe empty and the other 
half full. Now, the question is, if eight persons 
in four thousand years fill the one half of 
the earth as full as it can subsist, how long will 
one thousand millions be in filling the other 
half? If in despite of wars, famines, pestilences 
and all waste of human life, under the corruptions 
of the last four thousand years, such has 
been the increase of human beings, what would 
be the ratio of increase were all these to cease, 
and peace and health and competence be the 
order of the day for one thousand years? Why 
there would not be one half acre of land and 
water upon the face of the globe for every human 
being which would live at the completion 
of the Millennium or the seven-thousandth year 
from the creation, what I contemplate from 
these oracles to be about the end of the present 
state of human existence. Either then some 
devastation must empty the earth of its inhabitants 
or the human race be extinguished. Logic 
and arithmetic compel us to the former conclusions; 



but when we add to logic and arithmetic 

the prophecies of holy Scripture, we are 

compelled to embrace the latter. I think no 

prophecy ever admitted of so certain a calculation 

or so exact and definite a computation; in 

fact no other oracle in the annals of the world 

is proved by arithmetic so inevitably and unanswerably 

as I conceive this to be." 

Query: Did not Brother Campbell see Restitution 
at least dimly? E. A. SADDLER. 

We fear that Brother Campbell saw the future 
but dimly. Instead of being "extinguished" the 
obedient will be granted everlasting life, and 
only propagation will cease.— EDITOR. 



R1714: page 317 

A NEW BRANCH OF THE SERVICE 

--FURTHER EXPLAINED.- 

Some have been in doubt whether or not to 
respond to "Another Branch of the Work," in 
Sept. 1 TOWER, and "Introducing Tower Tract 
Society Representatives," in Sept. 15 TOWER; 
because, while willing and anxious to donate some 
of their time to special service, and believing 
that by the grace of God they possess (and are 
growing in) the eight qualifications for special 
ministry mentioned, they are so situated, with 
families dependent upon them, etc., that they 
could give but little time to the service and 
could rarely go away from home,— unless the 
Tract Society could pay their home, as well as 
their traveling expenses. 

We fear that we have been misunderstood by 
a few. It is not our purpose to start or to encourage 
a paid ministry. The funds at our command 
would be but a drop in the bucket for 
such an enterprise; and even if it were otherwise, 
we should doubt the wisdom of such a plan. 
One or two special representatives might be advisable, 
and they should be persons of remarkable 
humility and very clear in the truth- 
otherwise they themselves might be injured as 
much as others would be benefitted by them; 
but we would not think it advisable to divert 
to this branch more than a small part of the 
limited Tract Fund receipts now being expended 
in tract work, in the preparation of translations 
of DAWN in foreign languages, etc. 

Voluntary service from all, at the sacrifice of 
some earthly comforts, conveniences, etc., 
seems to be the Lord's order of development. 



Those who do not serve from the love of the 
Lord, his people and his truth should not serve 
at all,— their service will do harm. He who 
serves from love, and according to his opportunities 
for sacrifice, will have his opportunities 
enlarged and his talents increased. He who does 
not so serve will not serve long, but will be 
speedily gathered out— into outer darkness, error: 
for he will "gather out of his Kingdom 
all things that offend, and them that do 
iniquity." 

We had specially in mind certain brethren 
whose business calls them from place to place, 
and who we had reason to believe possessed 
the eight qualifications specified; and several of 
these have responded, glad to spend their 
Sundays and many of their evenings in visiting 
and helping the Lord's "little ones." We have 
accepted all so offering who have responded 
satisfactorily; and we trust that this branch of 
the service will accomplish much good during 
next year; for it will require some time to prepare 
lists of TOWER subscribers in so many towns. 

But do not forget that the Colporteur work 
offers an open door to one of the most effective 
branches of the Lord's service. Those unincumbered 
can give their entire time thus, and 
pay their way; while those who can give but a 
few hours a week can be used also. And for such 
as are unincumbered, but too diffident and 
bashful to succeed as regular Colporteurs, we now 
have a new plan of work to suggest. "Go ye 
also into the Vineyard!" 

It is not our design to supplant the DAWN 
and tract work, as a means for reaching the 
Lord's sheep with the "meat in due season;" 
for we know of no better method,— none nearly 
so good. The new branch of service is designed 
to "strengthen the brethren," to help 
them over difficulties and to lead them more 
and more to apply the truth and its spirit in 
their daily lives. 

The form of certificate mentioned in our last 
issue is an old one, and is not quite satisfactory 
to us. We have gotten up what we believe is 
a better one, instead, a copy of which will be 
given in our next issue. 



R1714: page 317 

OUR LORD'S VISIT TO NAZARETH. 



IV. QUAR. LESSON 1., OCT. 7, LUKE 4:16-30. 

Golden Text— "See that ye refuse not 
him that speaketh."— Heb. 12:25. 

In this lesson the special point of interest 
is our Lord's reference to his authority and 
commission from God, through the Prophet 
Isaiah, to preach the gospel of his coming 
Kingdom. This commission is contained in 
Isa. 61:1-3; but it will be observed that the 
Lord read only to the middle of verse 2, and 
then closed the book and sat down, saying, 
"This day is this scripture fulfilled in your 
ears." It was fulfilled in him, as the Prophet 
declared, he having received the anointing 
of the holy spirit. Therefore he had come 
to them with divine authority to declare 
unto them the good tidings of great joy unto 
all people. 

The question naturally arises, Why did 
he not read the entire commission? The 
answer is obvious: it was because the remainder 
was not fulfilled in that day. It 
was time then to preach (1) the good tidings 
of the Kingdom to all who were meek 
enough to receive it by faith from the humble 

R1714: page 318 

and unpretentious Nazarene; (2) to 
bind up the broken-hearted; to tell those 
in trouble that by and by the Kingdom 
would bring order, peace and joy out of 
present confusion and trouble; (3) to proclaim 
liberty to the captives and the opening 
of the prison to them that are bound— 
What captives? Surely not those lawfully 
detained for criminality in prisons of the 
state. No, but for all the dead race still lying 
in the prison-house of death— the grave: 
The hour is coming when all that are in the 
graves shall hear the voice of the Son of 
man and shall come forth (John 5:28,29); 
and (4) it was time then to proclaim the 
acceptable year of the Lord— the year or 
period of acceptable sacrifices: the "better 
sacrifices" than bulls and goats, the sacrifices 
of Christ and his body, the Church. 
(Heb. 9:23.) That was the beginning of the 
Gospel age— the time appointed as the great 
atonement day* for the world, the time of 
special favor to the called and faithful and 
chosen who should follow in the footsteps 
of their leader and head, Christ Jesus, and 
eventually become joint-heirs with him of 



the coming Kingdom. 

This was all of the commission that was 
due in the beginning of the age. It was 
not yet time to proclaim— "the day of vengeance 

R1715: page 318 

of our God," nor to comfort all that 
mourn— the whole "groaning creation" 
(Rom. 8:22), nor "to grant unto the mourners 
in Zion, to give unto them beauty for 
ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and the 
garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness." 
Had he read the entire commission, 
he could not have added the words, "This 
day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears." 
This latter part of the commission was 
not due until the harvest or end of the 
age; and while the entire commission belongs 
to the whole body of the Anointed— 
the Christ, head and body,— the latter part 
must of necessity be declared by those 
members of the body living in the last times 
—the harvest or end of the age, from A.D. 
1874 to A.D. 1915. 

It is upon this generation that "the days 
of vengeance" are coming; and it is this 
generation therefore, that should hear the 
voice of warning. It is in the midst of 
the great afflictions of the now impending 
time of trouble "such as never was since 
there was a nation," that the "groaning 
creation" is to learn that it is the chastening 
hand of God upon them, who wounds 
to heal, and that by means of this great affliction 
he is subduing all things unto himself. 
And when the judgments of the Lord 
are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of 
the world will learn righteousness. (Isa. 26:9.) 
Thus in due time— the end of the harvest 
and time of trouble— "all that mourn" 
will be "comforted." Then the whole world 
will have learned to be still and to know 
that the Lord's reign of righteousness is begun 
—the Kingdom of God established in the 
earth.-Psa. 46:10. 

The last proposition of this commission 
also belongs to this harvest period. During 
this time is the gathering together of the 
elect from the four winds— from all parts 
of the great nominal Zion, the nominal 
Christian church. These are they who 
mourned in nominal Zion, who realized the 
decline of vital piety in her, who sadly lamented 
the great discrepancies between her 
creeds and the divine Word of promise and 



prophecy, and who hungered and thirsted 
for righteousness and searched for truth as 
men search for silver. To all such the Lord 
now appoints beauty for ashes and the oil 
of joy for the spirit of heaviness. Within 
this harvest period he has given us refreshing 
views of the completeness and beauty 
of the divine plan: he has given to us the 
beauty and symmetry of divine truth for the 
ashes of human creeds, and the oil of joy in 
consequence, for the spirit of heaviness. 
And in the end of the harvest all such who 
prove faithful to the end shall be exalted 
and glorified: they shall be made heirs of 
the Kingdom, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ. 
They shall be "trees of the Lord, the planting 
of the Lord that he might be glorified." 
This commission through the Prophet 
Isaiah is the only divinely authorized commission 
that was ever given to any man to 
preach the gospel. And it belongs only to 
those, and to all those, upon whom the 
anointing of the holy spirit of God has come 
—to the Christ, head and body. They all 
can say, "The spirit of the Lord God is 
upon me, because he hath anointed me to 
preach," etc. Our Lord Jesus received this 
anointing of the holy spirit immediately after 
his baptism in water, which symbolized his 
entire consecration to the will of God, even 
unto death, when the holy spirit visibly descended 
upon him and a voice from heaven 
was heard saying, "This is my beloved 
Son, in whom I am well pleased." And as 



*See TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES. 

R1715: page 319 

in the typical anointing of the typical high 

priest in the service of the typical tabernacle, 

the anointing oil was poured upon 

the head only, but from thence ran down 

even to the skirts of his garments, thus 

bringing the whole body under the anointing 

(Lev. 8:12; Psa. 133:2), so all who have 

come into Christ by faith and full consecration 

to the will of God have likewise come 

under the same anointing. It was at Pentecost, 

after the Lord's ascension, that this 

spirit of anointing began to descend upon the 

consecrated body of Christ (Acts 2: 1- 1 8); 

and all who have been added to the body 

since have likewise received of the anointing, 



by right of which they can also claim 
the divine commission to preach the gospel 
in the use of whatever talents they may 
possess, be they few or many, or be they 
humble or brilliant; and for the proper use 
of their commission they are accountable 
to him who gave them authority as his 
ambassadors. 

The inference is also plain that no man 
should be regarded by the saints as a minister 
of the gospel, or received or heard as 
such, who cannot claim this commission 
(which alone grants the divine authority), 
as conferred upon him by virtue of his 
anointing as a consecrated child of God and 
member of the body of Christ. All such 
are of the "royal priesthood," whose duty 
and privilege it is to serve in holy things. 

Unto those who have not fully submitted 
themselves unto the Lord, but who would 
nevertheless pose as leaders and teachers in 
the Church, the Word of the Lord is very 
explicit, saying, "What hast thou to do to 
declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest 
take my covenant in thy mouth? Seeing 
thou hatest instruction and castest my words 
behind thee?" (Psa. 50:16,17.) "Thus saith 
the Lord of hosts, Hearken not unto the 
words of the prophets [teachers] that prophecy 
unto you: they make you vain; they 
speak a vision of their own heart, and not 
out of the mouth of the Lord. ...I have not 
sent these prophets, yet they ran: I have 
not spoken to them, yet they prophesied." 
(Jer. 23:16-21.) Alas! there are many such 
false teachers who are ambitious to declare 
the visions of their own heart, and claim 
that the Lord sent them and that they are 
teaching his truth. And many, too, there are 
who, ignoring the command of God, hearken 
to the words of such false prophets and are 
thereby deceived and led astray. 

Our Lord's sermon from this gospel-laden 
text must have been one of great 
power, proclaiming the blessed tidings of 
redemption and restitution and giving some 
intimations of the special favor to be granted 
to the Gospel Church. While he thus 
spake to them as never man spake, and 
opened up the Scriptures to their understanding 
so that the blessed rays of hope 
and joy penetrated their hearts, the people 
"wondered at the gracious words which proceeded 
out of his mouth." And they said, 
"Is not this Joseph's son?" It was just 
as some remarked on other occasions— 



"Whence hath this man this wisdom?" 

Ah, it was by reason of the anointing. Being 

thus brought into close fellowship with 

the Father, the divine plan was clearly revealed 

to him through the "sure Word of 

prophecy," and his lips gave expression to 

the glorious message of love and grace. 

VERSES 23-27 are words of reproof to a 
heedless and merely curiosity-seeking people. 
While he spoke to them wonderful 
words of life, he saw that the hearts of the 
great majority at least were not prepared 
to receive them, as evidenced by the fact 
that instead of looking for the correspondency 
in the teacher to the prophetic forecast 
of him to which attention had been 
called, they were inquiring about his earthly 
pedigree, and desirous to see some manifestation 
of his power to work miracles. 

This incredulity and idle curiosity the 
Lord severely rebuked by citing them two 
historic instances where God through the 
prophets manifested his saving power, not 
to the curious and unbelieving, but passing 
all such by, he showed his great favor and 
power to the meek and humble who loved 
and believed God. This was too much for 
the hot-headed, impetuous pride of the unworthy 
hearers of that noble sermon. Who 
was this son of Joseph, one of their humblest 
citizens, that he should thus brand them 
as unworthy of the favor of God? And in 
their wrath and haste they seized him and 
with violence bore him away toward the 
brow of the hill, intending to hurl him to 
death.-Verses 28,29. 

VERSE 30 records his escape—'Tassing 
through the midst of them, he went his 
way." His hour had not yet come, and 
therefore he seems to have exerted that 
power which belonged to him as a perfect 
man over the weaker, imperfect men— the 
power of his mind alone, we believe, which 

R1715: page 320 

overwhelmed and cowed their fierce passions, 
so that none dared take the responsibility 
of casting him headlong; and he, 
therefore, passing through the midst of them, 
went his way. The same power was also exerted 
on other similar occasions. (See John 7:30,43-46.) 
But when his hour was come 
he opened not his mouth, nor resisted in any 
degree the throngs that sought his life. 
The words of the Golden Text are most 



appropriate to all that hear the word of life 

—"this gospel of the Kingdom:" "See that 

ye refuse not him that speaketh...from 

heaven." The latter part of the divine commission 

—the harvest message— now due, and 

hence now declared, by those members of the 

body of Christ now living, is just as important 

to this end of the age as was the former 

part to the beginning and all through the age: 

therefore, let him that heareth see that he 

refuse it not, however humble and unpretentious 

may seem that member of the 

body through whom it may be declared to 

him. 



R1715 : page 320 

THE DRAUGHT OF FISHES. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON II., OCT. 14, LUKE 5:1-11. 

Golden Text— "He taught them as one that had 
authority, and not as the scribes."— Mark 1:22. 

This miracle of our Lord, located thus 
early in his ministry, prior to the choosing 
of his apostles and also to the sending out 
of the seventy, was a prophecy of the future 
work of all such. They were to be 
fishers of men. And here also was a prophecy 

R1716: page 320 

of their success as fishers of men. They 
were to catch multitudes. This same lesson 
was again repeated after our Lord's resurrection 
(See John 21:1-9), and the prophecy 
has been amply verified in the long 
fishing season of the Gospel age. 

Using the same illustration, our Lord also 
spoke a parable (Matt. 13:47-50), saying, 
"The kingdom of heaven [the embryo kingdom 
of heaven, the Gospel Church] is like 
unto a net that was cast into the sea and 
gathered of every kind, which, when it was 
full, they drew to shore and sat down, and 
gathered the good into vessels, but cast the 
bad away. So shall it be at the end of the 
age: the angels shall come forth and sever 
the wicked from among the just, and shall 
cast them into the furnace of fire: there 
shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth." 



The gospel net was first cast into the sea 
(the world, where no distinction was recognized 
between Jew and Gentile) at Pentecost; 
and from the day of Pentecost to the 
present harvest time it has been gathering in 
all sorts of fish; and together they constitute 
the great nominal Gospel church, or, as it is 
sometimes termed, the Christian world, and 
Christendom. But all of these fish are not 
of the kind desired of the Lord to constitute 
the true Christendom— Christ's Kingdom 
—which is to be set up in glory and power 
at the end of the Gospel age and dawn of 
the Millennium. Therefore, in the harvest 
or end of the age (a period of forty years— 
from 1874 to 1915, See MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
VOL. I., page 223,224), a separating work 
is to be accomplished, and those of the kind 
desired are to be carefully gathered out and 
preserved, while the remainder are cast 
away as unworthy of the Kingdom honors 
to which they were called. 

Such a work has been in rapid progress 
since 1874. The sickle of truth has been 
the instrument in doing the separating 
work, and the angels or messengers sent 
forth to do the gathering are those of the 
Lord's people whom he has graciously 
brought to a knowledge of his glorious plan 
and its appointed times and seasons. This 
is the harvest message which was not previously 
due nor known; and it is accomplishing 
the great harvest work. Those 
who love the Lord and who partake of his 
benevolent and gracious spirit readily recognize 
the divine source from which the 
harvest message springs, and accept it. 
Such are the desired kind of fish, but they 
are few in comparison with the great number 
in the net. 

The catching of the fish in the gospel net, 
and the sorting of them at the end of the 
age, are two parts of the one great work of 
making ready a people prepared for the 
Lord. This figure corresponds to that of 
the sower and the reaper; and when the 
great work is accomplished both the sower 
and the reaper shall rejoice together. The 
seed-sowing has been going on all through 
the age, but those who observe the divinely 
appointed times and seasons will devote 
their energies now to the special work of 
harvest, and not to seed sowing— to gathering 
the good fish into safety rather than to 
catching more. 



page 322 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1719: page 322 

JEWISH NATIONALIZATION MOVEMENT. 



We have often wondered that Hebrews in 
general seem to take so little interest in the revival 
of their own nation in Palestine. But their 
"double" (M. DAWN, VOL. II., p.218) having 
ended, and the time for the re-establishment of 
Israel as a nation being near, it is appropriate 
that we see signs pointing in that direction, such 
as the following:-- 

"The Zion Association of Baltimore was organized 
on Sunday, September 9th, for the purpose 
of fostering the national idea among the 
Jews, and to co-operate with similar societies 
in Europe and the United States, with the object 
of colonizing Palestine with Hebrews, who 



are emigrating from Russia and other countries 
in Europe. 

"The society will, in the near future, publish 
a declaration of its principles, giving the reason 
that led to the formation of this Society in 
Baltimore, and calling upon all Hebrews to 
unite and assist the great work which is carried 
on in the land of our fathers." 

—Jewish Exponent. 



R1716: page 322 

LIVE PEACEABLY WITH ALL. 



Rev. E. M. Milligan, of the U. P. Church, 
Steubenville, O., has caught the anarchistic 
spirit and adapted it to his ideas of the Sunday 
question. As reported in the Press dispatches 
of Oct. 3rd, he said, "If necessary God's people 
would exchange ballots for bullets to bring 
about Sabbath reform." 

The same gentleman spoke in the evening of 
the same day upon the "Attitude of the Church 
toward Labor Problems." With such lawless 
ideas as we quote above controlling his mind 
and speech, his advice would almost surely be 
unsafe. 

All of God's people should remember the 
Apostle's advice, "Let your moderation be 
known unto all men." The influence of God's 
people— especially of those whose eyes are 
opened to see how the present unrest and discontent 
are injuring the poor world— should speak 
and act and "so far as lieth in you, live peaceably 
with all men." 



page 322 



THOSE who cannot remit by Express or P.O. 
Money Order, or Draft, may send one cent U.S. 
postage stamps;— foreign stamps are valueless 
here. 



PLEASE write quite plainly, especially your 
address. If convenient, always prefer a pen 
and black ink. Give full address in every letter. 



R1716: page 323 

VOL. XV. OCTOBER 15, 1894. NO. 20. 

BISHOP FOSTER'S NEW GOSPEL, NO. 2. 



WE do not find fault with the Bishop's sympathy 
for heathendom, nor with his rebellion 
against an injustice which would consign 
them to an eternity of woe, mental or physical. 
Nay, we rejoice that he can see that such procedure 
is so unjust that it cannot possibly be 
the truth: it cannot possibly be God's plan. 
We rejoice that the Bishop is so free from the 
errors of Calvinism that he cannot believe that 
the 1,200,000,000 of heathen now living, and 
the fifty times that number who have died without 
the knowledge of the only name given under 
heaven and among men whereby they can 
be saved, were predestinated by God to their 
present ignorance and to an eternity of woe 
hereafter. 

We rejoice also that he has gotten free from 
the idea of his own Church, viz., that the power 
of God for the help of the heathen is confined 
to this present life and to the present missionary 
efforts of his children, and that the vast multitudes 
not so reached and blessed will suffer untold 
agonies to all eternity;— not because God 
predestinated that it should be so, but because 
God and his faithful people are doing all they 
can for the poor heathen, and can do no more. 

All this indicates a breadth and freedom of 
thought and a sympathy of heart on the part of 
the Bishop which we greatly appreciate. But 
we fear for the Bishop and for his flock, because 
his freedom and sympathy are not begotten by 
the teachings of God's Word. His lengths and 

R1717: page 323 

breadths, and heights and depths of good desire 
for the heathen are not those inspired by 
God's revelation of his plan. Consequently, the 
more the Bishop and his followers progress 
upon these lines, the farther they will get from 
the true plan of the ages— the lengths and 
breadths, the heights and depths of the love of 
God, which surpasses human understanding.— 
Rom. 11:33-36. 

This tendency to depart from God's Word is 
markedly manifested in other parts of the same 
discourse, and cannot fail to lead many of the 



"blind" "into the ditch. "--Matt. 15:14. 

For instance, we quote as follows from the 
report of the same discourse, as it appeared in 
the Pittsburg Commercial Gazette. 

"Why did not Christ come immediately after 
the fall of man? Why was not Revelation made 
at once? Simply because it could not be.... 
In Eden language took form, but it was not sufficient 
for Revelation. Adam probably knew 
very little, and God treated him accordingly. 
He did not give him such a law as he gave to 
Israel at Sinai, but he treated him as you would 
an infant." 

Here we see the effect of the Evolution theory, 
in which the Bishop is evidently a believer. 
Since that theory is the very opposite of the 
Bible theory, conflicts at every point are unavoidable. 
The Bishop looks at our civilization, 
then backward along the aisles of history, noting 
the ignorance of the past upon every subject. 
He, with all others who lose confidence 
in the Bible, jumps to the conclusion that Adam 
was an infant, with whom language began to 
take form. He, however, states the matter more 
agreeably and more Scripturally than to say that 

R1717: page 324 

Adam was an ape of a high order of development, 
and that in him the ape chatter began to 
take form, or to become a language. 

The Bishop is right in supposing that his 
words were more acceptable to his hearers than 
if he had put the matter bluntly, as Darwin and 
others have done. The Bishop's language, however, 
is the more dangerous; for it sugar-coats 
the doctrine and hides its true unscriptural 
character from some of God's children who 
would resent, as unscriptural, the idea that 
Adam was an ape and that his race has "fallen 
upward" for the past six thousand years. 

The Scriptural position, briefly stated, is that 
God, instead of creating Adam down at or near 
the brute level, created him in his own image 
and likeness, and pronounced him, Very good! 
God does not, however, pronounce the natural 
man of to-day, Very good. On the contrary, 
he declares that all have sinned; all are out of 
the way; all are fallen; there is none righteous, 
no, not one; and that only under cover of the 
imputed righteousness of Christ can any be acceptable 
with God or have communion with 
him. But Adam had fellowship and communion 
with God and was called his "son" (Luke 3:38), 
up to the time of his transgression and 
sentence. 



The Bishop says that Adam's knowledge of 
language was so crude that God could not then 
make a Revelation. The Scriptures tell us, to 
the contrary, that God did make revelations to 
Adam-"talked with him" (Gen. 1:28-30; 
2:15-17,23; 3:8-20);-but God does not 
deign to communicate at all with the modern 
man, except he become a "believer" in 
Christ. The flood of Noah's day has left 
no traces of the early civilization, so far as 
is now known; but we may safely suppose that 
the man whom God called a very good man 
and declared to be in his own image— the man 
who could talk with God and with his wife, and 
who could not only name the animals, but control 
them, and that without brute force, was 
such a specimen of human nature as we do not 
see to-day. It does not follow that they had a 
written language in Adam's day, or that they 
printed books or had the law written upon 
tables of stone. Perhaps they had conditions 
which were preferable. Perhaps they had means 
of communicating thoughts without writing 
and printing. We believe they had. The necessity 
for written language may (we believe 
does) lie in the fact that Adam's race has fallen 
from the original, perfect state in which he was 
created. 

Our present dependence upon language and 
books, etc., and the consequent development 
of these to meet our necessities, may be 
illustrated as follows: Suppose that a racial 
weakness of the ankles had set in as the result 
of the fall, so that none were able to walk without 
crutches. The crutches at first introduced 
would probably be very clumsy; but, as time 
progressed, the shapes and finish and ornamentation 
of articles so useful would surely progress 
also. Then men unguided by the Scriptures 
would probably philosophise thus: "See how 
crude, compared with ours, were the crutches 
in use a few centuries ago;— Adam probably lay 
around unable to walk at all, or merely crawled 
about, pulling himself by the roots and branches 
of trees and bushes. The Bishop, philosophising 
from the same standpoint of thought, might 
have changed the expression above and said, 
"Why did not Christ come immediately after 
the fall of man? Simply because it was in Eden 
that locomotion began, and that in a crude 
form of crawling. The helps or crutches of 
that time would not have been sufficient to enable 
him to go about to preach the gospel." 

Language and books are merely the crutches 
which partially make good the defects of the 
human mental powers incident to the fall— 



lack of mental perception and lack of memory. 

Does anyone suppose that in heaven God and 

the angels are dependent solely upon spoken 

and written language, books, etc., that some of 

the angels are printers, and others binders? 

Neither should we suppose that the perfect man 

needed such helps or crutches, but that these 

developed to meet his wants, and that as 

those wants or imperfections of man disappear 

during the times of restitution— which God hath 

spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets— 

these will be unnecessary. (Acts 3:19-21.) Undoubtedly, 

however, language and books will 

continue among men even after the powers of 

R1717: page 325 

mental discernment and expression have been 
restored to them during the Millennium. 

In full harmony with this is the promise of 
the Lord— "This is the covenant that I will 
make with them after those days, saith the Lord: 
I will put my laws into their hearts, and in 
their minds will I write them." (Heb. 8: 10; 
10: 16.) Here the law written upon tables of 
stone, and given at Sinai, under the typical Covenant, 
is contrasted with the better arrangement 
of the New Covenant, which will ignore a written 
language entirely and write upon the hearts. 
The context shows that when the law has been 
thus written upon the hearts of all antitypical 
Israelites, who make this New Covenant with the 
Lord through Christ, there will no longer be any 
teaching, for none will be ignorant of the Lord. 
-Jer. 31:33,34. 

And this condition, which is to be ushered in 
by the Millennial age or "times of restitution," 
will correspond exactly to the conditions previous 
to the fall. The law to Adam was not in book 
form, nor upon tables of stone, but infinitely 
better: it was written in his heart and brain— in 
his very nature. He knew right from wrong by 
the operation of his perfect brain. Being "very 
good," a likeness of his Creator, he needed no 
reminders as to God's will. And the law given 
at Sinai twenty-five centuries later, instead of 
being a higher expression of the divine will, was 
a very much inferior expression, when compared 
with the perfect mind-and-heart-written 
law bestowed upon Adam. 

The Apostle Paul corroborates all this, and 
tells us that all men have some traces of this 
original and superior law. Referring to some 
of the most degraded members of the race, he 
says, these "show the work [evidences] of the 
law written in their hearts." (Rom. 2:15.) 



And in the preceding chapter the Apostle shows 
how it comes that some of the heathen are so 
very much more degraded than others,— how 
the original nature-written law came to be so 
much more nearly effaced from the hearts and 
brains of some of earth's families or races than 
from others. "Because that, when they knew God 
[in the remote past], they glorified him not as 
God, neither were thankful; but became vain 
in their imaginations, and their foolish heart 
was darkened. Professing themselves to be wise, 
they became fools;. ..wherefore, God gave 
them up to uncleanness....And even as they 
did not like [prefer] to retain God in their 
knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate 
mind."-Rom. 1:21,22,24,25,28. 

The Apostle's explanation of present degradation 
is a fall down from a height; a failure 
to retain God in their knowledge— an effacing 
of the law from their hearts and minds. The 
Bishop, on the contrary, teaches that the race 
begun in the infant Adam, one degree above 
an ape, had not, previous to the coming of 
Christ, progressed sufficiently to be able to receive 
a revelation from God,— human language 
until then being too imperfect. Which is right? 
the inspired Apostle or the Bishop? Evidently 
the worldly-wise theory of the latter 
respecting Evolution is hindering his study of 
and faith in the Scriptures. But we must accept 
the consistent theory of the Scriptures, 
though it separate us entirely from the philosophies 
of the worldly-wise. 

In speaking of the cause of Adam's ejection 
from Eden, the Bishop says "fall;" but what 
does he mean? Evidently, from the general 
tenor of his discourse, he means that Adam and 
his race have been "falling upward" for six 
thousand years. The "infant" Adam, one degree 
superior to an ape, fell up to the present 
civilized manhood;— as the result of disobedience 
to God's commands! Surely any who 
believe this gospel would be justified in saying, 
Let us do evil that good may follow! 

But those who prove the Bishop's words by 
Scripture, and who seek "to the law and the 
testimony," will turn from such inconsistency 

R1718: page 325 

of human reasoning. Such would ask the Bishop, 
Where then would be the room for, or necessity, 
or value of, the ransom for all, given by 
our Redeemer? From what could he redeem 
men, if Adam's course were so beneficial? And 
why should the promise of restitution (restoring 



to Adam's condition) be held out by God at 
the mouth of all the holy prophets? (Acts 3:21.) 
Surely, restitution of even semi-civilized 
peoples to a babe condition, one degree above 
the ape, would be a curse, a retrogression, an injury, 
a most undesirable thing! 

R1718: page 326 

One error leads naturally to another: consequently 
we find the following unscriptural statement 
in the same discourse. The Bishop is 
reported to have said:— 

"We think sin caused death, and we are accustomed 
to say so. It is not true! Death is 
God's normal method of the universe! God 
made the universe for death!" 

The vast majority of Christian professors 
would agree with the Bishop, and could scarcely 
tell why they sometimes have associated death 
with sin; when they knew all the time that they 
recognized no relationship. We suggest a reason 
for this. It is because they sometimes read 
the Bible, and they find it thus stated therein. 
But as they get to believe that the race is falling 
up, and that the Bible was written by well-meaning 
men far down below present development 
—by men who never saw an electric car or 
a bicycle or a telephone— they will get to have 
less and less care for what the Bible says upon 
this or any subject. But let us examine the Bible 
and note how positively it contradicts the Bishop 
—or, as the Bible existed first, we should say, 
how positively the Bishop's expression contradicts 
the Bible. It says:— 

"The soul that sinneth, it shall die."— 
Ezek. 18:4. 

"The wages of sin is death."— Rom. 6:23. 

"By one man's disobedience sin entered into 
the world, and death by [or as a result of] 
sin."— Rom. 5:12. 

"By one man's offense death reigned."— 
Rom. 5:17. 

"By the offense of one judgment came upon 
all men to condemnation [to the wages of sin, 
death]. "-Rom. 5:18. 

"Sin hath reigned unto death."— Rom. 5:21. 

"Since by man [Adam] came death."— 
1 Cor. 15:21. 

"In Adam all die."-l Cor. 15:22. 

"The sting of [or which produces] death is 
sin."— 1 Cor. 15:56. 

"Sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth 
death."--Jas. 1:15. 

In harmony with these words of the apostles 
and prophets was the declaration of God 



to Adam when he placed him upon trial, in 
Eden, "In the day [2 Pet. 3:8] that thou eatest 
thereof, dying, thou shalt die;" and as expressed 
by Eve,— "God hath said, Ye shall not 
eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die." 
It was Satan that declared, "Ye shall not surely 
die," as the result of transgressing God's 
command. How strange that the Bishop and 
so many others place themselves on the side of 
Satan and join in his contradiction of God's 
declaration, and with him join in deceiving 
mankind respecting "the wages of sin."— Gen. 2:17; 
3:3,4. 

The Bishop's confusion respecting the heathen 
millions is largely because he fails to see clearly 
the Bible doctrine of the fall of Adam into 
condemnation of death, and that the terrible 
ravages of death (with its attendant features, 
sickness and pain) which for six thousand years 
have rested so heavily upon the race are God's 
"curse"— the "wages" or penalty for sin. Failing 
to see that hades, the grave, is the penalty for 
sin, and an awfully severe, though just, penalty, 
the Bishop and millions of others have for years 
looked for and imagined a place where devils 
will riot in pleasure to all eternity, enjoying 
the torments they will, by God's will and 
providence, or by his inability to prevent, inflict 
upon billions of the human race. Having 
misconceived the meaning of the words sheol 
and hades, rendered "hell" in our common 
version Bible (Can we really excuse an educated 
man on the score of ignorance as to the meaning 
and Scriptural use of these words?), and 
having outgrown the unscriptural eternal torment 
theories, the Bishop is wandering about 
looking amongst the most fallen-up men for 
some modern theory that will prove that death, 
and pain and sickness are blessings, and that 
the heathen as well as the saints enter by this 
gateway into a heaven where the few developed 
Christians will be perfectly happy, surrounded 
by myriads of characterless heathen, idiots, etc. 

If the Bishop would find the path of life 
which God has provided, for there is no other, 
let him retrace his steps; let him acknowledge 
that God created man upright, but that he sought 
out various contrary devices and defiled himself. 
(Eccl. 7:29.) Then let him admit the fall of 
man downward— mentally, morally and physically. 
Then he will find a place for the ransom 
for all— Christ's death— to redeem man from 

R1718: page 327 

the sentence of death. Then he will find a place 



for the restitution to their "former estate" of 
human perfection of all who will receive Christ 
and obey him. (Acts 3:19-21; Ezek. 16:48-63.) 
Then he will find a use for the Bible doctrine 
of a resurrection of the dead, which would be 
an absurdity if there be none dead. Then the 
Lord's promise that "All that are in their graves 
shall hear the voice of the Son of Man and come 
forth," will have a meaning (John 5:25-29); 
and soon he will see that the hope for the 
heathen of foreign lands, living and dead, and 
the only hope for the vast majority of civilized 
lands, will be the great Kingdom of Christ 
during the Millennium, for which we were 
taught to pray, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will 
be done on earth as it is done in heaven;"~a 
prayer not yet answered. And in connection 
he will find that the Church is the "little flock" 
to which it is the Heavenly Father's good 
pleasure to give this Kingdom— in association 
with Christ her Head and Bridegroom;— that 
the Kingdom cannot come until the Church 
has been completed,— and that not until then 
can "all the families of the earth be blest" with 
the promised Millennial blessings and opportunities. 
-Luke 12:32; Rev. 20:4; Gen. 28: 14. 

One more point before we close. We quote 
again from the report of the same sermon:— 

GOD FORCING MEN TO SIN. 



"God gives impulses to reach out and take 
that which we should not have. But when, to 
indulge these desires, we step over the law with 
which he has hedged us about, we commit sin." 

Here the Bishop is driven by the other errors 
he holds to this almost blasphemous statement 
that God not only places temptations before 
men, but that he actually impels or forces them 
to do sin; for this is the significance of the 
word "impulse." Webster defines it, "impelling, 
or driving onward." To say that God 
impels or impulses or drives mankind to choose 
"that which we should not have," and then 
"hedges us about" with contrary commands 
so as to entrap us in sin, would be to give him 
the character which properly applies to Satan. 

If at the time of his trial Adam was ignorant 
of right and wrong, or if God impelled him to 
do the sin, surely that was not a fair trial. And 
to so teach is to declare God unjust, not only 
as to the trial, but still more so in respect to 
the punishment inflicted because of that failure 



—death, including all sickness, pain and trouble. 
This view would make God the great and really 
the only sinner, his penalty a sham, and the 
Bible doctrine of man's redemption with the 
precious blood of Christ a farce; for if man did 
not do the sinning, he was not guilty and needed 
no redemption, and God, who impulsed or 
impelled an imperfect creature to sin, was alone 
blameworthy, properly deserving of punishment. 

But how inconsistent all this is when compared 
with the simple account— the only inspired account. 
The Bible shows Adam "upright," 
"very good" in God's sight, an "image of 
God" in flesh. It shows his fair trial, his just 
sentence, God's sympathetic love for his creature, 
even in his fallen condition, and his abundant 
provision for him in the gift of his Son for his 
redemption and restitution. The Bible theory is 
consistent with reason: other theories are not so. 

How clearly the Scriptures contradict the 
Bishop, saying, "Let no man say, when he is 
tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot 
be tempted with evil; neither tempteth he any 
man."— Jas. 1:13. 

But the Bishop's argument appears in a still 
worse light when its different parts are united. 
For instance, take the suggestion that Adam 
was an inexperienced "infant," with whom 
language only began to take form and was "insufficient 
for revelation;" add to this the statement 
that God impulsed or impelled him to 
take the forbidden fruit and thus to break his 
laws; add, thirdly, the proposition that God 
falsified to the "babe" Adam, and told him 
that he would die for his disobedience, while 
he really meant no such thing (for the Bishop 
says, sin did not cause death: "Death is the 
normal [regular, proper] method of the universe"), 
but intended thus to develop humanity 
and bring it up to perfection. 

Can any one imagine a more nauseating theological 
compound than this? Verily, as the 
Lord foretold through the prophet, "The wisdom 
of their wise men shall perish, and the 
understanding of their prudent men shall be 

R1718: page 328 

hid."— Isa. 29:14. Read also verses 9-13, applicable 
at the present time. 

Such teaching, from such a high dignitary, 
in so popular a church as the Methodist, is sure 
to have much bad fruit, and that quickly, in the 
ranks of the ministers, as well as amongst the 
"laity." Indeed, we were not surprised to 
learn that within two weeks after this discourse 



by the Bishop, an M.E. pastor in our city 

R1719: page 328 

preached about Adam being a big, ignorant baby, 
and that his temptation and fall were necessary 
in order to develop him. 

How needful that God's people see the truth, 
to keep them from following such blind guides 
and stumbling into the pit of unbelief and agnosticism! 
Those whose eyes have been anointed 
by the eye-salve of truth, and who now see the 
real beauty and harmony of God's Word, should 
not be satisfied to rest in the truth and to render 
thanks therefor. They should "preach the 
Word," the gospel of salvation by the cross 
and not by a fall upward (evolution), nor as a 
reward for ignorance. Those who do not get 
the truth speedily, will get the error; for Satan's 
time is short and his deceptive theories are 
many, while the truth is one. 

A sure way to test all theories is to square them 
by the doctrine of the ransom. Every theory 
which asserts that Adam did not fall from perfection 
of life into death, or which says or implies 
that his fall and that of his race has been upward, 
denies the ransom, whether its advocates so admit 
or not; for, if nothing was lost, nothing 
could be redeemed or bought back. If it denies 
that man's life was forfeited by sin, it 
cannot claim the sacrifice of Christ's life as "a 
ransom [a corresponding PRICE] for all." If 
death be the normal or proper condition, and 
not the wages of sin, then Christ's death could 
not pay our penalty; and, indeed, from the evolution 
standpoint, there is no penalty for disobedience, 
but, on the contrary, a reward— of 
civilization and development. There is no necessity, 
no place, for a ransom in any such theory. 
All modern theories thus deny the ransom. 

The most insidious and dangerous "enemies 
of the cross of Christ" are those who, professing 
to be his servants and to preach his gospel, 
attack it on the inside, by denying that God's 
work was perfect when he created man (Deut. 32:4); 
that man fell from that perfection and 
divine likeness; that the right to recover him 
out of sin and death, to "that which was lost," 
was purchased of Justice by "the precious 
blood [shed,— death] of Christ." By whatever 
ways any may attempt to climb into the 
sheep-fold, they are wrong ways, and their advocates 
are pronounced to be "thieves and 
robbers." (John 10:9-11,15.) The keystone 
to the divine plan is that "the man Christ Jesus 
gave himself a ransom [a corresponding price] 



for all, to be testified in due time." (1 Tim. 2:6.) 
Whatever theory does not square with this, 
absolutely and in every particular, is thus proven 
to be a false one.— 2 Cor. 11:13-15. 



We will supply our readers with plenty of 
these criticisms of the Bishop's views, and trust 
they may do good in the way of opening the 
eyes of some of the Lord's sheep to see where 
their trusted, but blind, shepherds are leading 
them. But do not stop with this: sell or loan 
or give them speedily other reading matter- 
especially "The Plan of the Ages." (See second 
page.) We will loan a copy, post free, to any 
who will promise a careful, prayerful reading, 
and to return the book post-paid or twenty-five 
cents instead. 



R1719: page 328 

THE POWER OF FAITH. 

"This is the victory [the conquering power] 
that overcometh the world, even our faith." 
-1 John 5:4.-- 

BLESSED are the overcomers! "To him that 
overcometh will I grant to sit with me in 
my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set 
down with my Father in his throne."— Rev. 3:21. 

What a reward is this which is held out as an 
incentive and inspiration to urge us on to noble 
and heroic effort!— to reign with Christ, to be 
his bride and joint-heir, his beloved and confidential 
companion through all eternity, and 
to be partakers of his divine nature and glory. 
These promises are freighted with an "exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory," which "eye 

R1719: page 329 

hath not seen, nor ear heard; neither hath it 
entered into the heart of man; but God hath 
revealed it unto us [brought it within the range 
of our appreciation] by his spirit." The words 
sound hollow and meaningless to those who 
have no appreciation of spiritual things, but to 
the consecrated children of God who are faithfully 
striving to meet the conditions upon 
which the fulfilment depends, and who have 
therefore a good hope, they are exceeding precious, 
and fill their hearts with a joy unspeakable 



and full of glory. 

But between the present time and the realization 
of the promises there lies the necessity of 
overcoming. The word is strongly suggestive 
of a great conflict, and calls to mind also the 
Apostle Paul's expressions— "Fight the good 
fight of faith;" "Endure hardness as a good 
soldier of Christ;" "Watch ye, stand fast in 
the faith, quit you like men, be strong." To 
overcome requires energy, force of character, 
perseverance and steadfast, patient endurance to 
the very end of the present life. 

In the above text the Apostle John points to 
the only power which can sufficiently energize 
our whole being and nerve to patient endurance 
of tribulation, even to the end. That conquering 
power is faith. "Now," says the Apostle 
Paul, "faith is a basis of things hoped for, a 
conviction of things unseen." Faith is not 
merely belief or knowledge, but is knowledge 
applied, assimilated, appropriated— made a part 
of our habit of thought, a basis for our actions 
and a spur to all our energies. Such a faith is 
the overcoming power which all must have who 
would run successfully the race for the prize of 
our high calling, and be overcomers. 

What is it that is to be overcome? John briefly 
comprehends it all in the expression, "the 
world." Then the whole world is against us 
in this battle. Yes, its spirit, its popular methods, 
its ambitions, ideas, hopes and aims are all 
at variance with the elect Church of God, who 
are not of this world, even as Christ is not of 
this world. The world is taking its own course, 
ignoring God, leaning to its own understanding 
and pursuing its own way. Consequently, 
our course is in direct opposition to that of the 
world, and we must pull hard against the current 
of the world's spirit which is deeply inwrought 
in our old nature, as well as surrounding 
us on every side. Yes, it is a hard pull; and 
we need all the inspiration and energy that 
faith can impart to accomplish it. 

It is important, too, to see that our faith is a 
correct faith; for if the faith be an erroneous 
one, inspiring false and delusive hopes built 
upon sandy foundations, the stronger this impelling 
power becomes, the more surely and 
quickly will it drive its deluded victim to shipwreck 
upon the rocks. Faith, like steam in an 
engine, is a power either for good or for evil. 
Hence the importance of a correct faith. 

It was because of this importance of faith, and 
of recognition of it as the motive power, either 
for good or for evil, that the Apostle Paul was 
so solicitous for the continuance of his converts 



in the faith. (See 1 Thes. 3:2,5,6,7,10.) He 
urged all to examine and prove themselves, 
whether they were in the faith, grounded and 
settled, and not moved away from the hope of 
the gospel, but rooted and built up in Christ and 
established in the faith; and to beware lest any 
man spoil them through philosophy and vain 
deceit, after the traditions of men, after the 
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. 
(Col. 1:23; 2:7,8.) He was deeply solicitous, 
too, that the faith of the Church should not 
stand in the wisdom (the vain philosophies) of 
men, but in the power of God. And, therefore, 
in his preaching, he did not launch out into 
foolish speculations or follow his own or any 
other men's reasonings, and so pander to the 
popular craving for something new; but he confined 
himself to the expounding of the sacred 
Scriptures and to exhortations, inspired, as they 
were, by the revelations made to himself— a 
prophet, as well as an apostle.— 1 Cor. 2:4,13; 
2 Cor. 12:1-7; Gal. 1:11,12; 2:2; 
2 Pet. 3:15,16. 

Let us see, then, that we have the faith of 
Christ— the faith well founded in the Word of 
God, a faith examined and proved, deeply rooted 

R1720: page 329 

in the heart as well as in the head, and therefore 
established as the motive power of life. 
Such a faith is not nervously looking about for 
something new, and always probing the vain 
philosophies of men to see how skilfully they 

R1720: page 330 

can withstand the Word of the Lord; for those 
who do so show plainly that their faith is not 
of sufficient influence to be the moving power 
in them, impelling them onward to full and complete 
victory over the world. 

Faith, to be a conquering power in us, must 
go deeper than the head: it must go into the 
heart, and thus permeate and energize the whole 
being, bringing not only the outward conduct 
but every thought into subjection to Christ. 
Then indeed will faith impel to action, to works 
which clearly manifest it; for "faith without 
works is dead." A mere intellectual assent to 
the truth of God, which does not lead to activity 
in his service, is not faith, and can never 
overcome the world nor secure the prize of our 
high calling. But this is the conquering power 
that overcometh the world, even our faith. Let 
us examine ourselves and see that we have it 



pure and simple, and deeply inwrought in the 

fiber of our character, and that as an energizing 

principle it is moving us to faithful and persevering 

activity. Let it be the governor and inspiration 

of our lives— a living faith which purges 

and purifies and strengthens to diligence and patience 

to the end of the narrow way to life. 



R1720: page 330 

LETTERS OF INTRODUCTION. 



In our last issue we stated that a different 
wording for the proposed Introductory Letter 
for traveling teaching brethren had been decided 
on; and this we give below. It may be 
well, however, to guard against any misunderstanding 
by explaining:— 

I. These letters are not authorizations to 
preach. That cannot be given by man. All 
true disciples, trusting in the precious blood, 
and fully consecrated to the Lord's service, are 
authorized by God's Word to preach the gospel 
in any and every way they can do so; and according 
to their talents and opportunities such 
should be glad to do all the preaching they can 
do, publicly or privately, by word or pen or 
printed page. (See Matt. 28:19.) The Apostle 
Paul, while assuring us that his authorization or 
ordination as a minister was not of man nor by 
man, but of and from God only (Gal. 1:1), 
nevertheless went forth to his ministry with 
Barnabas under the auspices of the Church at 
Antioch— as the Lord's representative and as the 
representative of the Church at Antioch. (Acts 13:3; 
14:26,27.) He evidently took just such 
a letter; for it was the usual custom to give and 
carry such letters. (Phil. 2:28-30; Rom. 16:1-15,17; 
ICor. 16:3; Acts 18:27.) This is 
intimated in his epistle to the Corinthians— 
"Need we, as some others, epistles of commendation 
to you," etc.? (2 Cor. 3:1.) He 
did not need such a letter to the Church at Corinth, 
because, as he there explains, he himself 
had founded and established that Church and 
few could know him better than they, or them 
better than he. But when first he visited the 
Church at Jerusalem, he did need letters, or 
more, a personal introduction. (See Acts 9:26,27.) 
It is this Apostolic custom and safeguarding 
of the flock that we seek to copy now, for 
the benefit of all concerned. Individual letters 



would serve where the individuals are known, 
or Church letters would serve where the Churches 
are known; but in this case the Tract Society is 
known to you all, and we are confident that its 
introduction will be appreciated by the scattered 
ones everywhere. 

II. ZION'S WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY is 
not a "religious society" in the ordinary meaning 

of this term; for it has no creed or Confession 
of Faith. It is purely a business association, 
whose mission is to serve in a business 
manner the wishes of its beneficiaries, who are 
represented in its officers. How faithfully it 
has served these purposes thus far, its enemies no 
less than its friends bear witness. 

The design of the organization of the Tract 
Society is to keep the affairs and moneys, represented 
by it, quite separate from the individual 
affairs of its managers. This present convenience, 
however, is still less than may be enjoyed 
in the future; for it is hoped that the death of 
any or all of those now managing the Fund 
would not destroy the Society nor totally hinder 
or involve its work, as the representative and 
servant of the household of faith, in economically 
providing tracts, etc., etc., for their use, 

R1720: page 331 

benefit and assistance in missionary work, since 
in its Charter provision is made for such 
contingency. 

III. The issuance of these Letters of Introduction 
means no more than if you or any other 
individual gave such a letter— except that it represents 
the judgment of experienced brethren, 

well informed respecting the character, ability, 
etc., of those introduced.— See Acts 16:2. 

Thus, in this day of "deceivers" (2 Tim. 3:1-13; 
Rom. 16:18; Matt. 24:24; Eph. 4:11-14), 
you may the more readily receive those 
of whom we bear testimony, knowing that we 
will use conscientious care. 

IV. It will be noticed that the eight qualifications 
named in this Letter of Introduction 

are not doctrinal, except as to the ransom— the 
foundation: and we hold that without it 
none are Christians at all. The other qualifications 
are those respecting character, and we 
believe them to be reasonable; and any one 
who could not confess them to be true of himself 
by the grace of God, we could not feel free to introduce 
as a proper person to be a teacher or a 
qualified servant, in the Church of the living 
God. 
It is not to be understood that those making 



these professions of qualification claim to be 

perfected in all those Christian graces and qualifications, 

but that they believe that they have 

them to such a degree as they concede a representative 

of Christ should possess them, in order 

to be a servant of the Church in holy things. 

All possessed of the right spirit, however, will 

desire and strive to continually grow in grace 

and knowledge and love and in every good 

work, and expect to be perfected only when 

they awake in the resurrection, in the likeness 

of their Lord.-- 1 Cor. 15:42,43. 

This Introductory Letter expires December 
31, 1895, and should be returned at that date, 
with application for renewal, if a new one is desired. 
The holder agrees to return this letter 
to the Society upon demand of the Society 
through its Board of Directors, at any time. 

Copy of the— 

LETTER OF INTRODUCTION. 



FROM ZION'S WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY, 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

To the Church of the living God, whose names 
are written in heaven (1 Tim. 3:15; 
Heb. 12:23), Greeting! 

We hereby commend to your Christian fellowship, 
and to your acceptance as a helper and 
counselor, our beloved brother and co-laborer, 



He is a brother beloved in the Lord, well reported 
of by brethren who know him, and one 
whom we recognize as a child of God and follower 
of Christ (with all that this implies respecting 
good moral character); and we believe 
him to possess the following qualifications for 
SPECIAL SERVICE to the household of faith: 

I. Unexceptional moral character, polished 
by the truth. 

II. Meekness— that he may not become 
puffed up, and thus be injured himself, while 
seeking to help you. 

III. A clear conception of the Lord's great 
plan, and large participation in its spirit. 

IV. Ability to impart the truth to others in 
its own power and simplicity (not necessarily 
an orator). 

V. Known fidelity to the doctrine of the 
ransom in its only true sense— a corresponding 
price or substitute for the forfeited life of Adam 
and his race, which inherits death through him. 

VI. A humble mind, seeking to preach not 



himself, but Christ— not to air his own knowledge, 
but to present God's Word in its purity 
and simplicity. 

VII. A student of the Word, of cultivated 
thought, well founded and settled— not a wondering 
novice; not a teacher of speculations and 
fancies, nor of Anglo-Israelism, Socialism, Politics, 
Astronomical theories, or other questions 

not of spiritual profit, but to the subverting of 
the hearers (2 Tim. 2:15-17; 1 Tim. 4:7; 6:20,21); 
but- 

VIII. He comes to you seeking to establish 
the faith and character of the Church, presenting 
the One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism— 

the one gospel, authorized by and based upon 
the one sacrifice, given once for all. 

He has affirmed to us, in writing, that, by 
the grace of God, he already possesses these 
qualifications, and that he is striving daily to 
perfect them in his actions, words and thoughts; 
and, in showing this Letter to others, he thereby 
makes the same confession to them. 

He comes to you under the GENERAL ORDINATION 
AND COMMISSION of our Lord's Word, applicable 
to all fully consecrated believers in the 
precious blood (Matt. 28:19,20; Isa. 61:1-3); 
but is particularly commended by us to you, because 
of the above eight special qualifications,— 
for your upbuilding in knowledge and practice of 
the truth, to help you over difficulties, and to help 
you to stand, in this evil day, against all the wiles 
of Satan and his multiplied, deceptive errors. 
We hope also that he will be able to water and 
bring forward to perfection some of the good 

R1721 : page 331 

seeds of truth which you have been patiently 
sowing amongst your neighbors for years, by 
word of mouth, and by the printed page;— answering 
their remaining questions, and convincing 
and confirming such in the knowledge of 

R1721 : page 332 

the truth; and to aid all in the great life-work 
of "perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord." 
He has full authority from the Lord (as above 
cited) to administer symbolic baptism, according 
to all and singular the commands and 
teachings of the Holy Scriptures; and to take 
a leading part in gatherings of the "household 
of faith," either for commemorating our Lord's 
death, or for worship, or for Bible study; but 
he has no more authority, under the above commission, 
than has any other consecrated believer, 



except such authority as special qualifications 
for this service would give. His coming 
to you with this our letter of introduction and 
commendation will, we doubt not, secure to 
him the leadership of any meetings held during 
his stay,— even though the local leader should 
hold a similar letter of commendation. Receive 
him in the spirit of love and Christian fellowship, 
and aid him by your prayers and cooperation 
(Col. 1:7; 4:7-9; Phil. 4:3); nevertheless, 
PROVE (1 John 4:1-3) critically, by the 
Word of the Lord, his every presentation. Hold 
fast that proven to be good.— 1 Thes. 5:21. 

In the love and service of the King of kings 
and of Christ Jesus, the Lord, Redeemer and 
Head of the Church, we remain 

Your loving servants, 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY. 

{ Corporate } President. 

{Seal. } Secretary. 



R1721 : page 332 

"LET PATIENCE HAVE HER PERFECT WORK. 



"Let patience have her perfect work, that ye 
may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing." 
-Jas. 1:4.-- 

THE term "patience" carries with it the 

thought of meek, uncomplaining endurance 

of suffering with humble resignation and perseverance. 

It is a trait which indicates strength 

and self-discipline. It cannot be predicated 

of inexperienced persons, but only of characters 

which have been subjected to trials of affliction, 

pain or loss; and it always shines brightest 

when manifested under the glowing heat of severe 

affliction. This trait takes a very prominent 

place in the galaxy of Christian virtues; for without 

it the heart would grow faint, the head weary; 

and the steps would soon falter along the narrow 

way in which the Church is called to walk. 

"In your patience possess ye your souls," said 

the Master, implying the danger of losing our 

souls, our existence, if we fail to cultivate this 

grace which is so very necessary to our continuance 

in well doing. 

The Apostle James does not overstate the 
matter when he intimates that the perfect work 



of patience will make its subjects perfect and 
entire, wanting nothing; for the Apostle Paul 
assures us that God, who has begun the good 
work of developing character in us, will continue 
to perform it until the crowning day— the 
day of Jesus Christ. (Phil. 1:6.) All his children 
will be subjected to just such discipline as they 
need for the correction of faults, the implanting 
and development of virtues, and for their training 
and establishment in righteousness, so that 
they cannot be moved. "If ye be without 
chastisement [discipline and correction], whereof 
all [true sons of God] are partakers, then are 
ye bastards, and not sons; for whom the Lord 
loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son 
whom he receiveth. If ye [patiently] endure 
chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; 
for what son is he whom the father chasteneth 
not?"-Heb. 12:8,6,7. 

This great work of developing and training 
character is necessarily a slow and tedious one, 
and not infrequently it is a painful process; 
and the patience that cheerfully submits to it 
is begotten of a high appreciation of the ends 
to be attained by it. It is begotten of a love 
of righteousness, truth and godliness, and is 
therefore most noble and praiseworthy. 

But how can we let patience have her perfect 
work? Just by meekly doing the best we can 
each day, and doing it cheerfully and well; 
making the best of every thing and going forward 
daily with true Christian fortitude to act 
the noble part in every emergency of affliction, 
pain or loss. To-day's trial may be a light 
one, perhaps almost imperceptible; or to-day 
may be one of the sunny days in which God 
bids our hearts rejoice in his overflowing bounty. 
To-morrow may bring its cares and its 
petty vexations that irritate and annoy. Another 

R1721 : page 333 

to-morrow may witness the clouds gather 
above our heads, and as the days follow each 
other the clouds may grow darker and darker 
until we are forcibly reminded of that strong 
figure of the Psalmist—"I walk through the 
valley of the shadow of death." Yet never will 
the valley grow so dark that the patient, trusting 
one cannot triumphantly exclaim, "Though I 
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, 
I will fear no evil; for thou [my Lord] art with 
me: thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me." 
Yes, there is comfort in the "rod" (of chastisement), 
as well as in the "staff" (of providential 
care); for both are designed for our 



ultimate profiting. 

The Apostle Paul tells us plainly that tribulation 
is necessary for the development of patience 
—"Tribulation worketh patience; and 
patience, experience; and experience, hope." 
(Rom. 5:3,4.) Consider how your own experience 
has verified this, you who have been 
for some time under the Lord's special care and 
leading. How much richer you are for all the 
lessons of experience, and for the patience that 
experience has developed in you! Although, 
like the Apostle, you can say that "no chastening 
for the present seemeth to be joyous, but 
grievous; nevertheless, afterward, it yieldeth 
the peaceable fruits of righteousness unto them 
which are exercised thereby." (Heb. 12:1 1.) 
In the exercise of patience the lessons of experience 
have made you stronger. They have 
increased your faith and drawn you into closer 
communion and fellowship with the Lord. 
They have made you feel better acquainted with 
and to realize more and more his personal interest 
in you and his care and love for you. And 
this in turn has awakened a deeper sense of gratitude 
and an increasing zeal to manifest that 
gratitude to him. This also deepens the sense 
of fellowship with God, and gives confidence to 
the hope of final and full acceptance with him 
as a son and heir, worthy through Christ. 

"Wherefore lift up the hands which hang 
down and [strengthen] the feeble knees"— 
"Let patience have her perfect work, that ye 
may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing." 

The Apostle James urges that we take the 
prophets who have spoken in the name of the 
Lord for an example of suffering affliction and 
of patience. Then he cites the example of Job 
and the manifest end or purpose of the Lord in 
permitting him to be so sorely tried: how the 
Lord was really very pitiful and of tender mercy, 
although the pity and mercy were not manifest 
except to the confiding faith that said, 
"Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him" 
—until the long and painful discipline had 
yielded the peaceable fruits and the subsequent 
rewards of righteousness. 

There is little virtue in the patience that endures 
merely from motives of worldly policy, 
though even that often has much advantage in 
it. Men in business dealings with fellow-men 
well know that an impetuous, turbulent disposition 
is greatly to their disadvantage, while patient 
consideration, temperance in judgment, 
and good self-control are of immense value, 
even from a worldly, business standpoint. But 
the patience that is begotten of deep-rooted 



Christian principle is the kind that will endure 
all trials and shine the brighter for every affliction 
through which it may pass. 

Job, the servant of God, was accused of selfish 
policy-motives for his remarkable patience 
and faithfulness; and it was boldly affirmed that 
if he were tried by adversity his mean motives 
would be manifest— that he would curse God 
to his face. But God knew better; and it was 
in Job's defence that he permitted him to be 
tried to the utmost that the loyalty of his heart 
might be manifest. Some of his poor comforters 
viewed Job's afflictions only in the light of 
chastisements, failing utterly to comprehend the 
divine purpose, and this only added stings to 
his afflictions; but through them all the Lord 
brought his servant and most fully vindicated 
him in the eyes of all the people. 

Thus will he ever do with all who patiently 
maintain their integrity and trust in God under 
affliction. If any man recognize affliction as 
a chastisement of the Lord for the correction 
of some evil way in him, let him be quick to 
learn the lesson and repent; or if it be refining 
discipline, let patience under the tedious process 
have its perfect work. 

The Apostle Paul (Heb. 11) calls up a long 
list of patient, faithful ones who endured cruel 

R1721 : page 334 

mockings and scourgings, bonds and imprisonment, 
who were stoned, sawn asunder, were 
tempted, were slain with the sword, who wandered 
about in sheep-skins and goat-skins, being 
destitute, afflicted, tormented; of whom the 
world was not worthy; who wandered in 
deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and 
caves of the earth. All this they endured patiently 
for righteousness' sake, looking by faith 
to God for the reward of their patience and 
faithfulness in his own good time. Then again, 
says the Apostle (Heb. 12:3), "Consider him 
[Christ] that endured such contradiction of sinners 
against himself, lest ye be wearied and 
faint in your minds." Yea, consider him, "who, 
when he was reviled, reviled not again; when 
he suffered, he threatened not; but committed 
himself to him that judgeth righteously." He left 
us an example that we should follow his steps. 
While we see the great necessity for pruning, 
cultivating and discipline in the development 
of character, it is manifest that none will be 
able to endure it unto the desirable end of final 
establishment in righteousness who do not from 
the beginning diligently devote themselves to 



the exercise of patience. "He that shall endure 
unto the end, the same shall be saved." 
"In your patience possess ye your souls." 



R1722: page 334 

A SABBATH IN CAPERNAUM. 



IV. QUAR. LESSON III., OCT. 21, MARK 1:21-34. 

Golden Text— "He taught them as one that had 
authority, and not as the scribes."— Mark 1:22. 

The opportunities of the synagogue and 
the Sabbath day were eagerly embraced by 
our Lord, affording, as they did, very favorable 
circumstances for the presentation of 
the truth. The habit of calling upon suitable 
persons in the congregation for the 
reading and expounding of the law and the 
prophets opened wide this door of usefulness. 

Our Lord's dealing with the unclean 
spirits (verses 23-26,34) shows three things 
—(I) the actual personal existence of invisible 
evil spirits. This one manifested his 
power to act, think, speak, and to hear and 
obey; and the Lord recognized and addressed 
him as a person, and commanded his obedience. 
(2) The power, and limit of power, 
in such beings. They can do nothing except 
as God permits them; nor can they invade 
the mind or heart of any man, save as he submits 
his will to their power. (3) The circumstances 
manifested the fact that the Lord's 
authority and power are known and recognized 
by the evil spirits. A very similar expression 
to that of verse 24 is found in Matt. 8:29 
—"Art thou come hither to torment us 
before the time?"— showing that they know 
of an appointed time for the judgment of 
angels as well as of men. "Know ye not 
that ye shall judge angels?" said the Apostle, 
addressing the Church; and the fallen angels 
seem to have found it out.* 

The Lord's wonderful power and sympathy, 
manifested in the healing of multitudes 
of the sick and afflicted, in casting out devils 
and in preaching the blessed gospel of the 
coming Kingdom, were but a faint illustration 
of his mighty power to be exerted at 
the time appointed, and now at hand, for the 
blessing of all the families of the earth. 



*See TOWER, July 15, '94. 



R1722: page 334 

A PARALYTIC HEALED. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON IV., OCT. 28, MARK 2:1-12. 

Golden Text— "The Son of man hath power 
on earth to forgive sins."— Mark 2:10. 

The healing of the sick was one of the 
distinguishing features of our Lord's earthly 
ministry— doubtless for several reasons, 
which are very manifest— (1) It foreshadowed 
the great work of his Millennial reign 
—the healing of the nations and the wiping 
away of all tears from off all faces. (2) His 
miraculous healing of the sick and raising of 
the dead attracted wide attention, drew the 
multitudes to see and hear him, and established 
his authority as a teacher sent from 
God. (3) It manifested his love and sympathy 
for the afflicted and suffering. 

Quite a difference will be observed between 
the work of the Lord during the three 
and a half years of his ministry and that of 

R1722: page 335 

the Apostles. Jesus taught mainly the surface 
and introductory truths of Christianity, 
and beyond these he opened his mouth only 
in parables and dark sayings which could 
seldom be understood by those who heard, 
while the Apostles brought forth the deeper 
things of God and did very little healing, etc. 

This was because the time had not yet 
come for opening up the deep things of 
God, and consequently the people were not 
yet prepared to receive them. It was as 
our Lord said upon one occasion,— "I have 
yet many things to say unto you, but ye 
cannot bear them now: howbeit, when he, 
the spirit of truth is come, he will guide you 
into all truth.. .and he will show you 
things to come." (John 16:12,13.) At Pentecost 
the holy spirit came upon the early 
Church, and has been in the hearts of all 



God's truly consecrated people ever since, 
enabling all such to hear the deep things 
with appreciation and gladness and some 
to teach it with power and unction. 

After the first introduction of Christianity, 
the miracle-working power gradually left 
the Church (1 Cor. 13:8), because no more 
needed as an introduction, and because the 
times of restitution— of healing and refreshing 
the world— had not yet come, and were 
not designed to be inaugurated for eighteen 
hundred years. But the deep and glorious 
truths of God's Word, the "exceeding great 
and precious promises" now made manifest 
to his saints, are the many things which the 
Lord had to tell, but which none were able 
to receive prior to the day of Pentecost. 

We understand our Lord's words, "Greater 
works than these shall he do" (John 14:12), 
to refer to the spiritual work of the 
Church during this Gospel age,— opening 
the eyes of men's understanding and, as 
God's ambassadors, calling and perfecting 
the saints for the great work of the Millennial 
age. We can conceive of no greater or 
grander work than this: it is certainly far 
superior to the curing of the physically 
blind and lame and deaf. Our Lord could 
not engage in this greater work himself, 
because the world could not be "called" 
or accepted to divine favor and anointing 
with the spirit of adoption until provision 
had been made for the forgiveness 
of their sins. That provision was our Lord's 
death as a "ransom for all" and his ascent 
"on high, there to appear in the presence 
of God for us [on our behalf]." Thus the 
"greater" work was left to his followers 
under his direction, but made possible for 
them by his previous work— his sacrifice of 
himself. The partial offer, favor to fleshly 
Israel, was by virtue of their typical justification 
and typical acceptance with God 
by the typical merit of their typical atonement 
sacrifices. 

When the Lord perceived the faith of the 
afflicted one and his friends, his reply, "Son, 
thy sins be forgiven thee," implied that restoration 
to the divine favor which guaranteed 
healing and full restitution to health and 
life in God's appointed time. Apparently 
the Lord was going to let him wait the 
appointed time, with the simple assurance 
of the present favor of God, thus to test his 
faith and the measure of his satisfaction in 
the assurance. 



His object in subsequently granting the 
immediate cure, as stated in verse 10, was 
to manifest his authority to forgive sins— 
"That ye may know that the Son of man 
hath power on earth to forgive sins (he 
saith to the sick of the palsy), I say unto 
thee, Arise, and take up thy bed, and go 
thy way into thine house. And immediately 
he arose, took up the bed and went 
forth before them all." This was the divine 
testimony to the power of Jesus to forgive 
sins and to bring to pass in God's own time 
all the blessings that forgiveness of sins implies; 
viz., full restitution to human perfection. 
Praise the Lord for the good tidings 
illustrated and emphasized in the miracles 
of our Lord! 



R1722: page 335 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT." 



DEAR FRIENDS :-Coming out of a gospel 
meeting, a copy of your publication, entitled 
"Do You Know?" was handed to 
me. I have read it eagerly, and fully realize 
the facts revealed therein to be the real 
truth, and of the utmost importance for 
every Christian to know. 

In the last paragraph of the above mentioned 
publication I have noticed your kind 
solicitude for the poor in spirit and for the 
hungry after righteousness; and, being one 
of them, I hasten to write to you and respectfully 
ask you to supply me with some food. 

I am one of the lost sheep of the house 

R1722: page 336 

of Israel. Recently the Lord opened my 
eyes, and I saw my Good Shepherd afar 
off. I ran to him over cavities and mountains, 
through thick forests and heavy walls, 
until I came near him, that I need only 
stretch my arms to embrace my dear Lord 
and Savior; and, O Lord! there is still another 
mighty obstacle obstructing my way: 
one which I am not able to remove myself, 
nor know I of a strong friend near me who 
would offer me aid. I am therefore rejoicing 
over your proposition, and hasten to 
apply to you for assistance, and trust that 



through your superior theological knowledge 
I will be able to embrace my dear Lord 
and Savior freely and consciously, and attach 
myself to him for ever. 

I am now reading the New Testament 
thoughtfully the second time. Every word 
makes a deep impression upon my mind. I 
am fully convinced, and heartily believe, that 
our great Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, is 
the Son of the living God, the authorized 
ruler of earth and the direct Mediator between 
the mighty Father and the sinful 
world, and that only through believing in 
him, and by his precious blood, can our sins 
be cleansed away, and we become white as 
snow. These facts came to me partly from 
the New Testament, but mostly from the 
Old Testament and from the fiery Law. 

The obstacle that now obstructs my way 
is Matt. 28:19, and the general Christian 
doctrine of "Trinity," which conflicts very 
much with the first and most important 
commandment of our mighty Father. In 
the first commandment, the Lord said, I am 
(perfect in himself) the Lord thy God, and 
thou shalt have no other gods before me. 
He also emphasized this very important 
commandment by placing a heavy punishment 
upon disobedience to it. (Exod. 20:2,3,5.) 
Now, if a Christian must believe in 
"Trinity," that the godhead is composed of 
three persons, the Father, the Son, and the 
holy spirit, it is in my judgment (I fear to 
utter it) a violation of that very commandment. 
I would therefore be exceedingly 
grateful to you, dear friends, if you would 
be so kind as to give me a plain and explicit 

R1723: page 336 

explanation on the above subject, that I 
and my family, and perhaps many others 
whom the Lord may privilege me to bring 
under his shelter, may live in the beauty of 
truth and holiness. 
Awaiting your reply, I am, Yours faithfully, 
C. S . L (a Hebrew). 



GENTLEMEN:-Please accept heartfelt 
thanks for the three volumes of DAWN. We 
pray that their light may be brought unto 
all people, as they are, veritably speaking, 
a key to the Bible. Heretofore the Scriptures 
were very dark to me; but since reading 



the DAWNS, they are being opened up 
to me in their true light. May the Father 
of Heaven add his richest blessings to the 
effort put forth in their circulation, is the 
prayer of your humble servant, 

A. E. KERSTETTER. 



page 336 

DEAR BRETHREN:--About two months 
before having seen or known of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and its wonderful and glorious 
Bible teachings, I had solemnly given myself 
to God in consecration, earnestly seeking 
to know and to do his will. When I 
began to investigate the DAWN, seeing that 
it was somewhat different from other religious 
books, I read critically and prayerfully, 
going to the Father, through Christ (John 14:6), 
and leaning on his promise to give 
wisdom to them who ask, seek and knock; 
and so I was ready to search its pages 
according to the will of God— whether it 
were truth or error, "strong meat" or 
simply the theory of man. 

Hungering and thirsting after truth, I 
continued to read, searching the Scriptures 
daily, drinking in the refreshing truths from 
the eternal fountain of all love— God. With 
the knowledge of these things in my heart, 
my experience is one of joy and real satisfaction. 
Nevertheless, since I began to walk 
in the path of light, and to appreciate the 
exceeding great and precious promises, I 
noticed the way was not smooth and easy, 
but rough, difficult and narrow, with many 
obstacles to overcome. I saw I must be 
tested and tried (to prove my love for, and 
appreciation of, the truth), not only during 
my first lessons, but at all times afterward. 
So I realize that I must overcome, and "press 
toward the mark for the prize," walking by 
faith, while the way becomes more narrow 
and steep, even until the end, when the 
blessed goal is reached, and the crown of 
life received. 

I have endeavored to carry the good news 
to others; and it is my purpose to "continue 
in the word," and let the light shine, 
"holding forth the word of life," no matter 
what it may cost me. 

Yours in the precious faith, 

JAS. McFARLAND. 



page 338 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



TO NEW subscribers for 1895, we will give 
gratis this double number and the December 
issues. 



THE PRICE of this double number is ten cents; 
but subscribers desiring extra copies will be 
supplied at the rate of 6 for 25 cents or 25 for 
$1.00. 



R1723 : page 338 

A WONDERFUL THING IN RELIGION. 



"Our enterprising Jewish contemporary, the 
Tidings, prints a report of the ceremonies at the 
dedication of the new and grand synagogue in 



Cleveland, and we are not going too far when 
we say that some of the things told of in the 
report are wonderful. Is it not a wonder that 
a half dozen of the Protestant ministers of 
Christianity united with the rabbi of the synagogue 
before the Jewish shrine in delivering 
discourses of exultation at the dedication of the 
edifice erected for the service of the Congregation 
Tiffereth Israel? 

"We do not remember ever hearing of any 
other incident just like it. 

"The six denominations of Protestant Christianity 
were represented by the six clergymen, 
who took part in the proceedings of the occasion. 
One of these clergymen was an Episcopalian; 
and the others were a Presbyterian, a 
Methodist, a Congregationalist, a Disciple, 
and the pastor of the Epworth Memorial 
Church. The Rev. CHARLES S. MILLS (Congregationalist) 
was, as we are told by the Tidings, 
'generous in his congratulations,' and 
exclaimed: 'As Jews and Christians worshiping 
one GOD, the GOD of ABRAHAM, ISAAC and 
JACOB, we should unite for the spreading of the 
truth in America, and for the solution of the 
problems which confront us.' The Rev. 
HARRIS R. COOLEY (Disciple), in addressing 
Rabbi GRIES, asked these significant questions: 
'Is there, after all, such a difference 
between us? Have we not one GOD?' 

"The clergymen judiciously refrained from 
making any allusion to the Gospel in that 
place. We guess they were more shrewd than 
the Apostle PETER or the Apostle PAUL would 
have been under the circumstances. Their 
conduct, as one of them took occasion to remark, 
gave evidence of the progress of liberal 
thought in the community. The conduct of 
Rabbi GRIES, also, in inviting the ministers, 
gave evidence of this new kind of progress 
among the Jewish people. 

"It seems to us that the thing here told of 
deserves to rank among the wonders of the 
nineteenth century."— N.Y. Sun. 



R1723 : page 339 

VOL. XV. NOVEMBER 1 & 15, 1894. NOS. 21 & 22. 

THE DIVINE LAW-UNIVERSAL AND ETERNAL. 

THE RELATIONSHIP TO THIS OF ISRAEL'S TEN 
COMMANDMENTS AND THEIR SABBATH-DAY. 



"THE LAW WAS GIVEN BY MOSES; BUT GRACE 
AND TRUTH CAME BY JESUS CHRIST." 
--JOHN 1:17.— 

TO suppose this text to mean that there was no 
divine law governing heaven and earth, 
previous to the giving of the Law at Mt. Sinai 
at the hand of Moses, would be as unreasonable 
as to suppose that neither grace nor truth were 
known throughout the universe until our Lord's 
first advent. 

On the contrary, we may say that, so surely 
as it is true that God himself had no beginning, 
so true it is that truth had no beginning and that 
law had no beginning; for God's righteous will 
has always been the law incumbent upon all his 
creatures. There was a beginning to falsehood, 
and Satan is credited with being "the father 
of lies;" but since God is the Father of truth, it 
had no beginning even as he was never untrue. 
So there was a beginning, to lawlessness or sin, 
and Satan is credited with being the first 
transgressor; but, since God's will or law is the 
standard of righteousness, it follows that it, like 
him, has been from eternity past and will extend 
to eternity future. 

Since the government of God is universal and 
eternal, it follows that there never was a time 
or a place without law, nor a being not subject 
to his law or under its control. 

But God's law was made known at Mt. Sinai, 
through Moses, in a different manner than it 
had previously been made known. 

In the creation of angels God had given them 
such intelligence as could distinguish right from 
wrong. Their minds were so properly balanced 
that right always appeared as right, and wrong 
never could be mistaken for right. This capability 
of discernment, on the part of the creature, 
is said to be God's "image," which, when possessed, 
obviates the necessity of any written law. 
Adam, the first of the human race, was also 
created in God's likeness, and had this law of 
God written in the construction of his being, 
or, as it is sometimes said, written upon his heart. 

The law given by Moses would have been 
entirely out of place in heaven, or in Eden before 
sin entered. With the law of God (briefly 
comprehended in one word, love— to God 
and all his creatures in fellowship with him) 
written in their very beings, how strange it 
would have seemed to the angels if God had 
set up in heaven the Mosaic law tables or 
copies of them. Of what service could such 



a statement of the law of God be to such beings, 
who already had a much higher conception 
of it? And such a presentation to Adam 
in Eden before his fall would have been similarly 
useless; and it was not done. 

But why was the Law given by Moses? Why 
about 2500 years after the fall of Adam into 
sin and death? Why at Mt. Sinai? Why to 
the nation of Israel, and not to all nations or 
any other nation? Why was it written upon 
stones? Why that departure from the previous 
method of expressing it? 

R1723: page 340 

The mere reading of these questions, and a 
reflection upon the facts upon which they rest, 
should relieve the mind of many inconsistencies 
and prepare it for the answer to them all. 

Father Adam, having violated the law of 
God— written in his being— had passed under 
its sentence— death. And this death-sentence 
had affected him mentally and morally, as well 
as physically: and thus began the effacement 
from his heart of that power of discerning or 
intuitively knowing right from wrong. The 
fallen conditions favored the cultivation of selfishness, 
and exalted selfishness to be the rule 
of life, instead of love, as in God's original 
creation. 

The more selfishness came in and gained control, 
the more the law of love was erased from 
Adam's heart. And the fall continued naturally 
from parent to child as years rolled on, until, 
in Moses' day, it is safe to say that, with the 
majority of the race, the original law was almost 
gone. A general picture of the race aside 
from Israel is given by the Apostle with an account 
of just what led to such a dreadful condition. 
-See Rom. 1:21-32. 

God chose or elected to give the law on tables 
of stone to the descendants of his "friend," 
Abraham, according to a promise made to him, 
that he would specially use and bless his posterity. 
But, as though to insure men that the 
Hebrews were not naturally superior to other 
men, God permitted them to go for centuries 
into slavery to the Egyptians, then the greatest 
nation of earth. 

From this we conclude that the Law given 
at Sinai was given because the original law, expressed 
in Adam's nature twenty-five centuries 
previous, had become almost extinct and unintelligible. 
It was given to a chosen people, at 
the hands of a specially chosen leader. 

It could not have been re-written upon their 



hearts, because that would have implied the restoration 

of that nation to Edenic perfection; 

and that was impossible because the penalty under 

which that perfection was lost was death, 

and it still rested upon Israel and upon all men, 

and would continue until a ransom could be 

found, for Adam,— and hence for all who lost 

life in him. 

The best way to express the law of love to 
those who do not possess the spirit of love, or 
mental likeness of God, is as God indicated it 
in the ten commandments written in stone,— 
Thou shalt, and Thou shalt not. 

This brings us to the question, Why did God 
give the law on tables of stone? Why did he 
not wait until the due time to send his Son to 
be our ransom-price, and then, after he had 
redeemed or purchased all from the sentence 
of death, begin the work of "restitution of all 
things" (Acts 3:21)— the re- writing of the original 
law in the human heart? 

The Apostle answers this important question. 
He tells us that when God told Abraham that 
he would bless all nations through his seed, he 
referred not to all of his offspring, but to Christ 

R1724: page 340 

Jesus, who, according to the flesh, would be 
born of Abraham's descendants; and that for 
Christ he would select a "bride" or companion, 
of many members, but all of one spirit with 
him,— to be joined with him in the sufferings 
incidental to sympathy and obedience and, when 
complete, to be perfected with him in glory and 
to share with him the work of blessing all the 
families of earth. (Gal. 3:16,29; 1 Pet. 1:11; 
Rom. 8:17,18.) He tells us that the due time 
for Christ to come and redeem the world must 
be before the selection of his "bride;" because 
she must be redeemed before she could be 
called or chosen. But as a long interval lay between 
the promise to Abraham and the "due 
time" for God to send his Son to redeem men, 
God purposed a work with Abraham's natural 
children, which would fill the interim between 
then and the coming of Christ Jesus, the real 
"seed of Abraham" according to the divine 
intention. 

This covenant which the Lord proposed 
with Israel, Abraham's natural children, would 
do them great good, even though they might 
thereby pass through some very severe experiences; 
it would not only keep them from sinking 
lower into degradation and losing the image 
of God as completely as some other nations; 



but in a few cases it might even make the original 
law more discernible. And not only so, 
but this Law given to Israel would be to 
some extent a standard before the world; and 

R1724: page 341 

thus Abraham's natural seed might lift up a 
standard to the people and to a slight extent 
bless all nations, by calling a halt in the downward 
course and by reviving in all to some degree 
the dying influence of the original law of 
conscience. 

Of this covenant the Apostle declares, The 
Law "was added [to the Abrahamic Covenant] 
because of transgressions [because sin was spreading 
and men were degrading very rapidly], till 
the [promised] Seed should come [until Christ 
came (not only Christ Jesus, the Head, but also 
the Church his body) to do the real work, the time 
for which had come] to whom the [Abrahamic 
Covenant] promise was made." "For the Law 
made nothing perfect:" and, moreover, "the 
Law which was [given] 430 years after [the Covenant 
made with Abraham] can not disannul [or 
in any manner change the terms and conditions 
of that covenant], that it should make the promise 
of none effect."--Gal. 3:19,17; Heb. 7:19. 

But this covenant which God made with Israel 
was something more than even they could realize. 
His dealings with them were typical of his dealings 
future from their day. Their Sin-offerings, 
for instance, typically took away their sins, and 
brought reconciliation to God for a year at a 
time to the nation; but, as the Apostle says, 
those sacrifices could not really cancel sin.— 
"The blood [death] of bulls and goats can 
never take away sin." It was man that had 
sinned, and man that had been sentenced to 
death, and the death of the animal could at 
most only typify the death of the man Christ 
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all. (Heb. 10: 1-10; 
1 Tim. 2:5,6.) And not only their 
sacrifices, but God's every dealing with that 
nation, seems to have a typical lesson, the reality 
of which reaches down either to the Gospel 
age or beyond into the Millennial age. From 
what we have shown foregoing respecting the 
divine law, which establishes the lines of right 
and wrong upon every question, and which, 
like its Author, is from everlasting to everlasting 
the same unalterable law, we trust that our 
readers see clearly that the giving of the Law 
at Sinai had a special, peculiar significance of 
its own, incidental to the people to whom it 
was given. 



THE LAW GIVEN AT SINAI. 



There was more done at Mt. Sinai than is 
generally supposed. Not only was a Law written 
upon tables of stone given there, but a 
Covenant based upon that Law was there entered 
into between God on the one part, represented 
by that Law, and Israel on the other part,— 
Moses being the Mediator of the Law Covenant. 

The Covenant was the important thing! God, 
who had recognized their father Abraham and 
made a covenant with him, for the fulfilment of 
which they had waited for centuries, had finally 
recognized them as Abraham's children, had 
brought them out of Egyptian bondage with 
wonderful evidences of his favor, and had now 
brought them in their journeys by a special leading 
to Mt. Sinai, and made a covenant with them. 

It was with hearts leaping with the joy of 
great anticipation that Israel accepted the proposal 
to become God's covenant people. It 
does not seem to have occurred to them, however, 
that theirs was a different covenant from 
the one made with Abraham. 

Great confusion of thought has resulted from 
a failure to notice the point just made,— 
namely, that the transaction at Sinai was important, 
not because God began there to have a 
law over his creatures, for we have seen that 
God's empire never was without a law; but it 
was important because there God made a covenant 
with Israel according to the terms of which 
they were no longer to be treated as sinners, 
but to be accepted as God's servants, if faithful 
to the requirements of that covenant. And the 
Law written upon tables of stone represented 
that covenant, because every blessing under that 
covenant was made dependent upon absolute 
obedience to that Law.-Exod. 19:7,8; 34:28. 

Hence in speaking of their covenant it became 
customary to think and speak of the Law 
upon which everything depended. Thus throughout 
the New Testament, when speaking of that 
covenant, the Apostle often calls it "the Law," 
leaving the word "covenant" to be understood. 
Yet in every instance a glance at the language and 
the context shows unquestionably that the Law 
Covenant is meant and not merely the written 
law. For instance, the expression, "The Law 

R1724: page 342 

made nothing perfect," could not refer to the law 



alone; for laws never make anything perfect: 
they merely show the perfect requirements. 
The Law on tables of stone showed Israel God's 
requirements, but it remained for the covenant 
to try to make the people perfect by promising 
blessings for obedience and curses for disobedience 
of the law. And this the Law Covenant 
failed to do: it made nothing perfect. It did 
serve to restrain sin and to show men some of 
their shortcomings, but it could not lift any out 
of the mire of sin and out of the horrible pit 
of death. It could not give life: it merely left 
Israel under sentence of death, as they were before 
it was given, but additionally bounden by 
it as a national contract. However, it was only 
a typical covenant and its mediator was only a 
type of the one mediator between God and men; 
and the blood of that covenant merely typified 
the blood of the New Covenant. 

God's covenant with Abraham was not hampered 
with a law. It applied as soon as 
Abraham entered Canaan,— "In thy seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 
The seed was promised and was sure, and so 
was the blessing. But not so the Law Covenant, 
made four centuries afterward with the fleshly 
seed of Abraham. The blessing which it promised 
was conditioned on obedience to a code of 
laws then given them. It said, "The man that 
doeth these things shall live by them."— Rom. 10:5; 
Lev. 18:5. 

Nor did it seem to occur to Israel that they 
might be unable to obey the Law, perfectly. 
They promptly accepted the terms of the covenant 
(Exod. 19:8; Deut. 27:11-26), little realizing 
that it was a covenant "unto death" 
(Rom. 7:10), and not unto life, because of their 
inability to perfectly obey its just requirements. 
Its promise of life was on terms easy enough for 
perfect men, but impossible for fallen men; but, 
having agreed to the terms, they were bound to 
them. Thus the Law Covenant "slew them," 
or took from them the very hope of life it had 
helped to enkindle. (Rom. 7:9-1 1.) Nevertheless, 
it served them well as a servant to bring 
them to Christ. When Christ came and magnified 
it and made it honorable,* it began to be 
manifest that none before him had ever fully 
appreciated or obeyed it; and, thus convinced of 
their own inability to secure eternal life by the 
terms of the Mt. Sinai Covenant, the proffered 
righteousness of Christ under a New Covenant 
of which Christ became the Mediator, and which 
New Covenant he sealed or made binding by 
his own blood [death], began to be seen by 
those of teachable mind as the only hope of life 



everlasting. So the Law Covenant made nothing 
perfect. (Heb. 7:19.) In the fullest sense, 
no one ever kept it but the perfect man, Christ 
Jesus (Rom. 3:23); for it is the full measure of 
a perfect man's ability. 

The mind is cleared of much difficulty when 
it is discovered that statements that Christ had 
blotted out the Law, "nailing it to his cross" 
(Col. 2:14), and that "Christ is the end of the 
Law for righteousness to every one that believeth" 
(Rom. 10:4), and similar passages, do not 
mean that the divine law of the universe, forbidding 
sin, ceased at the cross. That law has 
been over men and angels and all others of God's 
intelligent creatures since they came into existence, 
and it will never cease. All is plain when 
in every text the word covenant is supplied, as it 
was evidently understood by those addressed. 

That the Ten Commandments were the basis 
of the covenant made with Israel at Sinai is 
clearly attested by Scripture. "And he [Moses] 
was there with the Lord forty days and forty 
nights. And he wrote upon the tables the words 
of the covenant, the Ten Commandments." 
(Exod. 34:28.) "And he declared unto you 
his covenant which he commanded you to perform, 
even the Ten Commandments, and he 
wrote them upon two tables of stone."— Deut. 4: 13,14; 
9:9,11,15. 



*See our issue of Nov. 1, '92. 

R1725: page 342 

REDEEMED FROM THE CURSE OF THE LAW 
COVENANT. 



It has escaped the attention of many, that 
while Israelites had many advantages every way 
under their Law Covenant (Rom. 3:1,2), yet 
each one who failed to meet all the requirements 
of that Law Covenant came under a curse, or 
sentence, not upon others. Thus it is written, 
"Cursed is every one [every Israelite] that continueth 
not in all the words of the Law [Covenant] 

R1725: page 343 

to do them."-Gal. 3:10; Deut. 27:26. 

The Apostle shows that this curse was only 
upon those under that covenant, saying, "Whatsoever 
the Law [Covenant] saith, it saith to 



them that are under the Law [Covenant]." 
(Rom. 3:19.) Moses also declared the same. 
(See Deut. 5:2,3-) And, indeed, no other 
arrangement would have been just; for the blessings 
of that covenant and its promises of life 
were only to the one nation. (Rom. 9:4.) 
How, then, could its curse extend beyond the 
nation which enjoyed its favors and privileges? 

The blessings of that Law Covenant were 
earthly, and such also were its curses: with 
one exception, noted below, neither related 
to the everlasting future. The future had already 
been settled for them and for all the race 
of Adam, in the death-sentence. Nothing short 
of the ransom-price,— the corresponding price, 
which our Lord Jesus gave long afterward,-- 
could settle that original sentence and secure a 
complete release from the sentence of death. 
The sin-offerings of Israel's Day of Atonement 
were not of permanent value, but only for a 
year in advance, and were therefore repeated 
yearly. These blessings and curses of the Law 
Covenant were very particularly explained to 
Israel.-Deut. 28:1-14,15-33-45-58-64-67. 

This Covenant included every member of the 
nation of Israel, so that they shared in common 
the blessings or the curses. There was one provision, 
however, for an individual, namely, that 
the man who would fully obey all of the requirements 
of the Law should live,— be guaranteed 
lasting life. However Israel may have imagined 
it possible for all or for many of the nation to 
thus gain life everlasting, we can see that God 
never had such expectations concerning them. 
He knew from the beginning, what he has 
taught us by experience, as well as by the inspired 
words of the Apostles, that, "By the 
deeds of the Law shall no flesh [i.e., none of 
the fallen race, needing justification] be justified 
in God's sight."— Rom. 3:20. 

"The man Christ Jesus" (1 Tim. 2:5), who 
obeyed the Law absolutely, was the one in the 
divine purpose for whom the provision was made, 
that "He that doeth these things shall live." 
He consequently had a right to life everlasting, 
and therefore might have asked for, and might 
have had, more than twelve legions of angels to 
defend him from those who sought his life. But 
he laid down his life. But the one death, begun 
at Jordan and "finished" three and a half years 
after at Calvary, accomplished two things, -- 
one for Israel only, the other for the whole world. 

Since the Children of Israel, as well as the 
other nations, were Adam's posterity, they, as 
well as others, shared his sentence of death, and 
were redeemed by our Lord's offering of himself 



a sin-offering and corresponding price for Adam 
and those who lost life in Adam. (Rom. 5:12,18.) 
But since Israel alone, and no other nation 
or family or people of earth, had been 
brought under the terms of the Law Covenant 
made with them at Mt. Sinai, therefore, only 
Israelites required to be "redeemed from the 
curse of the Law [Covenant]. "—Gal. 3:13. 

That the "one man," Christ Jesus, could 
justly redeem our race is stated by the Apostle, 
and is clearly evident when we see that all men 
were sentenced in the one man Adam; but how 
could one man redeem the multitudinous nation 
of Israel from the curse of their Law Covenant? 

We answer that there is a point in connection 
with Israel's covenant that few have noticed. It 
is that God dealt with only one man in connection 
with the making of that Law Covenant; 
and that man was Moses, who stood in the position 
of a father to the whole nation, the nation 
being regarded and treated as children under 
age. (Num. 1 1:11-15.) The Lord talked with 
Moses in the mount. The Lord gave the tables 
of the Law to Moses. And Moses spake to the 
people and gave them the Law and bound them 
by the terms of the Law Covenant. 

"Moses alone shall come near the Lord."— 
Exod. 24:2. 

"As the Lord spake to Moses, so did the 
children of Israel."— Num. 5:4. 

"The people cried to Moses, and Moses 
prayed to the Lord."— Num. 1 1:2. 

"God sent Moses his servant."— Psa. 105:26. 

"They envied Moses also in the camp."— 
Psa. 106:16. 

God said "he would destroy them, had not 
Moses his chosen stood before him in the 
breach."-Psa. 106:23. 

R1725: page 344 

"Remember ye the Law of Moses my servant." 
-Mai. 4:4. 

"Moses hath in every city them that preach 
him. "--Acts 15:21. 

"Did not Moses give you the Law?"— 
Christ, Jno. 7:19. 

"What did Moses command you?"— 
Christ, Mark 10:3. 

"One accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye 
trust. "-Christ, Jno. 5:45. 

All Israel were "baptised unto [into] Moses, 
in the cloud and in the sea."— 1 Cor. 10:2. 

"He that despised Moses' Law died without 
mercy."-Heb. 10:28. 

"The Law was given by Moses, but grace and 



truth came by Jesus Christ."— John 1:17. 

So thoroughly was the one man Moses, the 
representative and typical father of the nation 
of Israel, that God could and did propose its 
destruction and the fulfilment of all his engagements 
with Moses' family instead. (Exod. 32:10,31,32.) 
It was thus, as God's representative 
on the one hand, and as Israel's representative 
on the other, that Moses could be and was 
the Mediator of the Law Covenant between 
God and that nation. 

When the man Christ Jesus, by full obedience 
to the Law Covenant, became entitled to life 
everlasting under its provisions, he had the right 
to "Moses' seat," the right to supersede Moses 
as the Lawgiver and representative of that 
nation. Of him Moses bore witness, saying: 
"A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up 
unto you like unto me. Him shall ye hear in 
all things." By fulfilling the requirements of 
the Law Covenant and by his obedience even 
unto death, Christ became the heir of its promise 
of life, and the Mediator of the New Covenant, 
based upon that better and everlasting sacrifice 
for sins, which therefore needed not to be repeated 
yearly, and was effective, not for Israel 
only, but for all the families of earth;— for 
"this man," "the man Christ Jesus, gave himself 
a ransom for all." Hence, this gospel of 
the New Covenant was for the Jew first and also 
for the Greek (or Gentile). Thus the one work 
finished at Calvary did a special work for Israel, 
and also a general work of redemption for the 
world, including Israel, which sealed the New 
Covenant and made it operative for all mankind. 

Thus seen, the expression, "Christ is the end 
[fulfillment] of the Law [Covenant] for righteousness 
[justification] to every one that believeth" 
(Rom. 10:4), can apply only to Jews who by 
faith have accepted Christ and the New Covenant. 
It cannot apply to others— neither to 
those who never were Jews and who consequently 
were never under that Covenant, nor 
to those who still trust in Moses' Covenant and 
who are still vainly seeking life by obedience to 
its provisions, law, etc. 

Israel as a nation is still bound by that covenant 
which they at first supposed would bring 
life, but which experience proved could bring 
them only death, because of the weakness of their 
flesh and their inability to fulfill its requirements 
expressed in its Law of Ten Commandments. 
There is only one door of escape from 
it; viz., Christ and the New Covenant which 
he mediated. God shut them up to this one 
and only hope (Gal. 3:23), and he promises 



that by and by, when the Gospel Church, the 
body of Christ, has been selected, he will open 
their blind eyes and cause them to see Christ in 
his true character— as their Redeemer from sin 
and their deliverer from death and their Covenant 
of death.-Rom. 11:25-27-29. 

Christ "came unto his own [people, the house 
of servants, under the bondage of the Law 
Covenant, offering the worthy ones favor and 
liberty under the New Covenant], and his own 
[people] received him not; but as many as received 
him, to them gave he liberty [privilege] 
to become the sons of God [under the New 
Covenant— with all the proper privileges or 
liberties of sons], even to them that believe on 
his name."— John 1:11,12. 

No wonder, then, that the Apostle so earnestly 
sought to guard the new Gentile converts 
from becoming Jews and seeking life under the 
Law Covenant; by which neither he nor his 
nation had been able to profit. No wonder he 
exhorted them to stand fast in the liberty of 
Christ and his gracious arrangements under the 
New Covenant. 

It was in view of this danger of their losing 
faith in Christ's finished work and trusting for 
salvation to their own efforts to keep the Law 

R1725: page 345 

Covenant by works, that Paul even prohibited 
the circumcision of Gentile converts, although 
he approved of it for Hebrews, to whom it 
was given as a symbol and rite long before the 
Law Covenant was made. Hence the remark 
that "the gospel to the circumcision" was specially 
supervised by Peter, while the gospel to 
the uncircumcised, the Gentiles, was specially 
Paul's mission. (Gal. 2:7,8,14-16.) It will 

R1726: page 345 

be quite a help in the study of the Scriptures to 
observe that the Apostles often refer to themselves 
as having been under the Law Covenant 
and subsequently freed from its bondage, and to 
Gentile converts as not having passed through 
such an experience.— See Gal. 2:17; 3:3,13,14; 
5:5,6,8-10; Eph. 2:11-19. 

FREE FROM THE LAW. 



The ransom was given FOR ALL mankind, but 
its benefits are applicable only to those who believe. 



Thus far the believers are only a few compared 

with the mass of mankind. These have 

escaped from all condemnation of all broken 

laws, while, of the remainder, the world in 

general still continues under the original condemnation, 

and Israelites who have not come 

to Christ and his New Covenant are still condemned 

by Moses' Law Covenant. "He that 

believeth is passed [reckonedly] from death unto 

life" (John 5:24), while "he that believeth 

not is condemned already." (John 3:18.) He 

was condemned six thousand years ago, and, if 

a Jew, he was additionally bounden by the 

Law Covenant, and has not escaped the condemnation 

that is on the world. (Rom. 5:16.) The 

only ones who have escaped this condemnation, 

so long upon all, are referred to by the Apostle 

Paul (Rom. 8:1): "There is, therefore, now no 

condemnation to them which are in Christ 

Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the 

spirit." 

These are the free ones: free from all laws 
and all penalties— free indeed. "If the Son 
shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed."— 
John 8:36. 

But can it be that God has released these entirely 
from both the Law given in Eden and 
that given at Sinai? Just so: being justified 
by the death of Christ, and released from their 
former condemnation, and having received his 
spirit, of love for God and obedience to God, 
so long as they are in Christ they are free: free 
to abide in him, by continued submission to 
his will, the essence of which is LOVE (to God 
and to man). All who come into Christ submit 
themselves to his will and voluntarily make it 
their law; and those who willingly violate this 
law thereby cease to "abide in him" and will 
be "cast forth" (John 15:6) as dead branches. 
Through him our best endeavors to do his will 
are acceptable, and we have thus passed out of 
condemnation to death into justification to life 
so long as we abide under the blood of the 
New Covenant. In no other way could any be 
accepted by God; for the law given in Eden 
was one that required absolutely perfect obedience, 
and that given at Sinai demanded the 
same. And since we know that God could not 
give an imperfect law (Jas. 3:11), and we could 
not fully obey a perfect one, we see the necessity 
for our being freed from all law and accepted 
in the merit of our beloved— Christ. 

Hence we conclude that those in Christ, 
whether they were Jews or Gentiles, are in no 
sense under the Law given at Sinai, graven upon 
stones, termed the "Ten Commandments," 



—neither to the ceremonial attachments relating 
to typical feasts, sacrifices and services.— 
Heb. 9:1. 

THE LAW ON TABLES OF STONE. 



The sanctified IN CHRIST JESUS need no such 
commands. Love to God and men, laid down 
by our Lord and the apostles, is the only rule 
under which the new creature in Christ is 
placed; and it is the very essence of his new 
mind— the spirit or mind of Christ. 

Look singly at the commandments given to 
fleshly Israel, and judge if it would not be useless 
to address such commands to the saints. 

I. "Thou shalt have no other gods beside 
me." What saint would think of such a thing? 

II. "Thou shalt not make unto thee any 
graven image, nor the likeness of any form that 

is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, 
or that is in the water under the earth: 
thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them nor 
serve them; for I. ..am a jealous God, visiting 

R1726: page 346 

the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, 
unto the third and fourth generation of them 
that hate me; and showing mercy unto thousands 
of them that love me and keep my commandments. 
For whom is such a law needful? 
Surely not to the saints, who love the Lord with 
all their heart, soul and strength, and who are 
laying down life itself in his service! 

III. "Thou shalt not take the name of the 
Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not 
hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain." 
Again we remark, Surely none of the saints will 
have any desire to blaspheme or profane* their 
Father's name, but the reverse: they are laying 
down their lives to glorify his name. 

IV. This we will examine last. 

V. "Honor thy father and thy mother: that 
thy days may be long upon the land which the 
Lord thy God giveth thee." This is distinctly 

an earthly promise of the land, while the promise 
to the saints is not long life here but hereafter. 
Those who sacrifice life, lands, etc., 
become, in Christ, heirs to the heavenly promises. 
Having the spirit of Christ, they also delight to 
honor their earthly parents, but especially to 
do the will of their Father in heaven. 

VI. "Thou shalt do no murder." Do not the 
saints delight to bless others and to do good, 



even to those who despitefully use them and 
persecute them? If so, where would be the propriety 
in telling them that they must not murder 
—must not do the thing farthest from their 
desires? It would be a useless command to say 
the least. 

VII. "Thou shalt not commit adultery." 
The sanctified in Christ Jesus, who walk not 
after the flesh, but after the spirit of Christ, 
could not thus wrong others. 

VIII. "Thou shalt not steal." Do the saints 
desire to steal? Do they desire to defraud 
others? Is it not rather their spirit to "labor, 
working with their hands the thing which is good, 
that they may have, to give unto the needy?" 

IX. "Thou shalt not bear false witness 
against thy neighbor." How could one of the 
sanctified in Christ thus injure his neighbor? 
It would be entirely foreign to the spirit of 
Christ— the spirit of truth, and would prove 
that the one who knowingly and willingly bore 
such false testimony had not the spirit of Christ 
and was none of his.— Rom. 8:9. 

X. "Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's 
house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife, 
nor his man-servant, nor his maid-servant, nor 
his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is thy 
neighbor's." Covetousness is wholly foreign 
to the spirit of Christ; and to the extent that 

the spirit of Christ dwells richly in his members 
they will be free from covetousness. The spirit 
of sacrifice having in the saints taken the place 
of self-love, covetousness is forestalled. 

The preface in Exod. 20:2 shows that these 
Ten Commandments were given only to Israel 
after the flesh: "I am the Lord thy God, which 
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of 
the house of bondage." So, too, in repeating 
them again, Moses declares (Deut. 5:1-5): 
"Hear, O Israel, the statutes and judgments 
which I speak in your ears THIS DAY, that ye 
may learn them and observe to do them. The 
Lord our God made not this covenant with our 
fathers, but with US, even us who are all of us 
here alive this day. The Lord spake with you 
face to face— saying," etc., etc.— See also Ezek. 20:10-13; 
Neh. 9:12-14. 

All these commands were proper and suitable 
enough for Israel. (Deut. 5:2,3,5-21.) They 
would have been suitable for any fallen man, 
but are surely inappropriate to any new creature 
in Christ, whose very nature, as a new creature, 
is to do right, yet who, because of the weakness 
of the flesh, cannot do perfectly though he desire 
and endeavor to do so. But though we 
can easily keep the outward letter of this Law, 



yet under our Lord's teachings we see that to 

keep it in full really means more than its surface 

indicates: that he who hates a "brother" 

has the murder spirit, and is a murderer; 

he that desires to commit adultery, lacking 

only the opportunity, is in heart an adulterer 

(Matt. 5:28); and he who loves and serves 

money and spends time and talent for it, more 

than in God's service, is an idolater. Our Redeemer's 

teaching regarding the obligations implied 

by the Law is— "Thou shalt love the Lord 

thy God with all thy heart, all thy mind, all 

thy soul and all thy strength, and thou shalt 



*See "Taking God's Name in Vain," May 15, '93. 

R1726: page 347 

love thy neighbor as thyself." From this we 
see that even we who are in Christ, with all our 
holy desires and aims, could not keep perfectly 
the spirit of that Law, according to this our Master's 
interpretation of it; because our new mind 
is hindered by the weakness of the sin-degraded 
and marred earthen vessel— the flesh. We find 
it impossible to rid ourselves entirely of inherited 
selfishness, so as to be able to love our neighbor 
as ourselves, or even to love and serve God with 
all our hearts and talents, much as our new 
minds might choose and seek to obey this, the 
spirit of the Law. It is only because we are 
dealt with by God according to the conditions 
of the New Covenant of grace in Christ that 
the Apostle could say, our best heart-endeavors 
to fulfill this law of love are accepted as a perfect 
fulfilment; and all we lack is continually 
compensated for out of the fulness of Christ, 
which is imputed to us. "Ye are not under the 
Law, but under grace"— favor. (Rom. 6: 14.) 
You are not acceptable with God because there 
is no fault in you, but because favor covers 
your unwilling imperfections of thought, word 
and deed. 

THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT OF ISRAEL'S 
COVENANT. 



"Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six 
days shalt thou labor, and do all thy work; but the 
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it 
thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy 
daughter, thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thy 



cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates: for in six 

R1727: page 347 

days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all 
that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore 
the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it." 

This command merely enjoins idleness on the 
seventh day of each week. It does not say to 
cease from ordinary work and engage in religious 
work, as many of its advocates seem to 
suppose; but, on the contrary, it prohibits all 
kinds of work. Many who think themselves 
bound by this command neither rest on the 
seventh day nor on the first day of the week, 
which, without orders, they make an effort to 
keep instead of the seventh day, which the Law 
appointed for those under it. On the contrary, 
to very many the first day is as busy a day as any. 
The ruling under the Law was that any one who 
even picked up sticks or kindled a fire was a 
violator of this command, and must be put to 
death. (Num. 15:32-36.) How many of those 
who claim to keep this commandment do far 
more work in the way of cooking, etc.— they, 
their sons, and their daughters, their men-servants 
and maid-servants? (See Exod. 35:3.) 
If that law is now in force and has by any 
means extended beyond the Israelites (on whom 
alone it was put), so as to cover Christians, 
then every Christian violates it repeatedly, and 
is deserving of death for each offense; for "they 
that violated Moses' Law died without mercy." 
-Heb. 10:20. 

But though our views on this subject differ 
widely from those of most Christian people, we 
are very glad that one day of each week is set 
apart for rest from business, without regard to 
which of the seven days is thus observed, or by 
what law or lawgiver it was originally appointed. 
We greatly enjoy the day, and think it not only 
a blessing to those who use it for worship and 
study, but also for those who use it merely as a 
day of rest and recreation from toil, to enjoy 
the beauties of nature, or to visit with their 
friends and families as they cannot do on other 
days. And we are specially pleased that the 
day set apart by the government under which 
we live is the First Day of the week, because of 
the same blessed memories and associations 
which gave that day a special sacredness to the 
Church in the days of the apostles. 

But for two reasons we totally dissent from 
the idea of the Sabbath common to the majority 
of Christian people. First, Because if their 
claim that we are under the Law of which the 



Sabbath day observance was a part be true, the 

day they keep as a Sabbath is not the day mentioned 

in that command. They observe the 

first day of the week, while the command designated 

the seventh day. If the Fourth Commandment 

be binding at all, it, as well as the 

other commandments, is binding as stated, and 

cannot be changed; and Second, If bound to 

the Law, the keeping of the Sabbath in any 

other than the strict way in which its keeping 

was therein prescribed is inconsistent. If the 

command be binding upon us, the manner of its 

observance, in its every minutia, is no less binding 

R1727: page 348 

If the strict significance of it has passed 
away, surely whatever destroyed its strict 
interpretation destroyed the command entirely. 
Therefore, if observed at all, it should be observed 
with all its former strictness, and it should 
be observed on the day then prescribed and observed. 
The only proper reason for the less strict 
observance of the day, or for the substitution of 
another day than the one originally designated, 
would be an order from God himself to that effect. 
Men have no right to alter or in anywise amend 
God's laws: no, not if an angel from heaven 
sanction the change. 

But God did not change that Law. It stands 
exactly as it was given, and applies only to those 
to whom it was given. If, as it is claimed by some, 
it was altered in any degree, or made applicable 
to any other people than the people of Israel, 
the evidence should be no less clear and positive 
than that of its original giving at Mt. Sinai; 
but no such evidence of its change to another 
day, or to another people, or of any relaxation 
of its original severity, exists. 

Neither did our Lord or the apostles ever authorize 
any such change; they declared that the 
Jewish Law (which included the command relative 
to the seventh day) was superseded by the 
new and more comprehensive law of the New Covenant 
thereafter in operation toward all who accepted 
Christ. The apostles used the seventh day 
as a time for preaching Christ, as they used every 
day in the week, and especially because on that 
day the Jews, their most hopeful hearers, met 
for worship and study. But the apostles nowhere 
recognized the seventh-day Sabbath as a day of 
rest, as the Jewish Law Covenant had enforced it. 
On the contrary, they taught (Rom. 14:5-8) 
that any and all days are acceptable for good 
works done in the service of God and for the 
benefit of fellow men.-Matt. 12:10,12. 



Some claim that the (first day) Christian Sabbath 
was introduced by an edict of one of the popes. 
But this is a mistake: it had its start in the fact 
that it was on the first day of the week that our 
Lord arose from the dead; and that upon that day 
and evening he met with his disciples, and expounded 
unto them the Scriptures, until their 
hearts burned within them. What wonder that, 
without any command to do so, they thereafter 
loved to meet together frequently on that day, 
to repeat the simple meal, the giving of thanks 
and the breaking of bread; recounting one to 
the other the gracious promises of God through 
the prophets, and the explanations of some of 
these which the Lord had given in person, and 
seeking yet fuller understanding of the same 
under the leading of the holy Spirit (Christ's 
representative), their guide into all truth as it 
became due. 

For a time both days were observed by 
Christians, the seventh day from Jewish custom 
(and because it furnished the best opportunity 
for reaching devout Hebrews, the class most 
likely to be interested in the gospel) and the 
first day in commemoration of our Lord's resurrection. 
Ignatius, A.D. 75, in his writings 

mentions some approvingly as "no longer Sabbathizing, 
but living in observance of the Lord's-day, 
on which also our life sprang up again." 

The earliest record found in Scripture of the 
use of the name "Lord's-day" for the first day 
of the week is in Rev. 1:10 (A.D. 96). And, 
says The Encyclopaedia Britannica (first-class 
authority), "by that name it is almost invariably 
referred to by all writers of the century immediately 
succeeding apostolic times. ...The 
first writer who mentions the name of Sunday 
is Justin Martyr: this designation of the first 
day of the week, which is of heathen origin, 
had come into general use in the Roman world 
shortly before Justin wrote. [Second century 
A.D.]. ..As long as the Jewish-Christian 
element continued to have any prominence or 
influence in the Church a tendency more or 
less strong to observe Sabbath as well as Sunday 
would of course prevail. ...The earliest recognition 
of the observance of Sunday as a legal 
duty is a Constitution of (the Emperor) Constantine, 
321 A.D., enacting that all courts of justice, 
inhabitants of towns and workshops were to be 
at rest on Sunday, with an exception in favor of 
those engaged in agricultural labor." 

It is, therefore, a misstatement to say that 
Pope Gregory or any other Pope first by decree 
instituted Sunday or the Lord's-day as taking 
the place of the Jewish seventh-day Sabbath. 



The Decretals of Gregory do enjoin 
Sunday-keeping, saying, "We decree that all 

R1727: page 349 

Sundays be observed, from vespers to vespers, 
and that all unlawful work be abstained from, 
so that in them trading or legal proceedings be 
not carried on." But it will be noted that the 
Emperor Constantine's decree was in 321 A.D., 
while Gregory did not become a pope until 590 
A.D. And Gregory refers to the fact that the 
work prohibited was already unlawful: hence 
his decree is merely confirmatory of the laws of 
Constantine and other civil rulers preceding 
him. 

The Roman Catholic church does not now, 
and, so far as we know, never did insist upon a 
strict observance of Sunday. In Catholic 
countries to-day both priests and people attend 
service in the forenoon, and give up the afternoon 
to various forms of pleasure— in beer 
gardens, parks, etc. 

INFLUENCE OF THE LAW AMONG EARLY 
CHRISTIANS. 



Many Christians do not realize the conditions 
which existed in the Church in the beginning 
of the Gospel age. The Jews as a nation had 
been typically justified by typical sacrifices, from 
the Adamic curse, or condemnation, and put 
under the Law given at Sinai, as a covenant 
under which, if obedient, they were to have life. 
But the Law proved valueless to them so far as 
giving them the hoped-for life was concerned, 
though it taught them some good lessons. All 
the other nations, known as Gentiles (heathens), 
were still under the original condemnation of 
Eden. Consequently, when our Lord came, 
both Jews and Gentiles were under condemnation 
to death,— the Jew by the Law from which 
he had expected so much, but with which he 
was unable to comply, because of the flesh; and 
the Gentile by the original sentence upon father 
Adam, from which he had in no sense escaped, 
not even typically as the Jew had. But the Redeemer 
whom God provided was sufficient for 
both; for in the one sacrifice of himself he accomplished 
the redemption of both, and reconciled 
both unto God in one body by the cross. 
-Eph. 2:16. 

The Jewish converts (and they composed the 
majority of the early Church) could scarcely 



realize the greatness of the change from the 
Law Covenant to the New Covenant in Christ, 
and were continually adding Christ's teachings 
and his law of love to their Mosaic Law, thus 
adding to their already heavy burden, instead of 
accepting the sacrificial death of Christ as the 
atonement for their sins under the Law, and as 
the end of the condemnation of that Law Covenant. 
(Rom. 10:4; 3:20,28.) It is not surprising 
when we remember their early prejudices 

R1728: page 349 

in favor of the Law, that the spirit of truth was 
able to guide them but slowly into the full truth 
on the subject. Even the Apostles were slow 
to learn, and we find Peter so slow to follow 
the lead of the spirit, that he had to be taught 
by a special vision that Gentiles needed no longer 
to become Jews and to conform to the Law of 
Moses before they could share divine favor, but 
that they had access to God through Christ 
and the "New Covenant in [instituted by reason 
of] his blood" (Luke 22:20), regardless 
of the Law Covenant. 

Some complained to the other apostles and 
brethren about Paul's recognition of Gentiles, 
and this brought the question before them all, 
and led to an investigation of God's dealings 
in the matter. "When they heard these things 
they held their peace and glorified God, saying: 
Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance 
unto life. "--Acts 11:18. 

Paul, most easily led of the spirit, got clear 
views on the subjects earliest, and had to oppose 
others among the apostles less strong and 
less spiritually clear-sighted. (Gal. 2:11.) 
Jerusalem was long considered the center of the 
Christian religion, the largest number and 
oldest believers and apostles living there; and 
as Paul's views of the changed condition of 
things became clearer and clearer, and he did 
not hesitate to preach boldly what he saw to be 
dispensational truth, some prejudiced ones desired 
to know whether the brethren at Jerusalem 
would concur in the advanced views; and Paul 
and Barnabas and others went up to Jerusalem 
to lay the matter before them and to bring 
back a report. A great debate and examination 
of the question on all sides followed. 
Peter and James, finally agreeing with Paul, influenced 
the entire council. Peter reminded 
them of God's wonderful dealing with Cornelius, 

R1728: page 350 



who was justified and made acceptable 
to God through faith in Christ, and not 
through keeping the Law, and urged, "Now, 
therefore, why tempt ye God, to put a yoke 
[Moses' Law] upon the neck of the disciples 
which neither our fathers nor we were able to 
bear?" James said, "My sentence is that we 
trouble not them which from among the Gentiles 
are turned to God." Then the council 
so decided, and sent a written message to the 
confused Gentile believers, saying:— 

"We have heard that certain ones who went 
out from us [here] have troubled you with 
words subverting your souls [destroying your 
faith], saying, 'Be circumcised and keep the 
Law'— to whom we gave no such commandment. 
...It seemed good to the Holy Spirit 
and to us to lay upon you no greater burden 
than these necessary things: That ye abstain 
from meats offered to idols, and from blood, 
and from things strangled, and from fornication." 
(Acts 15:9-29.) And even these suggestions 
were given as advice, and not as so much 
of the Mosaic Law, with penalties attached. 

THE LAW COVENANT A MINISTRATION OF 
DEATH. 



The Apostle Paul's epistle to the Galatians 
(who had been Gentiles) was written expressly 
to counteract the influence of the Judaizing 
teachers who mingled with the believers of Galatia 
and endeavored to subvert the true faith in 
Christ by pointing them away from the cross 
of Christ, to a hope of acceptance with God by 
keeping the Law of Moses in connection with 
faith in Christ: thus making the New Covenant 
merely an addition to the Law Covenant and not 
instead of it. This he calls "another gospel," yet 
really not another, for there can be but one; 
hence it was a perversion of the real gospel. 
(Gal. 1:7-9.) And here Paul indicates that he 
knew that the apostles at Jerusalem had at first 
only a mixed gospel, and that he went up to 
see them on the occasion mentioned in Acts 15:4, 
by revelation, to communicate to them 
that fuller, purer, unmixed gospel, which he already 
had been able to receive, and which he 
had been teaching; and, he says, he communicated 
it to them privately, lest their reputation 
should hinder them from receiving the truth— 
and even then some false brethren, spies, sought 
to compel Titus (a Greek) to be circumcised. 
Gal. 2:2-5. 



It is further along in this same epistle that 
Paul tells of Peter's vacillation on the question 
of the Law (chap. 2:1 1-16) and his words of 
reproof to Peter— We who are Jews by nature, 
knowing that a man is not justified by the 
works of the Law, but on account of faith in 
Christ, even we have believed in Christ that we 
might be justified by faith in Christ, and not 
by obedience to the Law. Why, then, should 
we attempt to fetter others, or longer bind ourselves, 
by that which has served its purpose, 
in bringing us to Christ and the New Covenant? 

O foolish Galatians! who has deluded you? 
As many as are trusting to obedience to the 
Law are under its condemnation or curse. 
"Christ hath redeemed us [Israelites] from the 
curse of the Law, that the blessing of Abraham 
might come to the Gentiles through Christ 
Jesus, and that we [Israelites] might receive the 
promise of the spirit through faith." And surely 
God's Covenant with Abraham, made four 
hundred and thirty years before the Law was 
given, cannot be annulled by that Law.— 
Gal. 3:1,10,13,17. 

Next, the Apostle answers a supposed inquiry 
as to what was the object of the Law, and why 
it was given, if not necessary to the attainment 
of the Abrahamic promises. He says the Law 
was added because of sin, to manifest sin in its 
true light— that sin might be seen to be a great 
and deep-seated malady. The law was a pedagogue 
or servant, to bring to Christ all Israelites 
who desired to learn the true way of life.— 
Gal. 3:24; Matt. 11:28-30. 

As children are under nursery laws and subject 
to teachers until an appointed time, so were 
we (Israelites) under the Law, and treated as servants 
rather than as sons. We were kept under 
restraints, though we were the heirs through 
whom, according to the promise, others were 
to be blessed. But in the fulness of time God 
sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under 
the Law, to redeem them that were under the 
Law that we (Israelites), being liberated, might 
receive the adoption of sons. And so also, 

R1728: page 351 

"because ye [who were not under the Law, but 
were Gentiles or heathens] are [also now] sons, 
[therefore] God hath sent forth the Spirit of 
his Son into your hearts." We were sons under 
tutelage, and you were aliens, foreigners 
and strangers, but now you and we, who are 
accepted of God in Christ, are fully received 
into sonship and heirship, and neither of us is 



subject to the Law.— Gal. 4:1-7. 

Tell me, you that desire to be under the 
Law Covenant, Do you not understand what 
it is? It is a bondage, as allegorically shown 
in Abraham's two sons. Abraham, here, is a 
figure of God; and Sarah, the real wife, is a 
figure of the real covenant of blessing, out of 
which the Christ should come as heir of all, to 
bless the world. For a long time Sarah was 
barren; so, too, for a long time the original 
Covenant of God (made with Abraham: In 
thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be 
blessed) brought forth no fruit— until Christ 
Jesus. Hagar, the servant of Sarah, in the 
meantime was treated as Sarah's representative, 
and her son as the representative of Sarah's 
son. Hagar represented the Law Covenant, 
and fleshly Israel was represented by her child, 
Ishmael. For the time they represented the 
true Covenant and the true seed of blessing, 
though they were always really servants— child, 
as well as mother. When the true son of the 
real wife, the heir, was born, it was manifest 
that the son of the bondwoman was not the 
heir of promise. And to show typically that 
the Law Covenant was not to have any rule 
over the spiritual sons of God, Hagar was not 
allowed to become the governess of Isaac, but 
in his interest was dismissed entirely.— Gal. 4:21-31; 
Gen. 21:10. 

The Apostle's argument, based on this allegory, 
is, that we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the 
seed to whom the promise was made; we are 
not children of the bondwoman, the Law Covenant, 
but children of the original, Abrahamic 
Covenant, born free from the slavery and conditions 
of the Law Covenant. And not only so 
born, but the Law is entirely put away from us, 
and has nothing whatever to do with us. "Stand 
fast, therefore, in the liberty wherewith Christ 
hath made us free, and be not entangled again 
with the yoke of bondage"— the Law Covenant. 
"If ye be led of the spirit, ye are not under the 
Law [Covenant]. "-Gal. 5:1,18. 

But Paul asks— "Shall we continue in sin [wilfully], 
because we are not under the Law [Covenant]?" 
(Rom. 6:15.) Shall we take advantage 
of our liberty to break away into more sin— because 
we are sons and heirs, and no longer commanded 
as servants.— Thou shalt, and thou shalt 
not? No, no; as sons, begotten of the spirit, 
partakers of the spirit of holiness, the spirit of 
the truth, we delight to do our Father's will; and 
the law of obedience to his will is deeply engraven 
upon our hearts. (Heb. 8:10; 10:15,16.) 
We gladly sacrifice our all, even our 



lives, in opposing sin and error, and in forwarding 
righteousness and truth; hence we 
answer emphatically, "God forbid." We will 
not take advantage of our liberty from the 
Jewish Law Covenant, to commit sin. But if 
any man should think to do so, let him remember 
that only those led by the spirit of God are 
the sons of God.— Rom. 8:14. 

We are not under the Law Covenant, but under 
divine favor expressed in the New Covenant, 
sealed by Christ's blood (Rom. 6:14); 
and not only so, but being justified and reconciled 
to God under the New Covenant, we have 
gone further and accepted the "high calling," 
the "heavenly calling," and consecrated our 
justified lives— "even unto death,"— and been 
accepted as members of the body of Christ and 
are thus heirs of the Abrahamic Covenant. 
(Gal. 3:29.) Hence, so far from desiring to use 
our liberty to indulge in sin, we, having God's 
spirit, detest sin and love righteousness and 
delight ourselves in the "law of Christ"— love. 
Christ's word is our law— not a law of bondage, 
but of liberty. Whoso looketh into the perfect 

R1729: page 351 

law of liberty and continueth therein [free], 
being not a forgetful hearer, but one who exercises 
his liberty, this man shall be truly blessed 
thereby. Such fulfil the royal law of the New 
Covenant, the law of love.— Jas. 1:25. 

THE LAW OF THE NEW COVENANT. 



If we have proved that the Ten Commandments 
were given to Israel, and to Israel only, 
and that as the basis of a Covenant made only 

R1729: page 352 

with that nation,— and if we have shown that 
the other nations of the world have been left 
by God without any law except such traces as 
yet remain of the original law, written in the 
nature of the first perfect man, who was created 
in God's image,— and that to the Church of the 
New Covenant our Lord gave the Law of Love 
as the basis of that New Covenant, then we have 
proved that the Ten Commandments should not 
be recognized by the Gospel Church, the Church 
of the New Covenant, except as they are in harmony 
with the Law of the New Covenant— Love. 
The Mediator of the New Covenant has a 



standard for all who accept him, as Moses, the 

Mediator of the Law Covenant, had ten commands 

for a standard. The Law of God is the 

standard of the New Covenant. It is the same 

law that was expressed in the ten commandments, 

but a more refined and more comprehensive statement 

of that law, designed for a more advanced 

class. The people put under the Law Covenant 

and baptised unto Moses were a household of servants, 

while the people of the New Covenant are 

a household of God's sons. Thus we read, 

"Moses verily was faithful as a servant over all 

his house [of servants], but Christ [was faithful] as 

a son over his own house [of sons], whose house 

are we, if...."— Heb. 3:6. 

The expression of the divine law given at 
Sinai was exactly suited to the house of servants 
to whom it was given: it was a series of instructions, 
—Thou shalt, and Thou shalt not. 
The expression of the law of the New Covenant 
is very different, and implies much more liberty. 
It simply tells those who are God's sons, and 
who therefore are begotten of his spirit, You may 
do or say anything in harmony with love. Pure 
love for God will lead not only to obedience to 
his will, but to the study of his will, in his Word. 
Pure love governing our conduct toward our 
fellow-men and the lower animals will seldom 
work to their injury. It will come more and 
more under the guidance of the Lord's Word, 
and thus we will be perfected in love. But from 
the first it is a safe law: it is a "law of liberty," 
in that it requires us merely to act out, according 
to our own judgments, that which we voluntarily 
consecrate ourselves to do, our own wishes as 
new creatures. 

Since this New Covenant is made only with 
those whose desires are changed, who no longer 
love sin but are seeking escape from it as well as 
from its penalty, who now love God and his 
righteousness,— it would be manifestly improper 
to give these "sons of God" the statement of 
God's Law or will in the same form that it was 
expressed to the house of "servants." The sons 
are granted a law of liberty, the servants a law 
of bondage. The servants were told what they 
might and might not do; because they were servants, 
not sons, not begotten of the Father's spirit; 
hence they needed positive commands, restraints 
and penalties. This is forcibly expressed by the 
Apostle in his exposition of this very subject in 
Galatians 3. 

How strange you would think it if we were to 
say, We feel it our duty to tell the readers of this 
journal who are saints, that they should not 
make or worship images, that they should not 



blaspheme God's name, that they should not 
steal from their neighbors, that they should not 
murder their neighbors, nor slander them, nor 
bear false witness against them. The intelligent 
and consecrated reader would feel offended, and 
that justly. He would say, The Editor has a 
very low opinion of his readers, or he would not 
so address them. 

Just so it would be strange indeed if God or 
Christ had given the Ten Commandments to the 
Gospel Church as the basis of the New Covenant. 
And the truly consecrated and spirit-of-love-begotten 
ones, would have been justified in 
questioning the wisdom and love of putting them 
under an expression of the divine law so far below 
their nature and wish and covenant as to be 
almost an insult. 

But the law of love, while it is a law of liberty 
and an "easy yoke" to such as have the Lord's 
spirit, is nevertheless a most searching law— discerning 
scrutinizing, judging the very thoughts 
and intents of our hearts— as well as our actions 
and words. In that one word, Love, is expressed 
the very essence of the divine law. Love to God 
implies full obedience, full recognition of divine 
character— wisdom, love, justice and power: full 
harmony with and service of God, and the exercise 
of those qualities of character in all our 
thoughts, words and deeds. 

R1729: page 353 

THE "LAW OF THE SPIRIT OF LIFE, 
IN CHRIST JESUS." 



This law of love to God and our fellowmen, 
which we delight to obey to the extent of our 
ability, not of compulsion, but of a willing 
mind as partakers of the spirit of Christ, is the 
only law with which we have to do. While it 
entirely ignores the Mosaic Law, its "thou 
shalt," and "thou shalt not," it really accomplishes 
far more than the Mosaic Law; for, with 
his heart ruled by love for God and man, who 
would desire to dishonor God or to injure his 
fellowman? 

But as of the Mosaic Law it was true that its 
utterances were only to those under it— Israelites 
—for "whatsoever the Law saith it saith to 
them who are under the law" (Rom. 3: 19), 
so it is true of the Law of Love, the law of the 
New Covenant: it speaks only to those who are 
under it, and these are only the consecrated 
believers in Christ. It is a law of liberty, in 



that all who are under it are under it from 
choice. They came under it voluntarily, and 
may leave it when they please. In this it 
differs greatly from the Law put upon fleshly 
Israel as a nation, in which they had no individual 
liberty or choice, being born under 
bondage to that Law Covenant. Our Law is 
the Royal Law; because the "little flock" 
developed under this law of liberty and love is 
the royal family— the divine family, selected 
under their Lord and Head to be heirs of God, 
joint heirs with Jesus Christ, partakers of the 
divine nature. 

Those now being selected as members for the 
body of Christ, are only such as delight to do 
God's will, sons of God and "brethren of 
Christ," having this likeness to Christ. And 
at the close of the Millennial age, when the rod 
of iron shall have broken the proud hearts, and 
shall have caused the stiff knees to bend in obedience, 
and when the obstinate are cut off as 
incorrigible, wilful sinners, then the law of love 
and liberty will again be virtually in force over 
all God's creatures. All who shall be permitted to 
enter upon that grand age of perfection following 
the Millennial reign of Christ will first have 
been tested, and will have given abundant proof 
that they delight to do God's will and that his 
righteous law is continually their hearts' desire. 

ALIVE WITHOUT THE LAW ONCE. 



In his letter to the Romans (chapter 7), the 
Apostle reasons to Jewish converts to Christianity; 
"For," he says, "I speak to them that 
know the Law." 

He then represents the Law Covenant as a 
husband, and Israelites bound by it as a wife to 
a husband. He shows that as it would be a 
sin for the woman to unite with another man 
while her husband lives, so it would be wrong 
for Israel to leave Moses and his Covenant of 
the Law, and to unite with Christ and his 
New Covenant of grace, unless released by 
death;— either the death of the Law Covenant 
or their death to the Law Covenant. 

It is a common mistake to suppose the 
Scriptures to teach that the Law Covenant 
died, or was destroyed by our Lord. It still 
lives; and all the children of Jacob are still 
bound by it, unless they have died to it. Only 
those who realize that they could not gain 
everlasting life through their union with Moses 
(the Law Covenant) are ready to abandon all 



hope of saving their life by that union with 
Moses, to become dead to all such expectations, 
and to accept the death of Christ, the 
ransom for Adam and all his race, as the basis 
of a new hope of a new life. Hence, only 
such Israelites as by faith reckoned themselves 
hopelessly dead under the Law Covenant, and 
as risen with Christ to a new life secured by 
his sacrifice, and who in will are dead to sin,— 
only such could be united to Christ as the new 
husband, under his New Covenant. Thus, according 
to the Apostle's reasoning, the thought 
of blending the two covenants, and being 
united to both Moses and Christ, was wholly 
out of the question.— Compare Rom. 6:2. 

The text, "Christ is the end [or fulfilment] 
of the Law [Covenant] for righteousness to 
everyone [under it] that believeth" (Rom. 10:4), 
does not conflict with the above, because 
only believers are specified. (Compare Rom. 3:31; 
Gal. 2:19.) Eph. 2:15 should be read: 
"Having abolished in his flesh the enmity of 
the law of commandments contained in ordinances," 

R1729: page 354 

etc. Col. 2:13,14 refers to "quickened" 
Jewish believers for whom the handwriting 
of ordinances is blotted out. Verse 20 
refers to the Gentile converts who had to become 
dead to the "rudiments of the world," 
before entering the New Covenant, even as 
the Jews must become dead to the rudiments 
of their Law Covenant. 

That the Law Covenant with Israel is still 
binding upon that nation is further evident 
from the fact that upon their national rejection 
of Christ, they were nationally blinded 
until the end of the Gospel age (Rom. 11:7,25), 
and that God declares that he has "not 
cast away his people" of that Covenant, but 
that under that Covenant he will yet open 
their eyes to see Christ as the only door of 
hope, and that of a new life purchased with 
his own. (Rom. 11:2,27,29; compare Deut. 30:1-9.) 

R1730 : page 354 

Meanwhile, we have the evidence 
that their Covenant continues in force in the 
fact that, as a nation, they have for centuries 
been receiving the very "curses" specified 
under their Covenant.— See Deut. 28:15-67. 
Verses 49-53 describe the Roman siege, etc.; 
verses 64-67 describe the condition of Israel 
since. (Isa. 59:21.) As heretofore shown*, the 



Lord in Leviticus (26:18-34-45) declared the 
symbolical "seven times," 2520 years, of Israel's 
subjection to the Gentiles; and their deliverance 
— A.D. 1914. Thus their present experience 
was foretold as a part of their covenant. 

Rom. 7:6 is not out of harmony with 
this explanation (that the Israelite who would 
unite with Christ must die to his nation's 
Covenant, and that the Law Covenant is not 
yet dead); for, properly rendered, + it reads, 
"But now we are delivered from the Law 
[Covenant], being dead to that wherein we 
were held; that we should serve in newness 
of spirit [with our minds, our wills]," and not 
[be required to serve] the very letter of the old, 
Law Covenant, which has passed away. 

What was defective in the old or Law Covenant? 
Was it sinful or bad? No. How came 
it, then, that under that Covenant we learned 
so much about sin? 

Because, previous to receiving the Law, Israelites 
were like the remainder of the world- 
dead in trespasses and sins; and, being already 
under sentence of death, we were like the remainder, 
unrecognized of God, and without 
any special commands; and hence we could not 
disobey or increase our sin by disobedience, 
until the Law Covenant began to command us. 

But, notwithstanding that death sentence 
under which we and all the world rested, we 
Israelites were "alive" before the Law Covenant 
came, because God had promised our father 
Abraham that somehow and at some time he 
would bless his seed, and through it all the 
families of earth. Thus, in God's promise to 
Abraham, a future life was assured to us all, 
before the Mosaic Covenant was made; but 
just as soon as that Law Covenant went into 
force, and required that we must obey its every 
command, in order to secure life, that soon we 
found that we could not absolutely control our 
poor, fallen bodies, however much we willed to 
do so with our minds. And, as sin developed, 
we died— our hopes of life expired, because we 
could not keep that Law Covenant. I speak 
for, or as representing, our whole nation. 
Thus we found that the Law Covenant, promising 
life to the obedient, really sentenced us 
to death, because we could not obey its 
requirements. 

Thus we acknowledge that the Law and the 
Covenant were good in themselves, but not 
helpful to us, because we were fallen beings. 
But God intended that it should show us how 
imperfect we really are. (Verse 13.) For the 
Law is adapted to all who are in full harmony 



with God's spirit— perfect beings— and this 
we Israelites were not; we were and are by 
nature carnal, depraved, even as others. And 
if our hearts be right, we can and will admit 
that we are unable to obey God's perfect law 
and that perfection is not to be found in our 
fallen flesh, even though in our mind we 
approve God's law and would gladly obey it. 
This is the wretched condition in which we 
find ourselves (verse 24), wanting to obey 
God's Law, and to have his favor and the everlasting 
life promised to them that love and 
obey him, and yet unable to do so because of 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., pages 88-93. 
+See marginal reading, Revised Version and Diaglott. 

R1730: page 355 

our dead bodies— fallen and sentenced through 
Adam's transgression. Oh! How can we get 
release from this, our difficulty? We cannot 
obey God's law, and God cannot give us an 
imperfect Law to suit our fallen condition. 
Oh, wretched hopeless condition! 

But no, brethren, there is hope in Christ! 
Not a hope of our fulfilling the Law Covenant 
—no hope of doing those things commanded, 
and living as a result; nor any hope of saving 
anything out of the wreck of Adam's fall and 
sentence. That must all be abandoned. We 
Israelites must die under the Law Covenant, 
as unsaved by it as we were before it was made, 
as unsaved as the Gentiles who never had a 
share in it. But as we realize ourselves dead 
under the terms of the Law Covenant, we see 
that Christ has died for Adam's sin, paid his 
penalty and thus redeemed him and all— lost 
through his disobedience— Jew and Gentile, 
bond and free, male and female. And this 
relieves us Jews, because Christ was a Jew, 
"born under the Law" Covenant, that he 
might redeem those who were under it. (Gal. 4:4,5.) 
In consequence, therefore, God can 
be just and accept all who serve his law in 
their minds and wills, and whose only hindrance 
from perfect obedience is the weakness 
of the fallen flesh. 

Thanks be unto God for this unspeakable 
gift; a new life, purchased by the precious 
blood. This we can obtain under the terms of 
the New Covenant, even though we could 
never justify the Adamic life by obedience to 
any law that God could give. 



SABBATH VIEWS OF THE REFORMERS. 



We do not cite these as of authority on the 
question, for the words of our Lord and the 
apostles are the only authorities we recognize; 
yet it is worthy of note that as the eyes of the 
early reformers, Luther, Calvin and others, 
opened to the truths of this Gospel dispensation 
due in their day, they saw at once that 
the Law Covenant was not given to the 
Gospel Church. They saw what every casual 
reader should observe, that the Apostle Paul 
contrasts the righteousness or justification 
which comes by faith in the real sacrifice, 
Christ, with that which was reckoned to Israel 
by reason of the blood of bulls and goats 
(Heb. 10:1-10), and which needed to be renewed 
yearly. The leaders in the Reformation 
all recognized the difference between 
Moses the prophet and Moses the law-giver, 
maintaining that as law-giver his authority 
extended only to Israel. They therefore denied 
that the Ten Commandments were laws 
for Christians, though they recognized them 
as valuable indications or interpretations of 
principles, to all time and to all people. 

Said Luther: "The Ten Commandments 
do not apply to us, Gentiles and Christians, 
but only to the Jews. If a preacher wishes to 
force you back to Moses, ask him if you were 
brought by Moses out of Egypt." 

Calvin was no less explicit. He declared that 
"the Sabbath is abrogated," and denied "that 
the moral part of it, that is, the observance of 
one day in seven, still remains;" while he 
added, "It is still customary among us to assemble 
on stated days for hearing the Word, 
breaking the mystic bread and for public 
prayers; and also to allow servants and 
laborers a remission from their labor." 

Justification by faith, and not by the observance 
of either Mosaic Laws or Roman 
Catholic fasts or penances, was the plea upon 
which the Reformation was started. 

"KEEP MY COMMANDMENTS." 



"If ye love me, keep my Commandments."-- 
John 14:15. 

When the young man came to our Lord, 
saying, "Good Master, what good thing shall 



I do, thai I may have eternal life?" our Lord 
replied, "If thou wilt enter into life, keep the 
Commandments," and then enumerated the 
ten commandments of the Law. Our Lord 
could not and did not ignore the Law Covenant, 
neither in his own conduct nor in his 
teaching; but, on the contrary, he testified 
that not one jot or tittle of the Law could fail 
or be ignored until all be accomplished, and 
therefore any one violating or teaching others 
to violate one of the least of them, would (if 
he got into the Kingdom at all, Matt. 5:20) 
be of a lower grade; and whoever would 
practice and teach those commandments would 
be great in the Kingdom. Our Lord himself 
was the only being under that Law Covenant 
who ever kept or taught it perfectly and He 

R1730: page 356 

is the greatest in the Kingdom: he inherited 
all of its blessings and promises.— Matt. 5:19. 

Our Lord knew that neither the young man 
who inquired, nor any of the fallen race, could 
keep those commandments. He therefore 
said, If thou desirest life, do this,— and then, 
in view of his soon fulfilment of the Law 
Covenant, and the subsequent divine acceptance 
of truly consecrated ones under the New 
Covenant, at Pentecost, he added: "Come, 
follow me." Had the young man obeyed, he 
would have been one of those accepted of the 
Father at Pentecost, an heir of life under the 
New Covenant and its law of love and liberty. 

But while our Master was obeying and fulfilling 
the commandments of the Jewish Law 
Covenant, he was giving "a New Commandment," 
not to the world, but to his followers, 
the letter, substance and spirit of which was 
LOVE. In various ways he illustrated and 
amplified this, his one command, which thus 
was made to summarize all his commandments 
—in honor to give each other preference, to 
forgive one another until seventy times seven 
times, to follow his example in sacrificing their 
lives for each other's and the truth's sakes, to 
love even their enemies and feed them if 
hungry, to pray for even those who persecuted 
them. To obey all these commands was the 
requirement of the new command, Love, which 
was the substance also of all the commandments 
given to Israel. 

Of these commands of our Lord, and not of 
the Ten Commandments of Israel's Law Covenant, 
does the Apostle John speak, saying:— 

"Blessed are they that do his commandments." 



--Rev. 22:14. 

"And hereby we do know that we have 
known him: if we keep his commandments." 
--1 John 2:3. 

"Whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because 
we keep his commandments and do those 
things that are pleasing in his sight. [The 
Jewish Law cannot here be referred to, because, 

R1731 : page 356 

"By the deeds of the Law [Covenant] 
shall no flesh be justified in his sight." And 
so we read in the next verse following, that 
the commands which we keep are not those 
given at Sinai, but "This is his Commandment 
[to us, under the New Covenant], that 
we should believe on the name of his Son, Jesus 
Christ, and love one another, as he gave us 
commandment. And he that keepeth his 
commandments dwelleth in him, and he in 
him; and hereby we know that he abideth in 
us, by the Spirit which he hath given us." 

These commandments, under which we are 
placed, are not grievous and impossible to 
obey as were those of the Jewish Law Covenant 
to those under it; for Christ's yoke is 
easy, and his burden is light, to all who have 
his Spirit; and "if any man have not the spirit 
of Christ, he is none of his." 

The fact, however, that we are not under the 
Jewish Law Covenant, and not dependent on 
it for life, but are hoping for life as a favor, 
or gift from God (through him who fulfilled 
the Law Covenant and canceled all claims 
against all who come into him, both Jews and 
Gentiles), does not hinder God's free children, 
justified through faith in Christ's redemption, 
and not by the Law, from using the Jewish 
Law and every other expression, fact, figure 
and type, at their command, whether from 
nature or Scripture, in determining what would 
be acceptable and pleasing to their Heavenly 
Father. Thus, for instance, Paul, who repudiated 
over and over again the dominion of 
the Law Covenant over any in Christ, quotes 
one of the Commandments as an evidence to 
Christian parents of what God's will is with 
reference to their government of their children. 
(Eph. 6:1-4.) But mark that he does not in 
any wise present it to them as a command. 
It never was a command to parents, but to 
children. The Apostle's admonition is to parents 
concerning their conduct towards their 
children. Nor does the Apostle intimate 
justification as a reward; for he writes to those 



children who are already justified, not by deeds 
of obedience to the Law Covenant, but by faith 
in their Redeemer,— "Children obey your 
parents in the Lord." 

OBJECTIONS OF SEVENTH-DAY ADVENTISTS 
ANSWERED. 



The following claims made by Seventh-day 
Adventists we consider worthy of notice and 
reply:— 

R1731 : page 357 

(1). The Sabbath-day was observed before 
the Law was given at Sinai.— Exod. 16:23-30. 

Answer. Yes; but the Law Covenant was 
really in force from the time Israel left Egypt. 
The Passover was a prominent feature of the 
Law, and it was instituted the night before their 
exodus began. Moses had already been appointed 
of God, and, as we have seen, God's 
dealings were only with him, as the typical father 
or representative of that nation. In accepting 
and obeying Moses, Israel had already made 
the covenant to obey the laws he would give. 
The demonstration at Sinai was a formal ratification 
and acknowledgment of their covenant. 

The Sabbath-day was instituted about two 
weeks before the formal giving of the Law on 
tables of stone at Sinai; viz., at the giving of 
the manna in the wilderness— a most favorable 
opportunity for giving them an object lesson in 
the double supply of manna on the sixth day, 
and none on the seventh. (Exod. 16:22-30.) 
It was inaugurated as a memorial of their deliverance 
from Egyptian bondage, in which they 
had no rest from their task-masters. This is 
clearly stated in Deut. 5:15— "Remember that 
thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and 
that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence 
through a mighty hand and a stretched-out arm; 
therefore, the Lord thy God commanded thee to 
keep the Sabbath day." The Law Covenant is 
continually referred to as dating from that time 
—"When I took them by the hand to lead them 
out of the land of Egypt. "-Heb. 8:9; Jer. 31:32; 
Ezek. 20:5,6,12,20. 

(2). God ordained the Sabbath at creation 
(Gen. 2:2,3; Exod. 20: 1 1), and evidently 
it was observed all along, and was merely repeated 
and enforced in the Law given by Moses. 

Answer. This is a mistake. The account 
does say that God rested upon the seventh 



creative day, but not one word is said about 
the seventh day having been commanded or 
ordained, until it was given to Israel. On the 
contrary, there is no mention made of the 
Sabbath during the entire period of two thousand 
years preceding Israel's exodus from Egypt, 
and then we are told, as above quoted, that it 
was ordained for that nation and as a memorial 
of their deliverance. 

From the entire account it is evident that it 
was something new to the Israelites. Its explanation 
to them (Exod. 16:20-30), as well 
as Moses' uncertainty in the case of the first 
transgression of this law (Num. 15:32-36), 
proves that it was new, that it had not been previously 
known among them or their fathers. 

We should remember, too, that the account in 
Genesis was written by Moses, and that he very 
appropriately called attention to the fact that 
the seventh-day Sabbath commanded in his law 
was not without a precedent. 

But while God's resting on the seventh day 
of his week was properly noticed as a precedent 
for Israel's observance of a seventh-day Sabbath, 
it does not at all follow that God's rest-day 
was a twenty-four hour day; nor that God 
rested in the same manner that the Israelites 
were commanded to rest. 

The Apostle (Heb. 4:3,4,9-1 1) explains 
that Israel did not enter into the real rest or 
Sabbath,— although they zealously observed 
the seventh day. He says that the reason was, 
that they did not exercise the faith by which 
alone the real rest can be enjoyed. "We that 
believe do enter into rest [and thus have a perpetual 
Sabbath]." "For he that is entered into 
his rest [the rest of heart, in faith, given by 
Christ], he also hath ceased from his own works 
[from attempting self-justifying works], as God 
did from his [works— i.e., as God left the work 
of redemption and recovery for Christ to do, 
so we also accept Christ's finished work, and 
rest in faith therein, with all the obedience 
possible]." Those who trust in the Law Covenant 
or who blend its requirements with those 
of the New Covenant cannot fully enjoy this 
rest, which is for the New Covenant keepers only. 

God's rest day, instead of being a twenty-four-hour 
day, is a day seven thousand years 
long. It began as soon as sin brought God's 
curse upon Adam. Instead of undertaking 
Adam's recovery out of sin and death, God 
rested from any further works on behalf of man 
and earth, and let things take their natural 
course, purposing in himself that Christ should 
have full charge of man's redemption and restitution. 



God gave promises and types and 

shadows in the Law, but he did not work toward 

R1731 : page 358 

man's recovery. The first work for man's recovery 
was the ransom paid by our Lord Jesus 
for Adam and his race. 

The Heavenly Father has therefore already 
rested six thousand years; and he will similarly 
rest during the Millennium of Christ's reign,— 
until its very close, when Christ shall deliver 
up the Kingdom to God, even the Father.* 

(3). The Command to keep the Sabbath is 
associated with nine moral precepts which are 
binding upon all men for all time. 

Answer. We have already shown that God 
had a law before the giving of the Ten Commandments 
to Moses and Israel; that it was 
graven in man's nature in Adam; and that it 
was a perfect expression of the mind of God on 
all questions of obligation to God and to man, 
—much more so than that written upon the 
tables of stone. Hence, the moral precepts of 
the Decalogue, a secondary statement of the 
divine law, are not to be ranked as the only 
moral standard, nor the superior one, when we 
know that a new standard was chosen for the 
New Covenant and remember that the original 
standard is promised for the future.— Jer. 31:31. 

The fourth of the Ten Commandments is 
not at first seen to have any parallel in the law 
of Love, the law or standard of the New Covenant. 
It enjoins a rest every seventh day. 
However, its parallel in the law of the New 
Covenant is brought to our attention by the 
Apostle's words in Hebrews 4:1-1 1. The 
word Sabbath signifies rest; and the Apostle 
here teaches that our rest by faith in Christ, 
our realization that we are "accepted in the 
Beloved," is the refreshing antitype of the 
literal rest-day commanded to Israel under 
their Law Covenant. Seven is the symbol for 
completeness, and hence the seventh day foreshadowed 
the more desirable and complete rest 
of the true Israel of God. And only those who 
thus rest by faith in Christ can continue under 
the blessed provisions of the New Covenant; 
for it is specially a covenant based upon faith, 
and "without faith it is impossible to please 
God;" and the true faith cannot be exercised 
without rest of heart, the true Sabbath-keeping. 

The poor Jew never could experience such a 
rest, but on the contrary had such experiences 
as the Apostle describes when personating them, 
"O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver 



*Thus we find the key to the period of creation; for if 
the seventh day be a period of seven thousand years, as 
we think we have proved, then each of the preceding 
days were doubtless of similar length. This period 
agrees well with the results of scientific research, and 
gives ample time for the gradual development of vegetable 
and animal life up to the time of man's creation; 
and at some other time we purpose showing the full agreement 
of the account of creation given in Genesis with the 
record of the rocks,— Geology. 

Thus considered, the period from the beginning of the 
ordering of creation on the Earth down to the surrender 
of it perfect to the Father, at the close of the Millennium, 
is a period of seven times seven thousand years, or a total 
of forty-nine thousand years; and the grand epoch then to 
begin will be the fiftieth thousand, or a great Jubilee, on 
a grand scale,— not the Jubilee of Israel, nor the Jubilee 
of general restitution, but the Jubilee of Earth. 

R1732: page 358 

me?" The nearest approach to the real rest 
of heart was the typical one given them in the 
Fourth Commandment of their Law Covenant. 

(4). There were two laws given to Israel, 
a ceremonial and a moral law; and it was the 
former only that was done away by Christ, 
while the moral law remains. 

Answer. There is no Scriptural authority 
for such a division. On the contrary, there 
was but one law,— its ceremonial features providing 
typically for the cleansing away of sins 
resulting from the violation of its moral precepts. 
If it could be seen as the Covenant mediated by 
Moses, it would be evident that all of its parts 
must stand or fall together. But after comparing 
Exod. 34:28; Deut. 4:13,14; and Heb. 8:6-8, 
there should be no question on the part 
of any one that the Ten Commandments were a 
part of the Covenant which was supplanted by 
the New Covenant sealed with the blood [death] 
of Christ, its mediator. 

When the Apostles wrote to the new Gentile 
converts respecting the Law— determined not 
to put upon them the yoke of the Law which 
they as Jews had been unable to keep— and contradicting 
certain teachers who had said that 
they "must be circumcised and keep the Law," 
James remarked incidentally that the law of 
Moses to which they referred was that "read in 
the synagogue every Sabbath day."-- 
Acts 15:9-11,24,28,29,19-21. 

(5). We Seventh-day keepers claim that God's 



commands are, that we labor six days and rest 
on the seventh; and many of us have gone to 
prison because of our conviction that it is our 
duty to labor on the first day and on all days except 
the seventh. And we believe that the time 

R1732: page 359 

is coming when the keeping of Sunday will be a 
yet more severe test, and bring further suffering 
upon us. 

Answer. We have nothing to do with the 
making of the social laws which prohibit labor 
on the first day of the week; but we obey them 
as civil laws, as commanded in the Scriptures 
(Rom. 13:1-7; 1 Pet. 2:13); and we find it to 
be to our profit as well as to our pleasure. We 
sincerely sympathize with the poor people who 
are deluded by such an argument, and suffer 
therefor; and we admire their willingness to suffer 
for what they consider to be the truth. But 
they are mistaken. The laws of this land do not 
compel any man to violate his conscience by 
working on the seventh day or any other day. 

And it is not sound reasoning to claim that 
a man must labor during the other six days. If 
so, are those days of twenty-four hours, or of 
how many hours? In such a case, for a man to be 
sick, or to go on a journey or on a visit, would 
be to violate the Law, and fall under its curse. 
What nonsense! False reasoning has surely blinded 
whoever cannot see that the Fourth Commandment 
of Moses' Law means, "[Within] six 
days shalt thou labor and do all thy work!" 

As for future persecution on these lines, it is 
probable; not because of any opposition to 
Seventh-day-keeping but because, according to 
the Scriptures, there will ere long be a federation 
or union of religious systems which, giving increased 
prestige and honor, will make the 
demands of popular religionists more arrogant 
—supposedly in the interest of peace and the 
cause of Christ. 

(6). We Seventh Day Adventists claim, that 
as the Mosaic Covenant had a tabernacle, with 
a holy place in which the high priest offered for 
the sins of the people during the entire year, 
and a Most Holy in which he finished that work 
on the last day of the year, so there is a Holy 
and Most Holy in Heaven; and that Christ has 
officiated for the sins of his people in the Holy 
during the Gospel age, and will for a short time 
before its close officiate in the Most Holy. 
This we understand to be the "cleansing of the 
Sanctuary." We consequently used to teach 
that all probation ended about 1845, when 



Christ (we believe) went from the Holy into 
the Most Holy. We hold, therefore, that the 
judgment is all over, and that naught remains 
except for Christ to come forth and receive us 
Seventh Day Adventists, and to destroy all the 
remainder of mankind. 

We hold, too, that we Seventh Day Adventists 
are fulfilling the "Third Angel's Message" of 
Rev. 14:9-12. In the expression, "Fear God 
and keep his commandments," we place the 
stress upon the Fourth Commandment. 

Answer. You err respecting the antitypes 
of the Jewish Atonement Day and Tabernacle. 
The antitypical Holy and Most Holy are "heavenly," 
in the sense of being higher (such is the 
meaning of the word heavenly). In Israel's typical 
service these were places: in the antitype 
they are conditions. All of the antitypical or 
"royal priesthood" have access to the Holy 
condition as soon as they consecrate themselves 
or present their bodies living sacrifices to God's 
service. (Heb. 9:6.) They at once have access 
to the antitypical "shewbread" (Lev. 24:9), 
"meat to eat that the world knoweth not of." 
They at once have the light of divine revelation, 
represented by the "golden candlestick," which 
the natural man perceiveth not. (1 Cor. 2:5,7,9-12.) 
They at once have access to the 
Incense Altar, and their prayers and services are 
acceptable to God through Christ as sweet incense. 
Thus the first apartment of the Tabernacle 
represents the present condition of the 
Church while still in the flesh. Thus we are 
now blest with Christ Jesus "in heavenly 
places [higher conditions]."— Eph. 1:3. 

But the vail (death) still separates between us 
and the perfect spiritual condition— the divine 
nature into which Christ has entered, and into 
which he has promised to conduct all his faithful 
joint-sacrificers and joint-heirs at the close 
of the Antitypical Day of Atonement. 

You err also in supposing that Israel's typical 
Day of Atonement was at the end of the year, 
to atone for past sins. It was, on the contrary, 
for the nation, and at the beginning of their 
year, to make atonement for the whole nation 
and to bring the whole nation into God's favor 
for the year following it. And the thank-offerings, 
peace-offerings and trespass-offerings, 
offered by individuals during the year following, 
were acceptable upon the basis of that Atonement 
Day offering. At the close of the year, 
for which the Atonement Day sacrifices applied, 
the people were again as defiled as the residue 
of Adam's race, and required a new Day of 
Atonement as a basis for another year's acceptance 



with God as a typically justified nation. 

You err also in supposing that the coming 
out of the Great High Priest at the close of the 
Day of Atonement will be for the blessing of 
seventh-day keepers. He comes out to bless, 
first, the "royal priesthood"— they that have 
made a covenant with him by sacrifice. (Psa. 50:5.) 
"They shall be mine, saith the Lord, 
in that day when I make up my jewels." 
(Mai. 3:17.) But, as in the type, not priests 
only were blessed, but "all the people," so in 
the antitype all the families of the earth shall 
be blessed at the revelation of Christ Jesus, when 
he shall come to be "glorified in his saints, and 

R1732: page 360 

to be admired in all them that believe in that 
[Millennial] day" (2 Thes. 1:10.) The sacrifices 
and offerings subsequent to the typical 
Day of Atonement will find their antitypes in 
the Millennial age, when all those who desire 
fellowship with God will come to him through 
the Royal Priesthood, who will offer their 
sacrifices for them.* 

You are in serious error, also, respecting the 
Cleansing of the Sanctuary; but for our view 
of this subject we must refer you to MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. III., Chap. 4. 

As to the Third Angel's message: Suppose 
we were to admit your claim, that you are fulfilling 
Rev. 14:9-12. That would prove nothing as 
to the truth or untruth of your message. The 
Book of Revelation is a symbolic prophecy,— 
a history written in advance. What is occurring 
and what will occur are faithfully related 
—often without comment;— just as the old 
Testament prophecies relate evil things as well 
as good things, and often without comment. 
For instance, Daniel 7:8 tells about the Papal 
horn "speaking great things," but does not say 
whether they are great truths or great untruths. 
So, too, in Revelation, Papacy is described and 
its language quoted without adverse criticism. 

(7). Christ said that he came not to destroy 
the Law and the prophets, but to fulfil them.— 
Matt. 5:17. 

Answer. Yes, that is just what we hold: he 
fulfilled the Law Covenant— met all of its requirements, 
and obtained its reward, Life. 
That fulfilled it, for that was the end for which 
it was intended and given. 

(8). Christ said, "The Sabbath was made 
for man, and not man for the Sabbath." (Mark 2:27.) 
We understand this to mean that the 
Sabbath was made for all mankind. 



Answer. Your inference is not reasonable. 
If the Sabbath were meant for all mankind, the 
fact should and would have been clearly stated 
to all mankind. But the facts are that it was 
commanded only of one nation, and that Christ 
and the Apostles did not so command. In this 
text our Lord is showing to the Jews, to whom 
the command was given, that they were putting 
an extreme construction upon the command 
when they refused to do good on that day— to 
a fellow creature, as well as to an ox or an ass. 
The Sabbath was intended for the blessing of 
the men who were commanded to keep it: they 
were not created nor called as a nation simply 
to serve the day. 

(9). In Isa. 66:23, the Sabbath is mentioned 
in connection with the new heavens and new 
earth— which to us means that it will be a perpetual 
institution— throughout eternity. 

Answer. It is possible that in the beginning 
of the Millennial age the Lord's dealing with the 
world of mankind, then in process of restitution 
and trial, will resemble his dealing with the house 



*For a fuller treatment of this subject see Tabernacle 
Shadows of Better Sacrifices— 104 pages, leatherette, 
10 cents. 

R1733: page 360 

of servants— Israel. He may restore laws respecting 
the Sabbath and various festivals, and 
even sacrifices, to teach the world by these as 
object lessons. Some scriptures seem so to hint. 
(Jer. 33:18; Ezek. 46:19-24; 47:12; 48:10,11.) 
We must remember that the liberty of 
sons of God, now granted to us, is in view of our 
being spirit-begotten, new creatures. However, 
we may be assured that the Law Covenant will 
never be placed over the world as it was over 
typical Israel; for it made nothing perfect; and 
righteousness could not come by the Law Covenant 
to others any more than to Israel. The 
New Covenant will remain open all through the 
Millennial age, for all who desire to flee from sin 
and to return to full harmony with God. But 
by that time, the "seed" of Abraham having 
been completed, none will then have the privilege 
to become joint-heirs of that promise, but 
can come under the blessings which will flow 
from that Seed. 

The expression, from new moon to new moon, 
and from Sabbath to Sabbath, to a Jew would 
merely mean, from month to month, and from 



week to week; and would not of necessity relate 
to any special observance of the days. 

The Seventh-day Adventists are surely doing 
a world-wide work, and, whether right or 
wrong, might not improperly be mentioned in 
the prophecy of Revelation. It does seem, however, 
rather preposterous to claim that their 
advocacy of the Fourth Commandment of 
Israel's Decalogue constitutes them alone the 
champions of God's commandments and the 
faith of Jesus. God's commandment to the 
Gospel Church of the New Covenant is, "This 
is my beloved Son. Hear ye him!" And neither 
he nor any whom he sent forth as his special ambassadors 
and representatives ever said one word 
in favor of the observance of the seventh day. 

(10). The Roman Catholic Church claims to 
have originated Sunday keeping, admits that 
there is no authority for it in the Scriptures, and 
claims its right to make the change. 

Answer. The Church of Rome is quick to 
turn any point to her own favor; and this is 
one which furnishes a specially good opportunity. 
It is nothing to admit that Sunday 
is not commanded in the New Testament (but 
neither is the seventh-day Sabbath), and it 
furnishes an excellent chance to emphasize 
Roman Catholic doctrine,— that tradition is 
equally authoritative with God's Word. 

R1733: page 361 

But this boast that Papacy changed the 
seventh-day Sabbath to the first-day Sunday 
amounts to nothing. Where is the proof of it? 
Nowhere. The facts are that the New Covenant 
provides no day for rest, but a rest for 
every day; and the early Church met on either 
or both days according to convenience or advantage. 
The custom of meeting on the first 
day came down and gradually crystallized into 
a habit, and, later, a supposed duty. But Papacy 
cannot point back to any date and show by the 
decisions of any Council that she changed the 
Jewish Sabbath into the Christian Sunday. 

A Catechism, entitled "The Catholic Christian 
Instructed," in answer to the question, 
"What are the days which the Church commands 
to be kept holy?" says, "(I). The Sunday, 
or our Lord's day, which we observe, by 
Apostolic tradition, instead of the Sabbath." 
Thus Romanists do not claim to have changed 
the day. 

(II). The name Sunday is heathenish, and 
doubtless at one time marked a day on which 
the Sun was worshiped; consequently the day 



should not be recognized nor the name used. 
Answer. Some great infidel may have been 
named Robert or Thomas, but this would not 
make an infidel of you if you had been given 
his name. So the propriety of worshiping God 
on the first day of the week or on any other 
day is not governed by its common or general 
name. We have no special choice of name— 
Lord's-day, Sabbath or Sunday would any of 
them serve our purpose, and we could worship 
God in spirit and in truth on that day as well 
under one name as another. Sabbath is a good 
name, and reminds us of our rest by faith in 
Christ's sacrifice and New Covenant. Lord's-day 
is also good, and reminds us that the first 
day of the week marks the greatest token of 
divine favor ever manifested— the resurrection 
of our Lord. Sunday reminds us of the Sun 
of Righteousness— our resurrected Lord, and 
all the blessings present and prospective that 
we and the whole world may anticipate through 
him. If the heart be right, any of these 
names will become fragrant with precious 
memories of God's grace through Christ. 

THE SUM OF THE MATTER. 



We group below the foregoing conclusions. 

(1). The word Sabbath-day signifies 
rest-day. 

(2). Any rest-day might therefore with 
propriety be called a Sabbath-day. Indeed, 
this was a custom with the Jews. All of their 
feast-days they called rest-days or Sabbaths— 
as, for instance, the first and last days of the 
Passover were called Sabbaths, no matter upon 
what day of the week they occurred. 

(3). The Sabbath-day commanded in the 
two tables of stone, delivered by God to 
Israel by the hand of Moses at Mt. Sinai, was 
the seventh day of the week, not the first day; 
nor was it merely one day in seven; this 
was particularly indicated by the extra supply 
of manna on the sixth day. 

(4). While any day of the week would have 
suited equally well, so far as Israel was concerned, 
God evidently had a choice. The 
seventh day, chosen by him, was evidently 
typical, as were all of God's arrangements for 
and with that typical people. We understand 
that it typified the rest experienced by spiritual 
Israel, and referred to by the Apostle in 
Hebrews 4:9. 

(5). The fourth commandment was as 



binding as the others of the Decalogue, and 
hence if the others continue in force against 
fleshly Israel, to whom they all were given, so 
does this one. But neither the fourth nor any 
other of the ten commandments was ever given 
to, or made a law for, any other nation than 
Israel. None could come under its provisions 
except by becoming Israelites, and practicing 
circumcision. 

(6). The Decalogue was the foundation of 
the covenant between God and Israel, called 
the Law Covenant.— Deut. 4:13. 

(7). Since the death of Christ the arrangement 
between God and those whom he acknowledges 
as his children is called the New 
Covenant— sealed or made of force by Christ's 
death,— by the precious blood of Christ. Its 
provisions or benefits are not for one race or 
family of mankind merely, but are open for 
all people,— through faith in Christ. 

The Jews, and, for that matter, some among 
the Gentiles also, who sought communion and 
fellowship with God, were continually striving 
to do something which would atone for their 
sins and open communion and harmony with 
God; but the most earnest were "weary and 
heavy laden" and almost discouraged with 
their failure. It is to such that our Lord addressed 
himself, saying, "Come unto me, and 
I will give you rest."— Matt. 11:28. 

(8). As the Law Covenant had the Ten 
Commandments for its foundation, so the 
New Covenant has a new law for its foundation 
—the law of Love. "A new commandment 
give I unto you, that ye love one 
another." The new command was not one 
added to the ten of the old Covenant,— not 
an eleventh,— but was instead of the ten of 
the Law Covenant, and much more comprehensive. 

R1733: page 362 

Love is the only command of the New 
Covenant, and bears only upon those who 
have accepted the New Covenant. The 
world in general has nothing to do with the 
New Covenant, its privileges, its blessings 
and its law, even as it had nothing to do with 
the Law Covenant and its decalogue, etc. 
Only those under the Law Covenant were 
bound by it or helped by it; and only those 
under the New Covenant are recognized by it. 

(9). The people of the world in general 
are not recognized by God; they are called 
"the children of this world," "children of the 
devil," "children of wrath," etc.; and we are 



told that they have not "escaped the condemnation 
that is upon the world," through "one 
man's disobedience," that they cannot escape 
except through the provisions of the New 
Covenant, and that hence "the whole world 
[God's covenanted people being exceptions] 
lieth in that wicked one." 

The world once had a law from God, but 
they have lost it, or most of it, and are now 
strangers and foreigners unrecognized by God. 
(Rom. 1:21; Eph. 2:19.) The original law 
was not written upon tables of stone, but was 
incorporated in man's very character, so that 
when perfect in God's image, he knew right 
and wrong instinctively— his conscience was a 
safe and accurate guide. But six thousand 
years of degradation, as slaves of Sin and 
Death under Satan, have almost effaced that 
original law from man's heart— have warped 
his judgment and conscience, and made his will 
the plaything of his animal propensities and 
hopes and fears. 

Provision was made that these might, if 
they chose, become Israelites, and by circumcision 
and the observance of the Law Covenant 
be joint-heirs with Israel to all the favors and 
typical privileges granted to that nation. 
But they were not under either the blessings 
or the curses of that Covenant unless they 
voluntarily accepted it. So now, under the New 
Covenant, arrangement is made for the world 
to come in under its provisions— under its 
justification or forgiveness of sins, and under 
its law of love. But only those who have put 
themselves under it are sharers of either its 
blessings or its responsibilities. 

But there was no provision made for any 
Sabbath-day under the New Covenant— every 
day was to be a Sabbath or day of faith-rest 
in Christ, to all under the New Covenant, and 
to no others. And the Apostle was careful to 
guard the early Church against the esteem of 

R1734: page 362 

one day above another as more holy. (Rom. 14:5-8.) 
Our Lord's ministry was under the 
Law Covenant, and hence he observed the 
seventh-day Sabbath even while he assured 
the people that he was "Lord also of the 
Sabbath-day." But neither he nor any of the 
Apostles ever commanded or even suggested 
the observance of any special day as a Sabbath. 
And one of these Apostles declared that he 
had "not shunned to declare the whole counsel 
of God;"— thus proving that the observance 



of a Sabbath day was no part of 

God's counsel to sons of the New Covenant. 

(10). There was no authorization of a 
change from the seventh day to the first day 
as a Sabbath or rest day. The early Church 
was composed chiefly of those who had been 
God's servants under the typical Law Covenant, 
and it required time for them to appreciate 
the fact that the Law Covenant had 
ended and a New Covenant had been introduced; 
and they were warned frequently 
by the Apostles against Judaizing tendencies 
and teachers, and a tendency to mix the New 
Covenant and its law of love and liberty with 
the Law of the old Covenant. Naturally, 
they still observed the seventh day from 
custom and convenience, and because in 
Palestine it was the civil law, and also because 
on that day they could most successfully reach 
with the Gospel of Christ the most hopeful 
class of hearers. 

Our Lord's resurrection on the first day of 
the week, and his subsequent showing of himself 
to them upon that day, seems to have 
started in the early Church the custom of 
meeting together on every first day, and having 
a simple meal, and recounting with prayer 
and praise the Lord's mercies, and remembering 
their risen Redeemer and how his words 
burned in their hearts when first on that day 
he had explained to them redemption through 
his blood, how it was necessary for Christ to 
die and to rise, etc. 

(11). This pleasant custom grew upon the 
Church, but without any law, for the Apostles 
assured them that there is no law but love to 
them that are in Christ Jesus. It was 
merely a privilege which they prized and used 
profitably. It was not until centuries had 
passed, and Papacy had arisen with the false 
idea that its mission was to convert the world, 
by force, if necessary, that laws were made 
respecting the first day of the week as the 
Lord's day or Sunday. Having gathered into 
the Church multitudes of "tares," who did 
not appreciate the liberty or the love of the 
New Covenant, and who really were as much 
as ever "children of the devil," some laws or 
regulations were made for their restraint. 

R1734: page 363 

(12). The New Covenant law controls only 
"believers"— "the faithful in Christ Jesus"— 
and leaves these entirely free to do or observe 
whatever love might dictate; for it is lawful to 



do good— to do anything that godly love would 
dictate or approve— on any day; and it is improper 
to violate the dictates of love upon any 
day. 

Mankind has laws upon the subject, however, 
and it is God's command to his people that 
they be subject to civil rulers in all matters 
not in violation of their consciences respecting 
his wishes. On whatever day or however 
frequently the civil law commands rest from 
secular labor, it becomes our duty to obey. 
We can rejoice that we are at liberty to worship 
how and whom we please, and should 
gladly use every opportunity wisely, nor forsaking 
the assembling of ourselves for spiritual 
refreshment. We are glad, too, and thankful 
that the day specially set aside as a Sabbath 
by civil governments is the very one of all 
others that we prefer, because it memorializes 
the beginning of the new order of things,— 
begun by the resurrection of our dear Redeemer. 
Hence, in outward conduct we conform 
to the laws of men on the subject, while 
in our hearts, having fullest freedom toward 
God, we delight to use the first day of the 
week specially to his pleasement and praise, 
in doing good to others, particularly to the 
household of faith. 

"STAND FAST IN THE LIBERTY." 



We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the 
weak, and not to please ourselves.— Rom. 15:1. 

Our liberty in Christ, under the terms of 
the New Covenant, must take care that others 
are not injured by our use of liberty; for this 
would be condemned by our law of Love. The 
Apostle clearly emphasizes this in his letter to 
the Romans.-Chap. 14:1 to 15:7. 

He there points out that all are not alike 
strong in the faith. Some, weak in the faith, 
can see that Christ is our Redeemer, but cannot 
as yet realize the liberty we have in Christ; 
for one realizes his liberty to eat whatever 
agrees with him, while another one, who is 
weak (in bondage), eats vegetables only, lest 
he should violate some law under which he 
thinks himself. Each should learn to grant 
the other full liberty of conscience: the stronger 
should not despise the weaker, nor should the 
weaker judge others by himself. It should be 
sufficient to know that God accepts even the 
weakest ones. So it is also with reference to 



the observance of days: One man esteems 
one day above another, while another esteems 
all days alike. Let each carry out fully the 
conviction of his own mind. 

The Apostle does not here teach, as so many 
suppose from the common translation, that 
each should make up his mind and stick to 
it, whether right or wrong; nor does he teach 
that one is as right as the other. On the 
contrary, he urges growth into the full liberty 
of Christ, but counsels patience and consideration 
on the part of the stronger for the weaker. 
He approves the stronger, and plainly states 
that the brother who thinks himself under a 
bondage regarding meat, or Sabbath days, fast 
days, etc., is the weak brother. But he urges 
that if such a weak brother observes such a 
bondage, not as an attempt to "keep the Law" 
and to justify himself before God, ignoring 
Christ's redemption sacrifice, but because he 
thinks that our Redeemer wishes him to be 
bound by such ordinances, then the stronger 
ones should not rail at, or make light of, his 
conscientious weakness, but rather receive him 
fully as a brother, trusting that discipline and 
experience and growth in grace and knowledge 
will gradually bring him to the liberty which 
others reach more quickly. 

And those strong ones who enter fully into 
the spirit of the Apostle's remark, "It is 
good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, 
nor anything whereby thy brother stumbleth, 
or is offended, or is made weak," and deny 
themselves what their own consciences permit, 
have the greater blessing. They can realize 
in an additional degree that they are following 
in the Master's steps; for "Even Christ 
pleased not himself."— Rom. 14:21; 15:2,3. 

For if the stronger brethren by sarcasm and 
influence were to force the weaker ones to use 
a liberty they did not realize, it would be 
forcing them into sin; for any violation of 
conscience is sin. (Rom. 14:23.) Therefore 
the weaker brethren should be left to the liberty 
of their consciences. They should be received 
as brethren, the influences of love and 
truth alone being brought to bear upon them, 
in the hope of gradually educating them to 
an appreciation of their full privileges as free 
men in Christ. Thus the body may be full of 
charity and unity, each one carrying out the 
convictions of his own mind as to the Lord's 
will, and each seeking to grow in grace and 
knowledge, out of childhood's weakness into 
manhood's strength, as rapidly as possible; 
being developed as he feeds upon God's Word. 



The Apostle again refers specially to the 
observance of days as a sign of weakness, childishness 
and lack of development, saying (Gal. 4:10,11): 

R1734: page 364 

"Ye observe days, and months, 
and times, and years. I am anxious on your 
behalf, lest my labor for you has been in vain." 
He here addresses those who had once known 
the liberty of the sons of God, but who were 
now getting into bondage through false teaching. 
He recognized by these weaknesses for 
the things commanded by the Law Covenant, 
an evidence that they were not growing into 
the liberty of sons of God, but going backward 
toward the servant condition (see verses 6-9; 
19-31); and he was even fearful that 
this weakness and failure to maintain the 
liberty of sonship, and this subservience to the 
Law Covenant might lead them to reject the 
true gospel, that Christ gave himself for our 
sins, and accept as a gospel a hopeless substitute 
—that Christ would save them if they kept 
the Law.-Gal. 1:4-8; 5:2. 

In Col. 2:14-17, the Apostle declares the 
same truth with reference to the liberty of all 
who are in Christ, in respect to the Law: 
especially singling out the festivals, new moons 
and Sabbaths. He pointedly declares (verse 13) 
that those believers who had been Gentiles 
were pardoned fully and freely from all 
condemnation, while concerning those who 
had been Jews he says (verse 14), Christ blotted 
out the written Law which was against us 
[believing Israelites], removed it from our way, 
nailing it to his cross; having stripped away 
from the original [law] and its authorities [all 
obscurities], he made a public illustration of 
them [in his life of obedience to them], triumphing 
over them by it [in obedience even 
unto death, even the death of the cross]. 
"Therefore," reasons the apostle, because 
our Lord has made both you Gentiles and us 
Jews free, "permit no man to judge you in meat 
or drink, or in respect to a holyday, or of the 
new moon, or of the Sabbaths, which are shadows 
of future things, the substance [or antitypes] 
of which appertain to the Anointed 
[Head and Body]." 

Glorious is the liberty of the sons of 
God! Let us stand fast in it ! And let us 
enjoy to the full our rest of faith; for we can 
rest (enjoy Sabbath) whether the world 
has a Sabbath or not: whether any day 
or no day is commanded by human law, our 



rest abides. It lasts seven days in each week 
and twenty-four hours in each day, and is not 
broken by physical labor, nor is it dependent 

R1735: page 364 

on physical ease. It is a deep and lasting rest, 
and can be broken only by doubt— by a rejection 
of the basis on which it must abide, the 
ransom,— or by living after the flesh, and 
thus disturbing conscience and our relationship 
toward God. 

How blessed is the state of all in Christ, as 
mature sons of God under favor, not servants 
nor infants under Laws! (John 15:15; Rom. 8: 15; 
Gal. 4:1-6.) How blessed to us is the 
true rest of faith in Christ's finished work, 
which rest neither the world nor the Law 
could give, and which, from us that are free, 
they cannot take away. We realize that Israel's 
Sabbath (not only their weekly Sabbath, 
but also their yearly Sabbath and their Jubilee*) 
was as far inferior to the real as was their Passover 
inferior to our Passover, and their sacrifices to 
our sacrifices, and their altar and candle-stick 
and table of shew-bread to ours. The realities, 
in all these, are a thousand times grander 
than their shadows. 



*See M. DAWN, Vol. II., Chap. 6. 



R1735: page 364 

THE TWELVE CHOSEN. 

IV. QUAR., LESSON VI., NOV. 1 1, MARK 3:6-19. 

Golden Text— "I have chosen you and ordained 
you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit." 
-John 15:16.- 

For full treatment of the main point of 
this lesson— the ordination of the twelve 
apostles— see our issue of May 1, '93; also 
the last page of June 15, '93. 

Other points of interest in the above selection 
are (1) our Lord's fortitude in pursuing 
his work, notwithstanding the opposition 
which conspired even against his life. 
—Verses 1-5. 

(2) We observe his caution in subsequently 
withdrawing from that locality 



when duty no longer necessitated his stay. 
He did not unnecessarily expose himself to 
danger and then look for miraculous interpositions 
of providence for his protection, 
and claim such interposition on the strength 
of the fact that his hour to die had not yet 
come. He used natural means and precautions 
for his preservation and protection until 
"his hour was come," and then, as a sheep 
before her shearers is dumb, so he opened 
not his mouth, nor exerted himself in the 
least to preserve his life.— Verses 6,7. 

(3) The completeness and instantaneousness 
of his cures evidence a miraculous gift 

of healing. At the word of his command 
the man's hand was restored whole as the 
other.— Verse 5. 

R1735: page 365 

(4) His wonderful works were drawing 
the attention of multitudes from various 
quarters— both Jews and Gentiles— and thus 
creating a popularity for the gospel which 
would be favorable to its dissemination 
later.— Verses 7,8. 

(5) Verses 9,10 indicate that many of 
his healings of the sick were accomplished 
by imparting a measure of his own vitality, 
thus impoverishing himself to bless 

others. (See also Luke 6:19; 8:43-46.) Feeling, 
therefore, his own loss of strength after 
continued service of this kind, he withdrew 
for rest and refreshment, both physical and 
spiritual. 

(6) Regarding the testimony of the unclean 
spirits concerning Christ, see our issue 

of July 15. 



R1735 : page 365 

THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON VII., NOV. 18, LUKE 6:20-31. 

Golden Text— "As ye would that men should do 
to you, do ye also to them likewise."— Luke 6:31. 

This sermon of our Lord to the disciples, 
and specially to the twelve apostles whom 
he had just ordained, is a very precious one 
to all who are endeavoring to walk in their 



footsteps. The twelve, specially, had left 

all their earthly prospects, ambitions, possessions 

and friends to follow the Lord 

through evil and through good report, with 

no hope of earthly gain, but, on the contrary, 

forewarned of hardship, persecution, 

pain and loss, yet with the eye of faith fixed 

upon heavenly things.— Matt. 19:27-29. 

Considering the fulness of their consecration, 
the Lord looked tenderly and approvingly 
on them (verse 20), and out of 
the fulness of his heart sought to impress 
upon their minds a sense of blessedness of 
their privilege of service and even of suffering, 
saying— "Blessed are ye poor,"— who 
have nothing to call your own; and ye that 
"hunger now"— for righteousness and truth; 
and that "weep now"— in sympathy with 
the groaning creation; and that are "hated 
and persecuted" and "reproached" and have 
"your names cast out as evil, for the Son of 
man's sake,"— for the kingdom of heaven 
is yours; your hunger shall be satisfied, and 
your sorrow shall be turned into joy. All 
these things are occasions for great rejoicing, 
in view of the new order of things to be inaugurated 
at the appearing and kingdom 
of our Lord and Savior.— "Rejoice ye in 
that day, and leap for joy; for behold your 
reward is great in heaven." 

But to those who receive their consolation 
now, in riches and fulness of bread; 
who revel in luxury and pleasure now, all 
unmindful of the suffering and death and 
sorrow and mourning that reign abroad; 
who enjoy the favor of the world because 
they partake of its selfish spirit; to these is 
coming a time of reckoning. And the 
evasive answer, "Am I my brother's 
keeper?" will not avail to turn aside the 
wrath of God which will burn against all 
sin and selfishness until it is consumed. 
"Woe, woe," is coming upon all such— a 
time of trouble such as never was since 
there was a nation: the iron rod of Christ's 
rule must bring down every high thing and 
subdue all things unto him.— Verses 24-26; 
Rev. 19:15; Psa. 2:9. 

Verses 27,28 urge upon all the Lord's 
people a loving spirit— a love which reaches 
out even to enemies and makes due allowance 
for hereditary taint and weakness and 
temptation; which seeks to heal the wounds 
and bruises which have resulted to them 
from the fall, rather than to have revenge 
upon them; and which prays for their deliverance 



from the snares and delusions of 
Satan and the blindness which hinders 
them from discerning the beauty of holiness. 

Verses 29,30 inculcate the principle of 
non-resistance, in contradistinction to the 
world's usual method of exacting their 
rights to the fullest extent possible, and 
often more than their rights. The Lord's 
people are to manifest an opposite spirit — 
a spirit of generosity, which prefers to let 
men take some advantage in temporal 
things, rather than, by contention, to indicate 
that their treasure is on earth instead 
of in heaven. 

Comparison with Matt. 5:39-42 makes 
the matter quite clear, indicating that if no 
LAWFUL redress can be obtained, the smiting, 
the parting with the cloak, etc., are to 
be endured gracefully and with due reverence 
for law and order and respectful submission 
to the powers that be. We may 
only strive lawfully for our rights, unless 
they are too small to be worthy of such consideration. 
—"If any man will sue thee at 

R1735: page 366 

the law, and [so lawfully, even though it 
may be unjustly] take away thy coat, let 
him have thy cloak also"— let the law take 
its course, and give something over to show 
your generosity, rather than be found kicking 
against the pricks. 

The Lord would have his people a noble, 
generous, order loving and law-abiding 
people, far above the petty bickerings 
of a small and mean disposition. Lend to 
the borrower; don't be exacting with the 
debtor; be generous, unselfish, frank and 
courteous— giving place unto wrath and 
meanness, and overcoming them by showing 
a more excellent way. Thus may we 
honor the worthy name we bear. 

The Golden Text— the Golden Rule— is 
a very safe measure to apply to all our actions, 
and should be in constant use every 
day of our lives. 



R1735 : page 366 
OPPOSITION TO CHRIST. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON VOL, NOV. 25, MARK 3:22-35. 

Golden Text— "He came unto his own, and 
his own received him not."— John 1:11. 

As the fame of Jesus increased, because 
of his miracles and teaching (Luke 4:14,15,33-37; 
5:12-15,19,25,26; 7:16,17; 
8:1-4; Matt. 4:23,24; 9:18,26,35; Mark 1:27,28; 
3:20), the opposition to him became 
more and more pronounced, especially 
from the Chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, 
as they were brought into competition 
and unfavorable comparison with him as 
public teachers; and the indications were 
that all the people would be drawn after 
him, and that they would soon be left out 
of their official positions and the accompanying 
honors and emoluments. For such a 
change they were not in heart-readiness, although 
the prophet had foretold that "unto 
him [the Messiah] shall the gathering of 
the people be." (Gen. 49:10.) They did 
not have the humble, unselfish spirit of John 
the Baptist, who meekly said, "There 
standeth one among you, whom ye know 
not: he it is who, coming after me, is preferred 
before me, whose shoe's latchet I am 
not worthy to unloose:. ..he must increase, 
but I must decrease."— John 1:26,27; 
3:30. 

Instead of manifesting such a spirit, they 
allowed pride, envy and malice to fill their 
hearts and actuate their conduct, and sought 
by every means in their power to obstruct 
and counteract the Lord's teaching. In 
this way they shut the door of the Kingdom 

R1736: page 366 

of Heaven against themselves and against 
all those into whom they infused the same 
evil spirit. (Matt. 23:13.) They wickedly 
blinded their own eyes, and then, with their 
deluded followers— the masses of the whole 
Jewish nation— they stumbled into the ditch 
of divine disfavor, where as a nation they 
must remain until the fulness of the Gentiles 
—the elect number to constitute the bride 
of Christ— has come into possession of the 
Kingdom and eternal glory, which they 
proved themselves unworthy of and therefore 
failed to receive, although it was 
offered to them first. 

In the instance of this lesson, it seems 
probable that these caviling scribes were 



commissioned by the Jewish ecclesiastics at 
Jerusalem (verse 22) to come as spies to 
watch his words, withstand his teachings and 
if possible, find some occasion against him. 

While the multitudes marvelled at the 
miracle which cast a devil out of a dumb 
man, enabling him to speak and to be 
clothed in his right mind, saying, "It was 
never so seen in Israel" (Matt. 9:32-34), 
these Scribes and Pharisees circulated the 
idea among the people that Jesus was 
possessed of a devil, and that he cast out devils 
through the power of the prince of devils. 

When this report came to the Lord's 
notice, he called the objectors to him and 
made manifest the absurdity of such teaching, 
saying in substance, with reference not 
only to the miracle just performed, but to his 
entire work as known and opposed by the 
Scribes and Pharisees, "How can Satan 
cast out Satan?" etc. That would be 
suicidal. It would be equivalent to a king 
stirring up strife in his own kingdom and 
working against his own cause; or the head 
of a house alienating and disrupting his 
own family and opposing the operation of 
his own plans. It is not presumable that 
Satan would thus seek to thwart his own 
purposes and oppose his own plans, unless 
he had reached great straits and found his 
kingdom already falling from his grasp. -- 
Verses 23-26. 

Again our Lord reasoned with them 
(verse 27), that "No man can enter into a 

R1736: page 367 

strong man's house and spoil his goods, except 
he first bind the strong man; and then 
he will spoil his house." The "strong man" 
here referred to is Satan, who is the powerful 
"prince of this world"— his dominion 
or house. He will surely hold his dominion 
and pursue his own policy as long as possible, 
and will diligently resist every binding 
influence which threatens the loss of 
his power. The work and teachings of 
Jesus were just such binding influences; 
and the opposition which his word met was 
what might be expected as a manifestation 
of Satan's wrath. During the Gospel age 
generally the Prince of Darkness has 
flourished, and consequently a large portion 
of it is known as the "dark ages." But 
since the beginning of the time of the end, 
in 1799, God has specially let in the light, 



—and particularly since 1878. The more 
the "light" shines, the more active is this 
adversary to preserve his power; but God's 
assurance is that Christ, as the Strong 
Messenger, will now quickly bind Satan's 
power and release humanity from his dominion. 
(Rev. 20:1,2.) Then Christ, already 
the Redeemer, will be the Savior or 
Deliverer of all who come unto God by 
him. That will be salvation to the uttermost. 
What we now enjoy is salvation by 
faith and hope. (Rom. 8:24,25.) 

That Satan's house is now dividing 
against itself is manifest in that we see those 
who with deep and cunning sophistries 
oppose the truth, teaching the doctrines of 
Satan, at the same time doing the good 
works of healing, etc. Thus, for instance, 
Christian Science (falsely so-called, for 
there is nothing either Christian or scientific 
in it) denies both the redemption by 
Christ Jesus and also the very existence of 
God, and yet its advocates undoubtedly perform 
marvels of healing. Can any one 
claim such healings to be of God? Not 
unless God's kingdom is divided against itself. 
Which horn of the dilemma shall we 
accept? Is it likely that God would thus 
endorse the doctrines of Satan? Is it not 
more probable that Satan would exert his 
power to imitate the works of God, thereby 
to support his doctrines and to deceive? 
Such must be our conclusions in view of the 
warnings given us to the effect that thus it 
should be in the last times. 

Before Satan will submit to the binding 
influences of the rightful Prince of this 
world, who now comes to take the dominion 
to himself, we should, as we are forewarned, 
expect Satan to transform himself into a 
minister of "light" (2 Cor. 1 1:14,15), that 
he may preach false gospels and perform 
"many wonderful works," healing, etc., 
insomuch as to "deceive, if it were possible, 
the very elect." Such manifestations (and 
we now see them multiplying all around us 
—in Christian Science, Spiritism, Theosophy 
and other delusions of which we 
were forewarned (Matt. 24:24; 2 Thes. 2:11), 
are evidences that Satan's kingdom 
is being hard pressed by the truth and is 
nearing its end. 

Our Lord's reasoning, although clear and 
logical, did not change the attitude of those 
malicious, wilful opposers, who manifested 
a large measure of Satan's spirit. The 



Lord saw this, and hence the rebuke and 
solemn warning which followed.— See 
verses 28-30. 

The sin which cannot be forgiven, and 
which, therefore, must be expiated or 
punished before the sinner's repentance can 
be accepted, is that of blasphemy against 
the holy spirit, or wilful opposition against 
that which is known to be holy and of 
divine appointment. The spirit which instigates 
such conduct is that of treason 
against God, and those who manifest it in 
any degree are in danger of eternal condemnation 
—eternal death; for, according 
to Heb. 10:26-31; 6:4-8, wilful opposition, 
in the face of clear, full knowledge of the 
divine will, incurs that penalty. Consequently, 
every approach to such a treasonable 
spirit is dangerous. And a manifestation 
of any measure of that spirit is a sin 
which must be punished with stripes. 
(Luke 12:47,48.) Every sin against light 
increases the danger of going into the second 
or eternal death. 

The punishment meted out to such is, 
however, no part of the satisfaction to 
divine justice whereby deliverance from 
Adamic death is secured: that was done by 
Christ, whose sacrifice was the all-sufficient 
ransom which reconciles the repentant 
sinner to God. The "stripes" for every 
measure of wilful sin against the light which 
emanates from the spirit of God are a necessary 
part of the corrective discipline of 
Christ in bringing the reckoned ly justified 
but erring ones back to full harmony 
with God. But if the corrective discipline 
does not produce reform, the increase of 
knowledge and experience will shortly 

R1736: page 368 

make it a wilful sin against full knowledge, 
for which the full penalty would be inflicted 
—second death. Verses 20,21,31 
(See Emphatic Diaglott), seem to indicate 
more of a spirit of fear and anxiety on 
the part of the Lord's mother and brethren, 
than of opposition. His brethren did not 
believe in his claims and doctrines at that 
time, and seemingly could not understand 
why he was so revolutionary in his teachings 
and so antagonistic to all the recognized 
religious teachers of his day, etc., 
etc. (John 7:5), while his mother doubtless 
still pondered the mystery in her mind. 



Yet hearing of the attention he was attracting, 
and the increased murmurings 
of opposition and violence against him, they 
came from Nazareth to see and talk with 
him, and doubtless to urge him to greater 
caution for his safety and to more care for his 
physical necessities of rest and refreshment. 

The occasion of their call upon him was 
an opportunity for the expression of his 
strong and tender affection for all that do 
the will of God. The heavenly relationship 
was the one dearest to him. 

In the opposition which our Lord incurred 
and the manner in which he met it, 
there are valuable lessons for all who are 
similarly tried. Opposition and persecution 
are the inevitable concomitants of 
activity in the service of God, and they 
should be met with reason and candor; and 
when these fail of their purpose, then, with 
solemn warnings of the dangers of such a 
course, the wilful opposer should be left to 
pursue his own course while we turn to 
others with the message of salvation. 



R 1736 : page 368 

CHRIST'S TESTIMONY OF JOHN. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON IX., DEC. 2, LUKE 7:24-35. 

Golden Text— "Behold, I send my 
messenger before thy face."— Luke 7:27. 

This testimony of our Lord concerning 
John was another pointed proof of his own 
identity with the predicted Messiah. John 
himself had claimed to be the fulfilment of 
Mai. 3:1 and Isa. 40:3 (John 1:19-27)- 
not the Messiah, but the forerunner of the 
Messiah, then present, but not yet made 
known to them. Now the Messiah had 
been introduced to them by John, and he 
had been proving his claims by many 
wonderful works of which they were witnesses; 
and yet they believed not. They 
had accepted John and his claim to be the 
forerunner of Messiah, and multitudes of 
them had been baptized of him for the remission 
of sins, believing the preaching of 
John that the Kingdom of God was at hand 
and the Messiah already in their midst. 



Why was it then that they could not believe 
in the Messiah attested by so many 
wonderful works and all the evidences of 
prophecy, even after they had recognized 
and received his forerunner? It was because 
their hearts were not right. It mattered 
not what sort of evidences were 
brought forward, they were not prepared 

R1737: page 368 

to receive any evidences: they were like 

children in the market places who, having 

no interest in what was going on for entertainment, 

showed no response to either the 

gay or melancholy music. No matter what 

kind of evidence was produced, they were 

so out of harmony with the truth that they 

objected to everything. 

"But," our Lord added, "wisdom [the 
divine wisdom, divine truth] is justified 
[proved right— accepted] of all her children:" 
those who have the spirit or disposition 
of the truth are not slow to understand 
the evidences nor to accept the facts. 

Our Lord's testimony of John was that he 
was not only a prophet, and the greatest of all 
the prophets, but much more than a prophet, 
and the greatest man that had lived up to 
his time. That is, he was the most highly 
honored of all men in being privileged, not 
merely to foretell the coming of Messiah, 
but to stand in his very presence and introduce 
him to Israel and the world. That 
honor John evidently appreciated (John 3:28,29), 
but the world did not then; but 
we can see in what esteem such honored 
and faithful ones of the past will be held 
when the light of the new dispensation is 
thrown upon them, as they take their places 
in the earthly phase of the kingdom. 

It was in comparative reference to the 
relative glory of the two phases of the 
Kingdom— the spiritual and the human 
(See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., Chap, xiv.) 
—that the Lord added to his eulogy of John 
the statement of verse 28— "But he that is 
least in the Kingdom of God [in its spiritual 
phase] is greater than he. 



page 370 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



CHANGE OF ADDRESS. 



Some of the friends have been in the habit of 
addressing letters to the Editor and his wife at 
their home. Such are notified that hereafter all 
mail should be addressed to the care of the 
WATCH TOWER office, Bible House, 58 Arch st., 
Allegheny, Pa. We have given up housekeeping 
and are now boarding, believing that 
this will the better enable us to economize time, 
and work to the general interest of the Truth 
and the Lord's "sheep," whom we seek to serve 
more and more. 



R1737: page 370 

Some of our readers, seeing the letter in Oct. 
15 TOWER from C. S. L., who, as a Hebrew, 



found the generally accepted doctrine of the 
trinity an obstacle to the acceptance of Christianity, 
have inquired our view of the subject. 
We refer all inquirers to our issue of June 1 & 
15, 1892 (double number), which contains a 
full treatise of this subject, the Holy Spirit, etc. 
These we supply at eight cents per copy. 



Mr. Gregory Ware publishes the following 
table to indicate the spread of Ritualism in the 
Church of England during ten years: 

Number of churches in 

which used. 
1882. 1892. 



Eastward position, 1,662 3,918 

Eucharistic vestments, 336 1,029 

Altar lights, 581 2,048 

Incense, 9 177 



page 370 



Our next issue will contain the Zion's Watch 
Tower Tract Society's report for the fiscal year 
ending Nov. 30, 1894. 



We continue the offer to send the November 
and December issues of the TOWER free to all 
new subscribers for 1895. 



R1737: page 370 

While the reading of the three volumes of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN is first in importance to 
Bible students, our experience is that the good 
seed seldom brings forth much fruit unless the 
WATCH TOWER'S regular visits serve to water it. 

He, therefore, that circulates the DAWNS does 
well; but he that continues the work by securing 
an interest in the TOWER does betters- 
brings more fruit to perfection. 



R1737: page 371 

VOL. XV. DECEMBER 1, 1894. NO. 23. 



THE FREEDOM OF CHRIST'S BOND-SERVANTS. 



"If the Son therefore shall make you free, 

ye shall be free indeed."— John 8:36. 

"For the slave, being called by the Lord, is the Lord's 

freedman; in like manner, the freeman, being called, is 

Christ's bond-servant."— 1 Cor. 7:22. 

THE love of freedom is inherent in all of 
God's intelligent creatures. And under 
certain limitations it was manifestly the divine 
purpose that all enjoy liberty, the limitations 
in every case being those of righteousness: of 
respect for and submission to divine law, and 
mutual love and respect for the rights and liberties 
of fellow-creatures. Within these metes and 
bounds, and within these only, is the rightful 
exercise of individual liberty. 

But many have very different ideas of freedom 
from this, and are anxious to cast off all 
restraints of God and man and to pursue a selfish 
course untrammeled and without regard 
to either their obligations to God or the rights 
of their fellow-men. Such ideas of freedom 
lead only to riot, anarchy and destruction. 
And those who hold them look upon all the 
wholesome restraints of law and order as infringements 
of their rights and consider themselves 
in bondage under them. This is the 
rapidly growing sentiment all over the world 
to-day among the masses of men. And this is 
what makes the outlook for the future so ominous, 
threatening the utter wreck of the present 
social order in world-wide anarchy. 

The reason for all this is that men have 
neither perfect hearts nor perfect heads. Having 
imperfect hearts, which do not love God 
supremely nor their neighbors as themselves, 
each is selfishly grabbing after all the advantages 
and privileges he can get without regard 
to the interests of his neighbor. And having 
also imperfect heads, they seem unable to reason 
correctly and to judge rightly between self 
and the neighbor. In fact, the whole human 
family is mentally unbalanced and morally deformed. 
We cannot therefore expect that, without 
superhuman aid, they will reach correct 
conclusions and learn to deal righteously. 

Among men there are many grades of intellectual 
ability: some are broad minded, and, 
reaching out, can compass many conditions and 
their operations and foresee the ultimate results; 
while others are by inheritance narrow minded 



and can only view present circumstances apart 

from their general bearings and relationships. 

Then again, some minds are deep, able to 

probe and solve intricate problems with accuracy; 

while others are shallow, merely skimming 

the surface of great questions, not seeing nor 

seeking foundation principles. The broad and 

deep minds are but few, while the narrow and 

shallow are far more general; consequently, 

men are very far apart in their ideas and conclusions 

on every subject, and generally far 

astray from sound judgment. These things 

are, however, a part of our undesirable inheritance 

through sin, which polluted the fountain 

of our being, and left the entire race in this 

deranged condition. 

Our only help under these circumstances is in 
God, who will give us the spirit— disposition— 
of a sound mind, if, in his appointed way, we 

R1737: page 372 

come to him for it. (2 Tim. 1:7.) In his Word 
he lays down certain principles to guide us in 
judgment (Psa. 25:9) and help us to right 
conclusions. He tells us first that as a race we 
have fallen from our original perfection through 
the sin of our first progenitor, and that in consequence 
we are imperfect and unworthy of 
eternal life; but that through Christ he has redeemed 
us, so that if we repent of our sins and 
believe on him, we may now have eternal life, 
being made free from the condemnation which 
passed upon all men through Adam. 

Thus we are made free from condemnation 
to death; and not only so, but now it is also 
our privilege to be liberated, through Christ, 
from the bondage and tyranny of Sin. As a hard 
task-master, Sin is driving all men to deeper 
degradation and death, and Christ undertakes 
to loose his fetters from all those who submit 
themselves to him for this purpose. 

Dearly as we may love liberty, there is no 
man that actually possesses it now; for as the 
result of the fall all men became the slaves of 
Sin, and, to a great extent, the tools of Satan; 
and never, until the promised restitution of all 
things is completed, will men enjoy the precious 
boon of liberty in its full sense. This is 
one of the elements of the gospel— that Christ 
is to bring liberty to the captives of sin and 
death, and to let all the oppressed go free.— 
ha. 61:1. 

To fully emancipate all the slaves of Sin and 
Death is a work which will require the full 
thousand years of Christ's promised reign on 



earth; and the blessings of that emancipation 
will therefore not be fully realized until the 
thousand years are finished, when sin and Satan 
will be destroyed, never again to mar the face 
of God's fair creation. Then men can again 
be entrusted fully with the precious boon of 
liberty; and the liberty of one will not infringe 
upon the liberties of another. The perfect freedom 
of the entire race necessitates such restraints 
upon each individual of the race as brotherly 
love would dictate; and such restraint every 
man will impose upon himself when he has regained 
the original likeness of God, for God 
is love; and then it may also be truly said that 
man is love. And when man is love, it is 
God's purpose to give him fullest liberty to act 
out every impulse of his loving nature. And 

R1738: page 372 

since "love worketh no ill to its neighbor," 
but delights itself rather in deeds of kindness 
and benevolence, this glorious liberty will fill 
the earth with peace and joy. And since love 
also delights in rendering honor to whom honor 
is due, and adoration to whom adoration, and 
praise to whom praise, and gratitude to whom 
gratitude, such will be the attitude of all men 
toward Jehovah, the giver of every good and 
perfect gift, and toward our Lord Jesus, whose 
self-sacrificing love became the channel for 
Jehovah's grace toward us, even while we were 
yet sinners. 

Thus earth will be filled with the music of 
according hearts; and heaven and earth will be 
in perfect harmony when love, which is the fulfilling 
of the law of God, reigns supreme in every 
heart. Then the natural impulse of every heart 
will be to love God with all the heart, soul, 
mind and strength, and the neighbor as itself. 
This supreme love to God, even beyond the 
love of self, is entirely presumable when we 
consider that the elements of reverence and 
adoration must enter so largely into the love 
that is centered upon such a glorious object- 
glorious in his personality, glorious in his character, 
glorious in his wisdom, glorious in his 
power, and glorious in his benevolence and love 
and grace. 

"Oh! what beauty 
Beams in his all-glorious face." 

Then indeed, and not till then, will the whole 
human race enjoy fullest liberty: a thing which 
will be simply impossible until then. Now, 
liberty to one class of men brings slavery to 
another; and the striving of classes, of nations 



and of individuals in the past, to throw off 

the yoke of bondage which the selfishness of 

others imposed upon them, has resulted occasionally 

to such classes and nations in a measure 

of release from the hand of tyranny; but 

individual liberty is still unrealized. Though 

the world has made some progress in this direction, 

so that limited monarchies have displaced 

the absolute, tyrannical monarchies of former 

ages, and republican forms of government have 

in some notable instances superseded these, yet 

R1738: page 373 

Sin, as a hard master, still rules the world. 
Even under this republican government— the 
most free and liberal civil institution in the 
world— witness the party strifes and animosities, 
and the tyranny of class rule, and hear how the 
cry of the oppressed individuals comes up and 
enters into the ears of the Lord of armies. The 
whole world is oppressed under the hard taskmaster, 
Sin, who rules everywhere. He takes 
his seat in legislative halls, in executive mansions, 
in all political, financial and social counsels, 
and even in the solemn assemblies of God's 
professed children; and everywhere his tyranny 
is felt and his subjects suffer. 

This tyrant, Sin, must be routed, before the 
world can ever enjoy the boon of liberty— of 
liberty to appropriate, manage, rule and enjoy 
their God-given possessions in the earth. 

While the actual freedom or liberty of the sons 
of God is not yet enjoyed by any, the inheritance 
of it being lost by the fall, a few have regained 
their title to that inheritance through faith in 
Christ, who purchased it with his own precious 
blood for all who will accept it as the free gift of 
God's grace, through faith in him. And these 
few have, by faith, passed from death unto life 
(John 5:24; 1 John 3:14), and are now, therefore, 
reckoned free— free from sin and its condemnation, 
death, the righteousness of Christ 
being imputed to them by faith. Thus they 
hold a sure title to this glorious liberty, which 
all the sons of God will possess when fully restored 
to the divine likeness. Those who have 
this title the Apostle Paul urges to hold it fast, 
saying, "Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty 
wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not 
entangled again with the yoke of bondage." 
-Gal. 5:1. 

This exhortation can mean nothing more nor 
less than to hold on, by faith, to our justification 
—our title to life through Christ our Redeemer. 
This he was urging the Galatian 



Church to do, the exhortation being prompted 
by the efforts of some Judaizing teachers to 
bring them again under the bondage of the Law 
Covenant. —Gal. 3:1. 

But while the full liberty of the sons of God 
is not yet ours, except by faith, let us consider 
what measure of that liberty is ours now. While 
in Christ we are reckoned of God as free from 
sin, and while we are therefore free from condemnation 
—justified— yet actually we realize the 
law of sin still working in our members, so that 
while our purpose and effort are to be perfect, 
the law of sin working in our members makes 
us realize continually that our actual liberty as 
sons of God is not yet possessed. And in this 
painful realization even we who have the firstfruits 
of the spirit, do groan being burdened.— 
Rom. 8:23. 

But we have in Christ not only a Redeemer 
who paid our death penalty, but a Savior who 
in due time will deliver fully from every element 
of imperfection all who put their trust in 
him. The work of emancipation he will 
do for the world in the appointed times of the 
restitution of all things; and he will begin it 
at once with all those who then willingly and 
patiently submit themselves to his leading, acknowledging 
him as their Lord and King, as 
well as their Redeemer. In thus acknowledging 
Christ as Lord and King, both Christians 
now, and the world in the times of restitution, 
will, if fully loyal, render to him prompt and 
loving obedience, and that without questioning 
either his authority or his wisdom, in the full 
assurance of his loving purpose to finally and 
fully deliver from the terrible bondage to 
Sin, which has become so interwoven with the 
very fiber of our being that the process of 
emancipation must of necessity be long and 
painful. 

In other words, before we can fully realize 
the actual liberty which God designed for all 
his sons, we must first become the willing servants 
of a new master, Christ, in order that he 
may accomplish our deliverance. 

But although Christians are now, of their 
own free will and choice, under the authority 
of Christ, and their constant effort should be 
to bring every thought into captivity to his 
perfect will, even in this sort of bondage they 
are able to realize their freedom to the extent 
that they are able to partake of the spirit or 
mind of Christ; for, "Where the spirit of the 
Lord is, there is liberty." (2 Cor. 3:17.) In 
the same way, when a man is sick, he must give 
up his will and personal liberty to the physician 



R1738: page 374 

who undertakes to restore his health. The 

physician may prescribe nauseous doses; he may 

forbid certain coveted articles of diet; or he may 

subject his patient to painful surgical operations: 

but to all this severe treatment the man 

willingly submits, in hope of regaining his 

health. He and the physician are of the same 

mind, having the same object in view. Consequently, 

the patient does not feel that he is a 

slave forced under this treatment; but, having 

the same mind or spirit in the matter as the 

physician, he realizes his personal liberty. A 

child, on the contrary, unable to see the necessities 

of the case, and therefore unable to enter 

fully into the spirit of the physician and of 

the parents who must act for him, does not feel 

this liberty of his own will, but realizes that he 

is compelled to submit by those in authority 

over him. Such will be the case with the world, 

especially in the early experiences of the Millennial 

age. A difference will be that unless 

their wills are ultimately submitted restitution 

cures will never be granted. But with the consecrated 

children of God now, the case is more 

like that of the matured and intelligent patient. 

Let us, then, while we willingly submit ourselves 
to Christ our Lord, partake largely of his 
spirit, and fully co-operate with him as a wise 
and skilled physician; and in so doing we will 
surely realize our liberty of mind as sons of 
God, even while we are undergoing the tedious 
and painful processes which are designed to accomplish 
our complete emancipation from the 
bondage of Sin. 

"If the Son shall make you free, ye shall 
be free indeed"— even now while our standing 
as free men in Christ is only a reckoned one. 
The freedom which we gain through Christ is 
( 1 ) freedom from the condemnation of sin, and 
consequent access to God in whose favor is life 
eternal; (2) freedom from the bondage of fear 
concerning the future, and consequent rest and 
reliance upon him who has said, "Cast thy 
burden upon the Lord, and he will sustain 
thee;" (3) and daily as we submit ourselves to 
Christ we come to realize more and more of a 
release from the hereditary bondage of Sin. 
One after another, under the treatment of the 
Great Physician, we find the symptoms of the 
old disease of Sin disappearing, and we rejoice 
to find it so. 

We find healing for our unsound minds in 
the balm of divine counsel. We find unerring 



standards of judgment by which to measure our 

own; and from the unerring precepts of righteousness 

and truth we drink in the spirit of a 

sound mind. And with this sound mind viewing 

all the experiences and conditions of life 

from the standpoint of the divine plan of the 

ages, we are enabled to weigh and properly estimate 

all present values and to count the good 

things of this present life as of no consequence 

in comparison to that for which we have covenanted 

to sacrifice them. We can even rejoice 

in tribulation for righteousness' sake. 

But while we enjoy this blessed freedom in 
Christ, we are nevertheless under strictest bondage 
to Christ. As the Apostle Paul states it, 
we are bond-servants of Jesus Christ, and, like 
him, we glory in being so branded. (Gal. 6:17.) 
We realize that we are not our own, but that 
we are bought with a price, and that the 
consecration of our lives to him who purchased 
us is but a reasonable service. 



R1739: page 374 
"PERFECTING HOLINESS." 



"Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us 
cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and 
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God."— 2 Cor. 7:1. 

HOLINESS is moral purity; and it is written 

that "without holiness no man shall see 

the Lord" (Heb. 12:14); and again, "Blessed 

are the pure in heart, for they shall see 

God." (Matt. 5:8.) Purity of heart signifies 

purity of the will or intention, the main-spring 

of life. To be perfectly holy or pure in every 

sense of the word would signify absolute perfection, 

which no man can now claim; but 

those who by faith are clothed with the righteousness 

of Christ are now reckoned "holy and 

acceptable unto God" (Rom. 12:1), the righteousness 

of Christ being imputed to them by 

faith. These, whose hearts are fully consecrated 

R1739: page 375 

and loyal to the Lord, are "the pure in heart," 
whose privilege it is to see God. 

While the heart of every accepted child of 
God must be pure from the very beginning of 
his Christian life (otherwise he is not accepted 



or owned as a child), yet, as the Apostle suggests 
above, there must be from that time onward 
a gradual work of perfecting holiness in 
the fear (filial fear) of God. That is (being 
graciously reckoned of God as holy through 
Christ, from the hour of our entire consecration 
to his will, because our will and effort are to be 
so), we are to go on striving daily against our 
natural imperfections, and endeavoring as nearly 
as possible to make the reckoned holiness more 
and more actual. Thus we should continue to 
grow in grace and in the actual likeness of the 
Lord. 

Some Christians make the very serious mistake 
of supposing that they, as merely passive subjects, 
may receive instantaneously the blessing 
of holiness as a mark of God's special favor. 
But such a conception is very far from the 
Apostle's idea, as expressed above. He represents 
the attainment of holiness as a life 
work, and the individual Christian as the active, 
and not as the passive, agent in accomplishing 
it. From the standpoint of a reckoned holiness 
he is to go on, day after day, and year after 
year, in the work of actual cleansing of himself 
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit— of 
person and of mind— "perfecting holiness in 
the fear of the Lord." 

In the exceeding great and precious promises 
we have abundant incentives to strive daily to 
perfect holiness; but these must be held before 
the mind that they be not crowded into the 
background by the cares of this life and the deceitfulness 
of its pursuits. The pure in heart 
—whose will is only to serve and please him— 
do see God by faith and with the eyes of their 
understanding. They see him in his Word and 
his plan, as he graciously opens it up to their 
minds as meat in due season; they see him in 
his mighty works— of creation, and of redemption 
and salvation; they see him in nature, 
whose open book is ever eloquent in his praise 
to those who have eyes to read; by faith they see 
him in the secret closet communions when there 
is no eye to see and no ear to hear but God's, 
where the heart may freely unburden itself of 
its load and lay down its cares and feel that unutterable 
sense of divine sympathy and love 
which only those can understand who have 
taken the Lord as their personal friend and 
counselor. They see him, too, in his providences; 
for, having entered into their closets 
and shut to the door and prayed to their Father 
in secret, the open reward of his sure and safe 
leading always follows, according to his promise. 

How blessed it is thus to see God— to realize 



his presence and power and his abiding favor 
in all the vicissitudes of life; to watch him and 
see how, as the days and years go by, he makes 
all things work together for good to them that 
love him, and to see also, from the grand standpoint 
of observation he gives us, how glorious 
a destiny he has carved out for us and for all the 
willing and obedient subjects of his authority. 

If we cultivate acquaintance with God and 
with our Lord Jesus, communing with them 
through the divine word and prayer, almost 
unconsciously to ourselves the work of 
perfecting holiness progresses. To be thus in 
communion with them is to receive more and 
more of their mind and disposition. And having 
the mind of God thus in us, as the controlling 
principle of our actions, to what purifications 
of the flesh it will also lead! 

It begins at once to clean up the whole man. 
Old unclean, as well as sinful, habits are put away; 
unseemly conversation is not permitted to pass the 
door of the lips, or if, by force of old habit, slips 
of this kind occur, they are promptly repented 
of and rectified; and unholy thoughts are not 
entertained. The same spirit of holiness prompts 
also to the cleansing and purifying of the body, 
the clothing, the home, and all with which we 
have to do; for the outward man must be in 
conformity with the pure heart within, and with 
the heavenly guests that make their abode with 
us.-John 14:23. 

It is quite possible, however, that the more 
we succeed in purifying ourselves of the old 
carnal nature, the more we may realize the imperfections 
that still remain; for the purifying 
process is also an educating one: we learn to 
appreciate and admire purity, holiness, the more 

R1739: page 376 

thoroughly we assimilate it, until "the beauty of 

holiness" becomes the most desirable of all possessions, 

that which is lacking of its glory is our 

deepest concern and the great work of perfecting 

holiness becomes the chief business of life. 

Let the good work go on, dearly beloved, and, 

in the end, the Lord himself shall be your exceeding 

great reward. 



THAT I MAY KNOW HIM. 
--PHIL. 3:8-10.-- 

Lord, let me talk with Thee of all I do, 



All that I care for, all I wish for, too. 
Lord, let me prove Thy sympathy, Thy power, 
Thy loving oversight from hour to hour! 
When I need counsel, let me ask of Thee: 
Whatever my perplexity may be, 
It cannot be too trivial to bring, 
To one who marks the sparrow's drooping wing, 
Nor too terrestrial since Thou hast said 
The very hairs are numbered on our head. 
'Tis through such loop-holes that the foe takes aim, 
And sparks, unheeded, burst into a flame. 
Do money troubles press? Thou canst resolve 
The doubts and dangers such concerns involve. 
Are those I love the cause of anxious care? 
Thou canst unbind the burdens they may bear. 
Before the mysteries of Thy word or will, 
Thy voice can gently bid my heart be still, 
Since all that now is hard to understand 
Shall be unraveled in yon heavenly land. 
Or do I mourn the oft-besetting sin, 
The tempter's wiles, that mar the peace within? 
Present Thyself, Lord, as the absolving priest, 
To whom confessing, I go forth released. 
Do weakness, weariness, disease, invade 
This earthly house, which Thou, Thyself, hast made? 
Thou, only, Lord, canst touch the hidden spring 
Of mischief, and attune the jarring string. 
Would I be taught what Thou wouldst have me give, 
The needs of those less favored to relieve? 
Thou canst so guide my hand that I shall be 
A liberal "cheerful giver," Lord, like Thee. 
Of my life's mission do I stand in doubt, 
Thou knowest and canst clearly point it out. 
Whither I go, do Thou Thyself decide 
And choose the friends and servants at my side. 
The books I read, I would submit to Thee, 
Let them refresh, instruct and solace me. 
I would converse with Thee from day to day 
With heart intent on what Thou hast to say; 
And through my pilgrim walk, whate'er befall, 
Consult with Thee, O Lord, about it all. 
Since Thou art willing thus to condescend 
To be my intimate, familiar friend, 
Oh, let me to the great occasion rise, 
And count Thy friendship life's most glorious prize. 
Selected. 



R1739: page 376 

THE PROGRESS OF RELIGIOUS UNION. 



THE movement in the direction of religious 



union, which received such a marked impetus 
from the World's Parliament of Religions 
last year, has been making very rapid strides 
for some months past. 

Last spring an important movement began 
in the Episcopal churches of Cleveland for the 
purpose of unifying the various Christian denominations. 
A little later a plan for the 

federation of the various branches of the Presbyterian 
church was agreed upon by a representative 
committee at their meeting in Philadelphia 
to be recommended to their appointing 
bodies for adoption. 

"In Australasia, by the action of the General 
Quadrennial Methodist Conference, a committee 

R1740: page 376 

was appointed to carry into effect the 
proposals for the reunion of the various Methodist 
divisions, so that there, as in Canada, the 
consolidation of the various Methodist sects into 
one church will soon be completed. 

"The manifesto of the Congregational State 
Association of New Jersey, issued last spring, 
is another important contribution to the reunion 
movement. It practically proposes an alliance 
of the Reformed and Presbyterian churches, five 
in all, and a basis of formal union with the Free 
Baptist and 'Christian' churches, and in its 
'Quadrilateral' formulates also a plan for the 
federation at least of the various Protestant 
churches of the United States. 

"The federation of churches for common religious 
and social work has gained a decided 
impetus in recent months, especially in England, 
and to some extent in this country. In the 
former, the Nonconformist churches of Surrey 
and Hampshire, and in the midland counties 
about Nottingham, in municipal centers like 
Birmingham and Manchester, have united for 
federated efforts. 

"Still another sign of the progress of the desire 

R1740: page 377 

for union is found in the wide appeal made 
for the observance of last Whitsunday as a day 
of special intercession for the reunion of the 
churches of Christendom. The archbishop of 
Canterbury and the archbishop of Dublin, together 
with four bishops of the English church 
and a number of dignitaries of the Irish church, 
joined in this appeal. The moderator of the 
church of Scotland, the presidents of all the 
Methodist conferences, the chairman of the 



Baptist Union, and leading Congregational 
ministers, preached on the subject. 

"The Grindewald Conference for 1894 discussed 
the subject of reunion and related church 
problems. As on similar occasions, representatives 
of all branches of the Protestant church 
spoke on this absorbing theme; and the new 
contribution thus made to the literature of the 
question serves to augment the interest already 
awakened throughout Christendom. 

"The American Institute of Christian Philosophy, 
at its summer meeting, July last, at 
Chautauqua, devoted two days of its session to 
the reunion question." 

CARDINAL GIBBONS ON THE SUBJECT. 



Not only are the various subdivisions of the 
leading Protestant denominations of Christendom 
drawing together, but they are seeking also 
a closer affiliation with the church of Rome, 
which also strongly reciprocates the sentiment, 
and with all its characteristic subtlety and energy 
is enlisted in the scheme. 

Cardinal Gibbons recently preached at the 
Cathedral in Baltimore on the subject of Christian 
unity. He said:— 

"Thank God there is a yearning desire for 
the reunion of Christianity among many noble 
and earnest souls. This desire is particularly 
manifested in the English speaking world. It 
is manifested in England and in the United 
States. I myself have received several letters 
from influential Protestant ministers expressing 
the hope of a reunion, and inquiring as to the 
probable basis of a reconciliation. Reunion 
is the great desire of my heart. I have longed 
and prayed for it during all the years of my 
ministry. I have prayed that as we are bound 
to our brethren by social and family and by 
natural and commercial ties, so may we be 
united with them in the bonds of a common 
faith." 

Addressing the "prodigal" protestants, whose 
return to the Catholic fold he invites, he says: 

"The conditions of reunion are easier than 
are generally imagined. Of course there can 
be no compromise on faith or morals. The 
doctrine and moral code that Christ has left us 
must remain unchangeable. But the church 
can modify her discipline to suit the circumstances 
of the case. 

"Every well-organized society must have a 
recognized head. The mayor and governor 



hold this position in the municipal and state 
governments; the President is the head of the 
republic; the Pope is the head of the church. 
The Papacy is as necessary to the church as the 
Presidency is to the republic. 

"In coming back to the church, you are not 
entering a strange place; you are returning to 
your father's house. The furniture may seem 
odd to you, but it is just the same as your 
fathers left three hundred and fifty years ago. 
You worship as have your fathers worshiped. You 
kneel before the altar at which they knelt. You 
receive the sacraments which they received.... 
You come back like the prodigal to your father's 
house, and the garment of joy is placed 
upon you, and the banquet of love is set before 
you, and you receive the kiss of peace as a 
pledge of your filiation and adoption. You 
can say with the Apostle, 'we are no longer 
strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens 
of the saints [of the calendar of the Roman 
church].' 

"One hearty embrace of your tender mother 
will more than compensate you for all the sacrifices 
you may have made. The leaders of the 
Reformation... dismembered the Christian 
flock. They scandalized the Gentile world by 
the dissensions which have prevailed, and have 
retarded the onward march of Christianity.... 
May the day be hastened when the scattered 
hosts of Christendom will form an army [literally, 
no doubt— EDITOR] which infidelity and 
atheism cannot long resist; and they would 
soon carry the light of faith and Christian civilization 
to the most remote and benighted 
parts of the earth." 

PAPACY AND THE EASTERN CHURCHES. 



The most recent remarkable feature of the reunion 
movement is seen in the efforts now being 
made for the reunion of the various branches 
of the Catholic church. 

"Pope Leo XIII. has recently been occupied 
with a conference in Rome of the patriarchs of 
the oriental churches, the final intent of which 
is the reunion of all churches in the East with 
the church of Rome. This, if accomplished, 
will be the greatest achievement of the pontificate 
of the present pope, and will make the 
name of Leo XIII. one of the most famous of 
this century. 

R1740: page 378 



"The most important oriental churches now 
separate from Rome are the Chaldean, under 
the patriarch of Babylon, which has its adherents 
in Mesopotamia, Persia and the island of 
Malabar, and which separated from the Catholic 
church in the fifth century; and the Abyssinian 
church, with branches in Egypt, depending 
on a patriarch in Cairo, which separated in 
the fifth century also. There are also other 
sects from Mesopotamia and Armenia. The 
most important of all, however, is the Greek 
church, which extends through Greece, European 
Turkey, Asia Minor, Syria, Egypt, and 
Palestine. She has still her four patriarchs at 
Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem, 
each being independent. This church 
was united to Rome until the twelfth century 
and reunited by the councils of Lyons and 
Florence. When Turkey took Constantinople 
there was a definite separation. 

"The Eastern or Greek church is really the 
parent stock; the Catholic church seceded from 
it when the Eastern patriarchs refused to acknowledge 
the supremacy of Rome. Some small 
conflicts of doctrine precipitated the division; 
but the main reason why the Christian church 
split in two in 1054 was the claim of the Eastern 
patriarchs for absolute independence, and 
the contention of the Pope that he was the 
paramount authority in matters ecclesiastic. 

"In the main the doctrines of both were the 
same. In form and rites differences crept in 
and a wide gulf between the two was opened 
by the final settlement of the controversy over 
the marriage of priests. Before the eleventh 
century celibacy or marriage were open questions 
which each Bishop regulated in his own 
diocese according to his judgment of the best 
interests of the church. Some time after that 
date the church of Rome adopted the law of 
priestly celibacy and made it obligatory. The 
patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch and Constantinople 
took a different view. They not 
only allowed priests to marry, but unmarried 
priests could not be ordained: though, if their 
first wives died, they could not marry again. 
But it was established as a rule of the church 
that a Bishop must be a monk sworn to celibacy. 
Both rules are in force to-day. 

"The effect of a reunion of the two churches 
would be to add about 90,500,000 members to 
the Catholic church and to cause the Greek 
church to pass out of existence. 

"The Russian government has recently ordered 
all priests of the Roman Catholic faith 



now imprisoned in Siberia to be liberated. 

Orders have been given to stop all interference 

with the Catholic churches in Poland. At 

Athens, Belgrade and Bucharest, which are headquarters 

of the Greek church, the scheme is 

noticed approvingly. On the other hand the 

Pope has endowed a Greek church seminary in 

Italy with a large annual sum. Pope Leo has 

also endowed the Armenian and Greek colleges 

at Rome and the Greek church seminary 

of St. Anne's at Jerusalem. Cardinal Vanutelli, 

one of the most eminent prelates of the 

Papal court, has recently published a book going 

to show that reunion, far from weakening 

either church, would strengthen them both. 

"The general belief that the Czar is the head 
of the Russian church is not exact, he being 
simply her protector. 

"To the Greek faith belong the Russian, 
the Servian, the Roumanian, the Georgian, and 
the Bulgarian churches. She even has adherents 
among the Slavs in Austria. 

"Finally, there is a Greek- Albanese sect, 
which has a small number of believers in Sicily 
and Calabria, in the south of Italy. 

R1741 : page 378 

"This immensely important meeting, which 
now takes place, is one of the greatest events in 
the history of the relations between Rome and 
the East. There is no precedent to compare 
it to in the annals of Catholicism. To obtain 
this reunion of the oriental churches with 
the Roman the pope intends to create a special 
congregation for them, quite separate from the 
propaganda, with a cardinal for prefect whom 
he would nominate. The pope would leave to 
the oriental churches all their privileges and 
rites, only demanding that the patriarchs elected 
by the synod of bishops should submit their 
elections for the approbation of the Roman 
pontiff, to whom the examination of all questions 
of dogmatic and ecclesiastic rights would 
be reserved. For asking so little it is believed 
that Leo XIII. will succeed, as the principal 
point of discussion in the eastern churches has 
always been the fear of being sacrificed to Rome 
and the Latins. The pope wishes to show that 
the papacy is neither Latin nor western, but 
universal. After the meeting he will issue an 
encyclical to the eastern church, which will be 
a development of what he recently wrote in the 
Praeclara encyclical about the union of the 
churches. 

"The union would be followed by the institution 



of three great papal-oriental colleges at 
Corfu, Athens, and Smyrna. 

In addressing the conference on Oct. 24, '94 
the pope said: 

"Above all we note the absence of the Patriarch 
of the Armenians. We shall not on this 
account, however, recede from our purpose.... 
Nothing will prevent us from solving the grand 
problem from the religious side, while awaiting 
more propitious times for the rest of the work." 

R1741 : page 379 

PROSPECTIVE CHARACTER OF THE PROPOSED 
RELIGIOUS UNION. 



While we thus view the rapid strides in the 
direction of religious union, it is no less interesting 
to note the prospective character of the 
proposed great organization, or church of the 
future. 

The points to be specially noticed are, (1) 
The willingness of Catholics as well as Protestants 
to make concessions in the interest of reunion. 
This might be considered a favorable 
sign, were the motives and considerations good 
ones. But they are selfish motives. Not brotherly 
love, but fear, is the mainspring of this desire 
for union. The fear is that mentioned by 
our Lord in his prophecy concerning our day. 
"Men's hearts failing them for fear, and for 
looking after those things which are coming on 
the earth: for the powers of heaven [religious 
powers] shall be shaken." (Luke 21:26.) It 
is a part of the general fear that has taken hold 
of the leaders in financial, political and religious 
circles. The leaders of Catholicism note the 
shaking as surely as the leaders among Protestants, 
and all feel that union is the only means 
of increasing their influence, or even of preserving 
their existence. 

Especially is this true on the part of the 
Church of Rome. She still boasts of the infallibility 
of her teachings, which declare most 
positively that there is no escape from everlasting 
torment outside of her communion. Does 
she confess the errors of her past course and 
teachings, and claim to be reforming? If so, 
that would be a step in the right direction. 
But no, she still boasts of her unchangeableness; 
and consequently we must believe that 
her present attitude and recent utterances respecting 
Protestants and the Bible are Jesuitical 
and hypocritical, and for her own purposes 



merely. 

Protestants have less policy and more sincerity 
in their desire for union. They too, however, 
desire it chiefly for strength and prestige 
before the world, and not from heart- love of 
Christian fellowship. Each sect is anxious to 
hold to its own traditions and doctrines and 
name, although all confess that there is really 
little in their confessions of faith worth contending 
for anyway. Indeed, we could rejoice 
in this feature were it not that with the mass of 
musty error they are discarding also the very 
root and essence of Scripture doctrine; viz., 
faith in Christ as the Redeemer who paid the 
ransom for all at Calvary. But all is going, 
good and bad, and gentility and morality are 
soon to be the only tests of Christian name and 
fellowship— all this to keep nominal Christianity 
popular with the world and to insure the 
continuance of its outward show of prosperity, 
in which thrifty "tares" are mistaken for 
"wheat." 

The leaders of the World's Parliament of 
Religions, of a year ago, it will be remembered, 
suggested even the dropping of the name Christian, 
and the use of the term Religious Union, 
so as to unite, not only all the denominations 
called Christian, but also the various heathen systems, 
in a universal church; and this suggestion 
should awaken all true believers to the real situation. 
As they see all the "tares" being thus 
bound together, they should the more forcibly 
realize the meaning of our Lord's words, "Come 
out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers 
of her sins, and receive not of her plagues." 

But all this only confirms us in the correctness 
of our interpretation of prophecy. It will 
be remembered by old readers that, so long ago 
as 1880, we pointed out in these columns that 
the Scriptures foretold a combination or federation 
of Protestants and their subsequent cooperation 
with Papacy. Every step of the way 
now, as this union develops, will be watched 
by us all with interest. 

But from the same Scriptures we learn that 
the union will last but a short time, and that 
instead of its being favorable to the truth and 
the Lord's saints, it will be the reverse, except 
as He shall overrule it in their special interest. 
Therefore,— "Say not ye [God's consecrated 
people], a confederacy [a union], neither fear 
ye their fear nor be afraid."— Isa. 8:12-16. 

Since writing the above we have received the 
following important announcement. 

Rome, Nov. 29.— "The Pope has appointed 
a theological commission to inquire into the 



validity of ordinations in the Anglican church 

R1741 : page 380 

from the view point of the Roman doctrine. 
His Holiness has invited Cardinal Vaughan to 
Rome to discuss the union of the Anglican and 
Roman churches. He also proposes to submit 
a specific scheme to a conference of Cardinals, 
as in the case of the Eastern churches. The 
Pope is still engaged on the encyclical on the 
English church question." 

We learn also, upon good authority, that it 
is the intention of the Pope to issue in January, 
1895, two or three encyclical letters; one freeing 
the Papal delegate of the United States (at 
present Satolli) from the supervision of the 
congregation of the Propaganda of Rome, 
making him responsible to the Pope only; another 
relating to the relationship of the Roman 
church in South America to secular governments; 
and another to the Bishops in England, discussing 
the position of the church of Rome, possibly 
suggesting terms of union with the church 
of England. 

A few days ago the "Guild of St. James the 
Apostle" was organized in Cincinnati, O. The 
Cincinnati Enquirer says:— 

"Their endeavors will be to bring the Episcopal 
churches back to the old ceremonial of the 
mediaeval days, when the church was still in 
communion with the Roman Catholic church, 
and a very considerable and influential part of 
it. They do not disguise the fact that it would 
be their highest realization to have all the Catholic 
churches reunited under one and the same 
head—the Pope of Rome— the Greeks, who for 
several centuries have been separated from it by 
schism, and the Episcopalians, who were separated 
from the Mother church during the reign 
of Henry VIII. 

"Rev. Robert A. Gibson, pastor of Christ 
Episcopal church was seen and said: 'The 
proposed movement is not for a consolidation of 
the Episcopalian, Greek and Roman churches 
alone, but of all denominations, Catholic and 
Protestant. It is in the distant future, and we may 
not live to see it, but it will come. The Episcopal 
church first proposed it 1886 and asked for a 
general conference to come to an understanding 
upon the matters of baptism, sacrament and 
local episcopate. At first none of the churches 
gave it much consideration, but now the Presbyterians 
have appointed a committee to confer 
with the Episcopalians, and it is receiving the 
careful attention of other denominations.' 



"The Episcopalian church and the church of 
England, numbering 10,000,000 people, are 
virtually pledged to it. The object is, organic 
union of all denominations, to present a solid 
front against heathenism. We are a long way 
in advance of the days when heretics were burned, 
and are rapidly approaching the time when 
a universal church will be possible, although it 
may take a good while yet." 



R1741 : page 380 

CHRIST TEACHING BY PARABLES. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON X., DEC. 9, LUKE 8:4-15. 
Golden Text— "The seed is the Word of God."— Luke 8:11. 

This parable needs no further explanation 
than that which the great Teacher gave. 
But his words should be carefully pondered 
and should lead to self-examination, as not 
the hearers only, but the doers of the Word, 
are acceptable with God. 

It is worthy of special notice, however, 
that the Lord expected his disciples to see 
the drift of this parable without inquiring 

R1742: page 380 

for an explanation. "And he said unto them, 

Know ye not this parable? and how then 

will ye know all parables? Unto you it is 

given to know the mystery of the kingdom 

of God, but unto them that are without, all 

these things are done in parables, that seeing, 

they may see and not perceive; and 

hearing, they may hear and not understand, 

lest at any time they should be converted 

and their sins should be forgiven them."— 

Mark 4:10-13. See also Isa. 6:9,10; Matt. 13:12-17; 

John 12:39,40; Acts 28:25-28; 

Rom. 11:7. 

While our Lord thus indicated that his 
disciples should have been able to interpret 
this parable, because of their knowledge of 
the truth it was designed to illustrate, it is 
not to be inferred that all his parables were 
so simple as to be promptly understood at 
the time they were spoken. Many of them 
illustrated truths not revealed at that time, 
and hence they could not be understood 



then. The expression, "To you it is given," 
etc., applies, not only to the disciples of 
that day, but to the disciples all through the 
age. While the truth is made manifest 
gradually, more and more, as meat in due 
season, the parables which illustrated those 
truths can only be seen as illustrations as 

R1742: page 381 

the truths they illustrate become manifest. 
To "them that are without"— outside the 
pale of the believing disciples— which included 
the whole nation of Israel except a 
small "remnant," these illustrations of the 
truth were, of course, as dark as were the 
truths themselves to which they allowed 
their prejudices to blind their eyes, greatly 
to their own detriment. And it was for 
this very reason— because their hearts were 
not right, and they were therefore unworthy 
of the truth and its blessings— that the 
Lord opened his mouth in parables and 
dark sayings, so that they might fail to perceive 
the blessings of which they were proving 
themselves unworthy. It was because 
of this unworthiness that blindness came 
upon Israel, and that it will continue until 
the fulness of the Gentiles shall have come 
into possession of those blessings which 
were first offered to Israel and rejected by 
them. 



R1742: page 381 

THE TWELVE SENT FORTH. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XL, DEC. 16, MATT. 10:5-16. 

Golden Text— "As ye go, preach, saying, The 
kingdom of heaven is at hand."— Matt. 10:7. 

In this lesson we have an account of the 
method which the Lord pursued in the 
harvest work of the Jewish age. This 
is a topic which should be of very special 
interest to those who recognize the 
present as the harvest time of the Gospel 
age, and who believe that the same Lord of 
the harvest is now present directing and 
superintending the work of this harvest as 
he did that (See Rev. 14:14; Matt. 13:30; 



Mark 4:26-29); and who see further, that 
the two ages correspond to each other as 
type and antitype.* 

In the two harvests we see a remarkable 
correspondence, not only in the exactly 
equal time allotted to each— 40 years— but 
also in the character of the work to be done 
and the methods of doing it. The present 
harvest work has now been in successful 
operation for twenty years (1874-1894), 
and the methods which the Lord's providence 
has indicated and blessed have been 
very similar to those of the Jewish harvest. 
Though the Lord is not visibly present here, 
as he was there, we have the assurance of 
his Word, as above cited, that the work is 
his— under his direction, supervision and full 
control; and he who does not believe this 
has no authority for engaging in it; he is 
not sent. But he who is sent, and who goes 
under the Lord's direction, is appointed to 
one of the grandest privileges that was ever 
offered to any man, although now, as in the 
Jewish harvest, the present reward is nothing 
that the world would envy.— 
Matt. 10:16-28,34-36. 

While the methods in this harvest and 
the Jewish have been similar, there is no 
reason to believe that they ought to be exactly 
alike; for the Lord of the harvest is 
surely at liberty to adopt in either case the 
methods that please him best: and in each 
case he has evidently taken cognizance of 
the conditions and circumstances of the 
times, and adapted his methods accordingly. 
The following points of similarity and 
dissimilarity in the methods of the two harvests 
are worthy of comparison as indicating 
first, the similarity of the work, and, secondly, 
the freedom of the Lord in adapting his 
methods to the circumstances of the times. 

In the Jewish harvest the Lord sent out 
first the twelve, and then the seventy, and 
was ready to send as many more as might 
become ready; for, said he, "The harvest is 
great, and the laborers are few." (Luke 10:1-12.) 
He sent them out two and two under 
his direction and supervision. He also 
gave them a message to declare and instructions 
how and to whom to declare it, and 
required that those going forth should be 
fully consecrated to the work, being filled 
with his spirit. Indeed, such were his forewarnings 
of the present wages they should 
receive, that none would undertake it except 
such as had learned to walk by faith, 



who were willing to "endure hardness as 
good soldiers," and whose "treasure" was 
"laid up in heaven." 

In the present harvest the same course is 
manifest. Since its beginning in 1874, the 
Lord has been instructing his consecrated 
disciples in the truths of another new dispensation, 
revealing the glorious harmony 
and beauty of his plan in outline and detail, 
and also its orderly times and seasons; and 
as they have become prepared he has been 
sending them out— generally two and two, 
where they have been able to give their 



♦MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. vii. 

R1742: page 382 

whole time to the work— to declare, "The 
Kingdom of heaven is at hand!" (in its 
glory and completeness now, as, at the time 
of the Jewish harvest, it was at hand in its 
embryo condition) and to explain and 
prove the truth of the message. 

As in the Jewish harvest the Lord's instructions 
confined the special work of those 
messengers to the lost sheep of the house 
of Israel, so his instructions here confine 
the special work of his messengers to the 
household of faith— spiritual Israel.— Gal. 6:10; 
Isa. 52:7. 

Here, too, as there, they have been forewarned 
of that which their experience bears 
out; viz., that there is no earthly gain in it, 
no ease or worldly honor, no present reward 
except the blessed consciousness of 
being a co-worker with God and of knowing 
the fellowship of the sufferings of Christ, 
the joys of heart-communion with him now, 
and the hope of future glory in his presence. 
Only those who accept of these conditions, 
and who are willing to endure hardness as 
good soldiers, being impelled thereto by the 
spirit of the Lord abiding in them, have 
any desire or incentive to this service; and 
if any such grow weary in well doing and 
look longingly back to the things left behind, 
it is not long before they drop out by 
the way. 

In the respects just mentioned the methods 
in the two harvests are very similar; but 
there are also points of dissimilarity which 
we should not fail to note. For instance: 

(1) Those sent out in that harvest 



preached the truth orally, and attention was 
drawn to them and their message by reason 
of the miracles which they were empowered 
to perform; while in this harvest the preaching 
is done largely by the printed page, disseminated 
through the agency of traveling 
colporteurs sent out generally two and two 
to bear the message. 

The propriety of this feature of the change 
is very manifest, since now education has 
become general and the printing press has 
largely multiplied the influence of every 
one of the harvesters. By taking advantage 
of this modern invention they magnify 
the influence of the truth a thousand fold. 
And in consequence of these improved facilities 
of printing and of general education, 
and the still greater advantage of nineteen 
centuries of gospel privilege and blessing, 
the truth now needs no such endorsement 
as the miracle-working power given 
at first, and so necessary then to the awakening 
of attention and the confirmation of 
the truth. In fact such methods now would 
be out of harmony with the thief-like presence 
and mission of the Lord here. (Rev. 16:15; 
Matt. 24:43,44; 1 Thess. 5:2.) If he 
comes as a thief, it is not to sound a trumpet 
before him, calling the world's attention 
to his work. Those gifts gradually disappeared 
from the Church as the necessity for 
them decreased. When faith gained a sure 
and substantial footing, such helps were 
taken away, and believers were expected to 
walk by faith, and not any longer by sight. 

(2) Those sent out in that harvest were 
instructed to depend upon the people to 
whom they went for support in temporal 
things, while the reapers of this harvest are 
independent of such means, greatly to the 
advantage of the work. The reason for 
this variation is also manifest. In the Jewish 
harvest the reapers were sent exclusively 
to a consecrated people. The entire nation 
had bound itself by a solemn covenant 
to the Lord (Exod. 19:8), and in consequence 
had been specially favored in many 
ways, but chiefly in that to them were committed 
the oracles (the law and the testimonies) 
of God. (Rom. 3:1,2.) According 
to their covenant, therefore, it was the duty, 
and it should have been esteemed by them 
a privilege, to receive and entertain any 
messenger of the Lord whose credentials 
warranted such a claim and thus protected 
them from impostors— as theirs did, their 



personal character and demeanor and the 
divine testimony of miracles thus endorsing 
them. It was because of this preparation 
of Israel as a people for the reception of the 

R1743: page 382 

gospel (whether they had profited by it or 
not), that they were expected to recognize 
both the harvest message and the appointed 
and attested messengers; and their opportunity 
for either receiving or rejecting them 
was the first applied test of their worthiness 
of the special favors then about to be offered 
to them. It was on this account that the 
harvesters were instructed to go to that 
people in a manner to impress them with 
a sense of their obligations as a covenant 
people to receive and gladly to entertain the 
messengers of the Lord to them. Throughout 
the whole nation the fame of the Messiah 
and the divine attestations of his power 
and authority had spread (Matt. 4:23-25; 
Mark 1:28,32-34,45; 6:31-34; 8:26,27; 
Luke 4:14,15,36,37; Matt. 9:26,31; 14:1,2), 

R1743: page 383 

and these now sent forth in his name 

represented him, so that in receiving them 

they were receiving him, and in rejecting 

them they were rejecting him. Hence the 

blessing promised on their reception, and 

denunciations that followed their rejection. 

(Verses 1 1-15.) When they departed out 

of the city or house that rejected them, they 

were to shake off the very dust of their feet 

for a testimony against them, because that, 

in so doing, they were violating their most 

solemn covenant with God and bringing 

upon themselves the just condemnation of 

such a course. That condemnation, however, 

was not to eternal death, but to deprivation 

of the privileges and blessings of 

the new dispensation then about to be offered 

to them, but of which they proved 

themselves unworthy. Nor was the condemnation, 

either then or at the full end of 

their age, an individual one; for although 

the nation as a whole was cast off from divine 

favor and blinded, and destined to remain 

so until the gospel favor had passed 

over to the Gentiles, yet, during this time, 

if any individual of the nation repented and 

severed his ties with the nation and family 

(which the persecuting spirit of the nation 



has always compelled), he might, through 
such tribulation, enter into the embryo kingdom 
—the Gospel Church. 

In this harvest the circumstances attending 
the work are in many respects quite 
different. Though here also the Lord has a 
consecrated people— nominal spiritual Israel 
—they are not a local nation within a circumscribed 
boundary, but they are scattered 
here and there as wheat in the midst of 
tares. The reapers here must therefore 
search them out singly, while there they 
were grouped in cities and families and as 
an entire nation. 

Again, the circumstances here are the reverse 
of those there in that the testimony 
to the truth is given in the midst of a very 
babel of voices, all claiming to teach the 
truth; and so great is the confusion that only 
the consecrated and faithful souls, whose 
practised ears know the Master's voice from 
all others, are able to discern it. They have 
an affinity for the truth: the holy spirit 
within them recognizes the same spirit in 
the message, as well as in the messengers, 
and it satisfies their longings as nothing else 
can do. 

Thus the harvest message becomes a test 
of faithfulness to God's covenant people 
here, and as a sickle it accomplishes the 
reaping. These different circumstances and 
conditions of this harvest make necessary 
the very reverse of the former method of the 
dependence of the messengers upon the hospitality 
of the people. Now, in order to make 
manifest that no mercenary motives, or motives 
of indolence, or love of ease, or popularity, 
or of desire to impose on others prompt 
the reapers of this harvest, the Lord in his 
providence has so arranged the work here 
that all such motives are manifestly eliminated 
from the harvest work; and it is seen 
to be a self-sacrificing labor of love, prompted 
by that devotion and zeal which the truth 
alone inspires. And this of itself commends 
the truth to the attention of the Lord's people 
where the messenger comes in contact 
with them, though often it reaches them 
through the printed page alone, where the 
luster of the truth is its own commendation. 

This difference in the two harvests was 
aptly illustrated by the Lord when he likened 
the Jewish nation to wheat and chaff, 
and his work there to a fan for blowing the 
chaff away— thus indicating the compactness 
of that people; while here his professed 



people are likened to wheat and tares, thus 
indicating their scattered and confused condition 
and the necessity of careful searching 
and gathering out. 

It would therefore be entirely out of order 
for the reapers in this harvest to denounce 
or shake off the dust of their feet for a testimony 
against any city now, for no city 
or community as such is now in covenant 
relations with God as was Israel; and so different 
are the customs and circumstances 
of this time that a man might brush the dust 
and denounce the people for a week and 
not be noticed, or, if noticed, merely considered 
as of unsound mind, so intent are the 
masses of the people on pursuing their own 
course and grasping after gain. 

The consequence now to those who recognize 
and yet reject the truth will be very 
similar to those which followed Israel's rejection 
(their complete overthrow in the 
midst of great tribulation), excepting that 
the increased light and privilege of this time 
will merit and receive the greater punishment 
--"a time of trouble such as never was 
since there was a nation." (Dan. 12:1.) 
Surely, then, it will be more tolerable for the 
land of Sodom and Gomorrah (Matt. 10:15) 
in the day of judgment (the Millennial age) 
than for the condemned house of Israel, either 

R1743: page 384 

fleshly or spiritual, which are judged unworthy 

of the grace of God, because they 

cast it from them. The judgment upon condemned 

fleshly Israel was a terrible overthrow 

in the midst of harrowing scenes of 

war and desolation and famine, leaving 

them utterly desolate and scattering them 

as fugitives among all nations; while that 

which is shortly to come upon nominal 

spiritual Israel is described as a time of unparalleled 

trouble, such as never has been 

and never again shall be. 

Another point of contrast which this lesson 
suggests is that between the Lord's 
methods for the harvest work of the Jewish 
age and the subsequent methods of the 
inspired Apostles, equally under the Lord's 
direction and supervision, which not only 
winnowed the grain of that harvest, but also 
sought to systematically store it. The 
wheat of that dispensation was to form the 
nucleus of the Christian Church— the embryo 
kingdom of heaven— which as a compact 



and sympathetic body subject to Christ, 

imbued with his spirit, and representing his 

truth, was to stand before the world as a 

living testimony to his truth and to the 

power of his grace for nearly two thousand 

years. It was necessary, therefore, as believers 

multiplied in the days of the apostles, 

to adopt some simple method of recognition 

which would serve to unify them 

and to make them helpful one to another as 

members of one body. 

But as that work of organizing the Church 
of the new Gospel dispensation was no 
part of the harvest work of the old Jewish 
dispensation, so the present harvest work 
or reaping of the Gospel dispensation is also 
separate and distinct from the work of 
the new Millennial dispensation now drawing 
on. But there is this difference between 
our days and those of the apostles: the 
wheat of the Gospel age is not to form the 
nucleus of another Church for the Millennial 
age; and those gathered out from among 
the tares are not beginning, but are finishing 
their course on earth, and the time of 
their sojourn in the flesh is very short and 
cannot go beyond the twenty years of harvest 
yet remaining. Their organization for 
the work of the new dispensation will be 
beyond the vail, when they are changed to 
the glorious likeness of the Lord. 

In view of these facts and also of the nature 
of the harvest work, and the additional 
fact that each one so gathered is expected 
to enter into the harvest work as a reaper, 
and will do so to the extent of his ability 
and opportunity, it is plain that the forming 
of a visible organization of such gathered 
out ones would be out of harmony with the 
spirit of the divine plan; and, if done, would 
seem to indicate on the part of the Church 
a desire to conform to the now popular idea 
of organization or confederacy. (See Isa. 8: 12.) 
The work now is not organization, but 
division, just as it was in the Jewish harvest 
proper (Matt. 10:34-36.) And this harvest, 
as illustrated by the natural, is the 
busiest time of all the age, because the time 
is short and the "winter" is fast approaching. 
What is to be done must be done quickly, 
and there is abundant room in the great 
field for every member of the body of 
Christ to reap. 

While, therefore, we do not esteem a visible 
organization of the gathered ones to be 
a part of the Lord's plan in the harvest 



work, as though we expected as an organization 

to abide here for another age, we 

do esteem it to be his will that those that 

love the Lord should speak often one to another 

of their common hopes and joys, or 

trials and perplexities, communing together 

concerning the precious things of his Word, 

and so help one another, and not forget the 

assembling of themselves together as the 

manner of some is; and so much the more 

as they see the day approaching.— Mai. 3:16; 

Heb. 10:25. 

Let us, then, give ourselves diligently to 
the great harvest work, observing and carefully 
following the providential lines for 
the guidance of the work as indicated by 
the Lord of the harvest— the same Lord, 
and just as truly present and active in this 
harvest as in the Jewish harvest, though invisible 
to mortal sight. What dignity and 
grandeur and blessed inspiration does the 
realization of this truth give our humble 
services! Truly it is not a glory which the 
world can discern, but faithfulness to the 
end of our course will bring an exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory which will appear 
to all God's intelligent creatures of 
every name and order; for in the ages to 
come he will show forth the exceeding 
riches of his grace in his loving kindness 
toward us who are in Christ Jesus (Eph. 2:7); 
and, praise the Lord ! our exaltation and 
glory will be for a grand and benevolent 
service— even the privilege of scattering 
universal blessings. 



page 386 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



"GOOD HOPES" FOR 1895. 



The Supplement which accompanies this issue 
is not to be considered "an appeal," nor "a request," 
for money for the Tract Fund. It is 
nothing of the kind. It is merely sent out as a 
convenience for such of our readers as are anxious 
to have a hand in the good work which the 
Lord is now doing, and who appreciate the privilege 
of being co-workers with us in it. 

The name may be original with us, but the 
plan is not. It is the Lord's arrangement 
through the great Apostle Paul. (See 1 Cor. 16:2.) 
It is not given as a law; there is no such 
bondage— no tithing under the New Covenant. 
But as a suggestion it certainly is a good one, 
and has, so far as we are aware, proved a blessing 
to all who have observed it. It has not 
only enlarged their contributions to the Lord's 
cause, but it has correspondingly enlarged their 
hearts, and increased their love and deepened 
their interest in the truths which they thus 
practically confess. 

The "Good Hopes" enable us to judge, 
somewhat in advance, of the amount of money 
at our disposal for the year, and permit us to 
contract accordingly; and where large quantities 
and low prices are factors, this is of considerable 
importance. 

True, many failed considerably of what they 
had "hoped" to do for the cause during this 
year; but they received the blessing which always 
comes from willingness to render the Lord 
service and trying to do it. On the whole, as 
will be noted from the Reports in this issue, our 
Great Provider made up from other sources what 
he did not see best to entrust to their disposal. 



R1744: page 386 
JERUSALEM TO BE PROBED. 



Excavations certain to add to the knowledge 
of the old city of Jerusalem are soon to be 
made. The Sultan has granted a firman to the 
Palestine Exploration Society, of London, giving 
a long-sought privilege. The permission 
to dig includes a generous strip of land all 
around the walls on the outside, excluding only 
Moslem burying-grounds and holy places. 

The work is to be done under the direction 
of Frederick Bliss, a young American of considerable 
reputation as an archaeological explorer. 
Shafts are to be sunk on the hill of 
Ophel, where were the royal gardens and the 
tombs of the kings. It is hardly possible that 
this ground can be turned up without valuable 
discoveries being made. One thing hoped for 
is that the old wall that swept around the 
southern brow of Zion may be found. 

The imperial firman grants a two years' privilege, 
time enough to make the old city of 
Solomon and the Jebusites tell some of its long 
hidden secrets. — N.Y. World. 



R1744: page 387 

VOL. XV. DECEMBER 15, 1894. NO. 24. 

"WHO SHALL ASCEND." 



"Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall 
stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands 
and a pure heart: who hath not lifted up his soul unto 
vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive the 
blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from 
the God of his salvation. This is the generation 
of them that seek him, that seek the face 
of the God of Jacob."-Psa. 24:3-6. 

IN this psalm the prophet David takes the 
standpoint of the dawn of the Millennial age, 
when, after the great time of trouble, the kingdoms 
of this world will have become the Kingdoms 
of our Lord and of his Christ (Rev. 1 1 : 15), 
—when the "Times of the Gentiles" will 



have been fulfilled, and "he whose right it is" 
will have taken unto him his great power and 
begun his glorious reign. Those who have 
studied the plan of the ages and its times and 
seasons know that this is due to be accomplished 
by the year 1915,— only twenty years future 
from the present time. Then will the words 
of this prophecy be fulfilled— "The earth is the 
Lord's and the fulness thereof; the world, and 
they that dwell therein; for he hath founded it 
upon [instead of] the seas, and established it 
upon [in place of] the floods."— Verses 1,2. 

The earth, the world, the seas and the floods, 
the hills and the mountains are all used here, 
as in numerous other instances, in a symbolic, 
and not in a literal sense, which would be absurd 
in this connection. The earth and the 
world represent the present social order of things, 
or human society as at present organized. The 
seas and the floods represent an increasingly 
large class of mankind which restlessly recoils 
against the restraints of the present social order 
and at times grows turbulent and threatening. 
The hills and mountains represent governments. 

When the earth is the Lord's and the fulness 
thereof, it will not be because all the kingdoms 
of this world will have been converted to God 
and purified, and their kings permitted to reign 
by the grace of God, as they now claim to do, 
and because all the now restless masses of men 
will have become docile and submissive to the 
present governing powers; but it will be as the 
prophet declares, because God will have "founded 
it upon the seas and established it upon the 
floods." That is, the present earth, or social 
organization, and the present heavens, or ruling 
powers, will have passed away, and the new earth 
will be established upon the ruins of the old. 
When the waves of the restless sea-element of 
society shall have arisen in their might and 
overwhelmed the whole present social order, so 
that the wild and stormy sea of anarchy shall 
prevail everywhere, then, amidst the wreck and 
ruin, the desolation and universal despondency 
and despair, the voice of Jehovah will be heard, 
saying, "Be still, and know that I am God: I 
will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted 
in the earth." (Psa. 46: 10.) And out of 
the wild commotion of that stormy sea God will 
bring order and peace. 

Instead of this restless sea of humanity he will 
found the new earth, the new order of things; 
yea, and he will firmly establish it upon [in place 
of] the floods: there he will establish his Kingdom 
"which cannot be moved." (Heb. 12:28.) 
And he will set his King upon his holy hill of 



Zion, and give to him the nations for his inheritance, 
and the uttermost parts of the earth for 

R1744: page 388 

his possession. (Psa. 2:6,8.) Then indeed shall 

the King, the Lord's anointed, reign in righteousness; 

and princes shall decree justice (Isa. 32:1); 

and, in consequence, there shall be 

abundance of peace so long as the moon endureth. 

--Psa. 72:7. 

There will then be but one Kingdom (mountain 
or hill) in all the world— the Kingdom of 
God; and his Anointed will be King in all the 
earth in that day. (Zech. 14:9.) This hill or 
kingdom of the Lord is that to which the Psalmist 
refers when he raises the question, "Who 
shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who 
shall stand in his holy place?" To ascend into 
the hill of the Lord is to come into his 
Kingdom as loyal and obedient subjects, as true 
citizens, worthy of all its blessings and privileges, 
and not as aliens and foreigners, having 
no part or lot in the common interests and inheritance 
of all the true and loyal people of 
God, viz., eternal life and all its blessings of 
righteousness, peace and everlasting joy. Who 
indeed shall be counted worthy thus to ascend 
into the mountain of the Lord? "And who 
shall stand in his holy place?" The reference 
here is to the antitype of the typical temple of 
God, which, standing upon the top of Mount 
Zion, prefigured the glorious true temple, the 
Church of the living God, in Kingdom power 
and glory. Who shall stand in that holy place 
in that age of glory and blessing now so near 
at hand?— who shall be counted worthy to reign 
with Christ in his Kingdom? 

The answer to both inquiries is the same- 
He that hath clean hands and a pure heart; 
who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor 
sworn deceitfully." These will be the required 
qualifications for citizenship in the Kingdom, 
when the Kingdom is established; and they are 
also the qualifications required now of all those 
who would be heirs of that coming Kingdom. 
It will be observed that the qualifications mentioned 
are not those of faith (for faith in the 
gospel of the Kingdom, which includes faith in 
Christ the King and Redeemer, is implied in 
the desire to be in the Kingdom in any capacity); 
but the qualifications mentioned here are 
those of character. The Scriptures elsewhere 
make more specific mention of the necessary 
faith, but always implying a character consistent 
with the faith. (Acts 16:31; John 3:16,36.) 



The prophet does not ignore faith, but points 

to that character which is the legitimate consequence 

of a true faith exercised unto godliness. 

A faith which does not produce character is 

null and void. (Jas. 2:17.) Therefore it is 

plain that both the heirs and the subjects of the 

Kingdom of God must have that character 

which is both begotten and developed by the 

faith of the gospel; for if the faith of the gospel 

be held in unrighteousness there is no place 

in the Kingdom for any such. (Rom. 1:18.) 

Let us consider the character-requirements here 

mentioned. 

"Clean hands."— That means clean actions, 
clean conduct. If bad habits of any kind have 
been cultivated, they must be promptly forsaken. 
The hands must not be defiled with the holding 
of bribes, nor with the gain of oppression, 
and every evil thing must be resolutely put 
away. (Isa. 33:15.) It is in vain that any profess 
loyalty to God and to his anointed King 
and Kingdom while they continue in a sinful 
course of action. Loyalty to the Kingdom signifies 
determined opposition to sin in all its 
forms, and a firm resistance of it. 

"A pure heart."— That signifies purity of will, 
intention or purpose, which, like the needle to 
the pole, always turns toward righteousness. 
Though some sudden or strong temptation may 
for an instant, through the weakness of the 
flesh, draw it to the right or to the left, yet 
quickly it recovers its normal position which is 
true to righteousness and truth. A pure heart 
loves righteousness and truth, and hates iniquity. 
It loves purity, and despises all that is impure 
and unholy. It loves cleanliness of person, of 
clothing, of language and of habits. It delights 
only in the society of the pure, and shuns all 
others, knowing that "evil communications corrupt 
good manners." 

"Who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity." 
Pride is an abomination to the Lord 
and to all those who partake of his spirit. It 
is a weed which, if once permitted to take root 
in the heart, will soon crowd out every grace. 
The Psalmist says, "I hate vain thoughts;" and 
such should be our sentiments. The grace of 

R1744: page 389 

humility, meekness, is one of the most beautiful 
that can adorn the character. It takes a sober 
estimate of personal qualifications, is not puffed 
up, does not behave unbecomingly, and seeks 
to exercise its talents, not for pride and vain 
glory, but for the joy of doing good. It is 



modest, candid and sincere, both in consideration 
of its own qualifications and those of others. 
What comfort and pleasure are found in the society 
of those possessed of such a spirit. 

"Nor sworn deceitfully."— Those who make 
a solemn covenant with the Lord, and who thereafter 
wilfully despise or ignore it, have sworn 
deceitfully; and surely no such disloyal subjects 
can be admitted either to citizenship or heirship 
in the Kingdom of God. But those who, 
in this age, have made a solemn covenant with 
God and who are true to their covenant, even 
unto death, they shall ascend into the holy 
place, the temple of God— they shall be the heirs 
of the Kingdom, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ; 
while all such, in the age to come, shall be recognized 
and privileged citizens of the Kingdom. 
These shall receive the blessings of the Lord 
promised in his Word. After first receiving the 
imputed righteousness of Christ through faith, 
they may, under divine grace, be made perfect 
in righteousness and worthy of eternal life. 

This is the generation of them that seek the 
face of the God of Jacob. Men do not obtain 
these blessings without seeking them, nor without 
seeking them in God's appointed way- 
through Christ, by humble reliance upon his 
finished work of redemption, and by the full consecration 
of all their ransomed powers of mind 
and body to his holy will, which is only our 
reasonable service. 

Beloved, ye who are called by his grace to 
stand in his holy place, let us ponder these 
things. Are our hands clean and our hearts 
pure? are we humble and faithful to our covenant? 
Let us see that we meet these conditions, 
and let us run with patience the race set before 
us, looking unto Jesus. 



R1744: page 389 

"THINK IT NOT STRANGE." 



"Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial 
which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened 
unto you: but rejoice, inasmuch as ye are 
partakers of Christ's sufferings, that, when his glory 
shall be revealed, ye may be glad also 
with exceeding joy."— 1 Pet. 4:12,13. 

PERHAPS few have learned to value the discipline 
of the Lord as did the faithful 



Apostle who wrote these words. While he as 
well as others realized that no affliction for the 
present seemeth joyous, but rather grievous, yet 
knowing the ministry of such discipline, and 
recognizing it as an additional evidence of 
sonship to God, he rejoiced in being a partaker 
of it. 

But why is it that fiery trials must come to 
us? Is there no way of gaining the crown 
without these crosses? No, there is not; for if 
ye receive not the discipline of trial whereof all 
are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons; 
for what son is he whom the Father chasteneth 
not? Trials of faith and patience and love and 
endurance are as necessary to our development 
and our fitting for the high position to which 
we are called, as are the instructions of the divine 
Word and the special manifestations of divine 
grace. The blessed sunshine and shower 
have their benign influence, but none the less 
the cloud and the storm; but we need ever to 
bear in mind that the cloud has its silver lining, 
and that God is in the whirlwind and in the 
storm. 

Like water upon the parched earth, and like 
sunshine to vegetation after winter snows, so 
the message of divine truth comes to us and 
with it the blessed realization of divine favor. 
In the joy of our new-found treasure we are apt 
to think at first that we have actually entered 
the Beulah land of joy and peace where sorrow 
and trial can never more come to us. But no; 
there are sorrows ahead and trials beyond, and 
you will need all the strength which the truth 
can give and all the blessed influences that divine 
grace can impart to enable you to endure 
faithfully to the end. 

But do not stop to worry about the trials until 
they come; only remember the Apostle's 
words— "Think it not strange," when they do 

R1744: page 390 

come. They come to prove you and to strengthen 
your character and to cause the principles of 
truth and righteousness to take deep root in 
your heart. They come like fiery darts from our 
great enemy, Satan, whose wrath against the 
children of light is permitted to manifest itself 
in various ways; but his darts cannot injure 
those who securely buckle on the divinely provided 
armor of truth and righteousness. "Wherefore," 
says the Apostle, "take unto you the 
whole armor of God,. ..above all, taking 
the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able 
to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked."— 



Eph. 6:13-17. 

The Christian life is thus set forth as a warfare 
—a warfare, "not against flesh and blood, 
but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against 
spiritual wickedness in high places." (Eph. 6:12.) 
In other words, as Christians imbued with 
the spirit of our Master, we find the principles 
of truth and righteousness which we have espoused 
to be at variance with the whole present 
order of things, which is to a very large extent 
under the control of "the prince of this world" 
—Satan. And when sin is thus so inwrought 
throughout the whole social fabric of the present 
age; and not only so, but when we also 
find the flesh, our own old nature, in harmony 
with it, we see into what close quarters we must 
come with the enemy, and what a hand to hand 
and life- long struggle it must needs be. Yet 
our weapons are not carnal, but spiritual, and 
the Apostle says they are mighty for the pulling 
down of the strongholds of error and iniquity. 
~2 Cor. 10:4,5. 

When, therefore, the fiery trials and darts 
from the enemy come upon you, be ready as an 
armed soldier of the cross to meet and withstand 
them. If you run away from them, you 
are a coward, and not worthy to be called a 
soldier. 



R1744: page 390 

"A THORN IN THE FLESH." 



"And lest I should be exalted above measure through the 

abundance of the revelations, there was given to me a 

thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, 

lest I should be exalted above measure. For this 

thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might 

depart from me. And he said unto me, My grace is 

sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect 

in weakness. Most gladly, therefore, will I 

rather glory in my infirmities, that the 

power of Christ may rest upon me. 

"Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, 

in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's 

sake; for when I am weak, then am I strong."— 2 Cor. 12:7-10. 

THIS was the language of an overcoming 
saint, meekly bowing to the divine will. 
Noble and loyal and true and strong in character 
as the Apostle Paul was, he yet realized that he 



was a member of the fallen race, and, in common 
with all humanity, subject to frailties. 
God had called him to a most important and 
glorious work— that of bearing the gospel to 
the Gentiles; and, for the benefit of the whole 
Church, to him were granted special and wonderful 
revelations, even above all the other 
honored and beloved apostles. He was caught 
away in mental vision to the third heaven— 
the new dispensation, the Millennial reign of 
Christ, and shown things (doubtless the plan 
and purpose of God, as now made manifest to 
us, largely through his writings, in the light of 
this harvest period, but) not lawful to be uttered 
then, because not then due to the Church. 
(2 Cor. 12:4.) Upon him devolved the care 
of all the Churches of the Gentiles, and great 
were the responsibilities of his office. Though 
the position was a most laborious and trying 
one, requiring great fortitude, zeal, energy and 
self-denial to fill it, it was also one of great honor. 
And Paul appreciated the honor of such intimate 
fellowship of service with the Lord, and 
manifested his appreciation by untiring zeal and 
enthusiasm. But even in this the Lord recognized 
a personal danger to his beloved and 
faithful Apostle— a danger of pride and self-exaltation, 
which, if it should develop, would 
soon unfit him for further service and rob him 
of his future reward. So the thorn in the flesh 
was permitted to come. It came, not from the 
hand of the Lord, though by his permission; 
but, as the Apostle affirms, it was "the messenger 
of Satan to buffet" him. 

R1744: page 391 

A thorn in the flesh is always a painful thing; 
and whatever this may have been, it was something 
severely trying to Paul. At first he 
thought only of the pain and annoyance it 
caused him, and of its hindrance to him in the 
Lord's work: it was a messenger of Satan that 
he was anxious to get rid of. Three times he 
besought the Lord for its removal. But no, it 
had come to stay, and the Lord mercifully 
made him to realize that though it was very 
undesirable to the flesh, it was nevertheless 
profitable to him spiritually; for otherwise he 
might become exalted overmuch. 

The implication of weakness the Apostle 
humbly accepted. He did not resent it and 
begin to boast of his strength and to reproach 
the Lord for not exerting his power for its removal; 
but, on the contrary, with grace and 
gladness he accepted the Lord's judgment of 



his heart, and his estimate of his strength, and 
appreciated the love that thus cared for him 
personally, while through him he was ministering 
to the whole Church. Yes, praise the Lord ! 
he chooses his own instruments, and whets and 
grinds and polishes them for the more effectual 
service, and wields them with force and power 
in the service of his people; but in all the painful 
and laborious service he has special care also 
for the willing and faithful instrument. He 
will not suffer it to be tried beyond that which 
it is able to endure; nor will he suffer it to be 
exalted without some counterbalancing thorn in 
the flesh to preserve its equilibrium. 

R1745: page 391 

The answer to the Apostle's prayer, although 
not in accordance with his request, was a blessed 
consolation— "My grace [my favor] is sufficient 
for thee; for my strength is made perfect [made 
manifest] in [your] weakness." 

This is also the blessed consolation of every 
truly submissive heart. How many of the Lord's 
people are tempest-tossed and sorely tried in 
these days; and doubtless many of them have 
earnestly besought the Lord to remove this or 
that trial or affliction; but the piercing thorn 
still remains for their discipline and perfecting. 
Let all such, like Paul, give ear to the Master's 
voice— "My favor is sufficient for thee." What 
if other friends forsake thee, and hosts of foes 
seek to overwhelm thee, if thou hast my favor, 
my love: is not that sufficient? And what 
though the flesh be weak and the heart sometimes 
faint, my strength shall supply your lack; 
and while you walk in the way of my appointment, 
your weakness shall only the more manifest 
the power of God working in and through you. 

What sincere child of God has not realized, 
in times of greatest need and felt weakness, the 
power of God on his behalf supplementing his 
weakness with strength from above? And when 
the task was accomplished to which the Lord 
had called him and for which he felt so incompetent 
of himself, has he not realized in the 
outcome the wonder-working power of God? 

In view of such a gracious provision to supplement 
his weakness with divine strength, the 
faithful Apostle meekly responded, "Most gladly, 
therefore, will I rather glory in my infirmities, 
that the power of Christ may rest upon me." 
Having put forth all his own energies and faithfully 
used his own ability to its fullest extent as 
a wise steward, it was his joy to recognize the 
hand of the Lord working with him— by miracles 



and signs and with demonstrations of the 
spirit and of power. (Heb. 2:4; Acts 19:11; 
1 Cor. 2:4.) These demonstrations of divine 
power supplementing Paul's faithful use of his 
natural abilities were the Lord's endorsement 
of all he did— the manifestations of divine approval 
both to himself and to others, and consequently 
cause for great rejoicing. 

With the Apostle it is also the privilege of all 
God's children to have their weakness supplemented 
by divine grace, while they meekly and 
faithfully use their talents in the Lord's service. 
And so all the faithful may rejoice in tribulations 
and infirmities, while God overrules the 
former and supplements the latter to his praise. 

But to rejoice in tribulations, to endure meekly 
and patiently a sore thorn in the flesh, and 
even to glory in such personal infirmities as 
make the power of Christ the more manifest, 
is not possible except to those whose hearts are 
in fullest accord with the loving purposes of 
God. If the heart be influenced by pride or 
ambition or love of fame or wealth or any 
worldly ambition, joy in tribulation is impossible. 
But if the old ambitions and desires of 
the flesh are kept under, and faith, love, hope 
and zeal are all alive and active, we shall have 
the consciousness of the divine favor, and then 
we can rejoice in every experience. 



R1745 : page 392 

"THE LORD IS MY SHEPHERD." 



"The Lord is my Shepherd: I shall not want."— Psa. 23:1. 

IN comparing himself to a shepherd, the Lord 
made a very apt illustration of his care for 
his people— a care which is always solicitous for 
their welfare, watchful for their interests, patient 
with their youth and inexperience and untiring 
in its ministry of love. 

But it is only when the individual can say in 
his heart, The Lord is my Shepherd, that this 
blessed ministry of the good Shepherd can be 
realized. It is when we become his sheep that 
we learn the value of the Shepherd's care; and 
the man who has had experience under the care 
of the good Shepherd can truly say with the 
Psalmist, "I shall not want." He shall not 
want for the temporal necessities of the present 
life— "Bread shall be given him; his waters 



shall be sure." (Isa. 33:16; Matt. 6:33,34.) 
He shall not want for light and be left to walk 
in the darkness of this world, but unto him shall 
be given the light of life. (John 8: 12.) He 
shall not want the necessary care and discipline 
to fit him for the future life; "for whom the 
Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every 
son whom he receiveth." (Heb. 12:6.) He 
shall not lack the consolations of divine grace 
in times of trial and affliction; for it is written, 
"My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength 
is made perfect in weakness." (2 Cor. 12:9.) 
He shall not want for fellowship and sympathy; 
for the Lord himself hath said, "I will never 
leave thee nor forsake thee" (Heb. 13:5); and 
again, "Lo, I am with you alway."— Matt. 28:20. 

Surely no good thing will he withhold from 
them that walk uprightly— as true sheep. He 
will protect them in every danger, and guard 
them with a shepherd's care. 



R1745 : page 392 

Z.W.T. TRACT SOCIETY'S ANNUAL REPORT. 



IT is with great pleasure, deep gratitude and 
profound recognition of the great Master's 
providential leadings, that we summarize and 
lay before our readers the results of their labors 
and ours with and under the great Chief Reaper 
in the present harvest work, for the past year— 
from Dec. 1, 1893 to Dec. 1, 1894. 

We congratulate our readers that although the 
year has been marked by Satan's fiercest assaults 
upon the Lord's work and upon us of the 
WATCH TOWER as his and your representatives 
in the supervision of that work,— and notwithstanding, 
too, the fact that the year has been 
one of unprecedented pinch in financial affairs, 
nevertheless it has been the most successful year 
of the Tract Society's experience in the amount 
of money received and expended, and in the tract 
pages circulated, as you will see from the reports 
of the Secretary and Treasurer subjoined. True, 
the work is small:— very small is the sum at our 
disposal for the spread of the Truth compared 
with the immense sums donated to other tract 
societies for the promulgation of what we believe 
to be chiefly error. The Lord in his wisdom 
has seen fit to limit the means at our disposal, 
and no doubt for good reasons;— quite probably 
to draw out to greater activity and self-denial 



each one who has the cause at heart. 

"It is required of a steward that he be found 
faithful." We at the WATCH TOWER office are 
in several respects stewards of the Lord's goods, 
"stewards of the manifold grace of God," 
and it is his approval which we crave. We trust 
that as he reviews the efforts and results of the 
year— your efforts and ours— that he can approve 
both you and us, saying, "Well done, 
good, faithful servants." But we of the TOWER 
office are not only the Lord's stewards, of goods 
both temporal and spiritual, but we are also 
your stewards,— stewards of those monies which 
you have contributed to the Tract Fund— and 
as your stewards this report is due to you, and 
submitted accordingly. 

If we cannot congratulate you that the sum 
is a large one, we can congratulate you that it 
has accomplished more than double as much 
as the same amount generally accomplishes 
in the hands of other Tract Societies, where 

R1745: page 393 

salaries and office rent consume a large proportion 

of the receipts. Twenty-three millions 

of pages of tracts is a good showing; and if 

the DAWN pages circulated were added, it would 

represent over thirty millions of pages more. 

Thank God for the privilege of having a share 

in this, his work of gathering together his elect 

unto him, preparatory to the setting up of his 

Kingdom in power and great glory. Compare 

Psa. 50:4,5; Matt. 13:30, and Matt. 24:31. 

The colporteur work has been considerably 
interfered with by reason of the financial depression. 
Tens of thousands of people who 
have the time to read, and whose minds are 
more than ever open to the message of God's 
Kingdom coming, have been obliged by necessity 
to refuse to purchase DAWNS, and have 
been supplied with free tracts instead. This in 
turn has worked unfavorably to the colporteurs, 
many of whom have been obliged to receive credits 
and some assistance from the Tract Fund while 
others have been forced to quit the work entirely 
until times improve, which we expect will not be 
before next Spring. These dear co-laborers have 
many trials and discouragements by the way, 
and need our prayers. Let all who feel an interest 
in the cause remember in their devotions 
these whose labor of love has been God's instrumentality 
for carrying the good tidings of 
great joy to so many of you, and this branch of 
the service, which has been specially attacked by 
the Adversary during the year just closed. 



Impressed with the fact that a number of 
school teachers, ministers and business men who 
had tried the colporteur work had failed to make 
it a success, we have devised a new method of 
work specially suitable for them. A few are 
already using it with success, and we hope that 
it will enable many to engage in the harvest 
work in a self-supporting way during the coming 
year. The new method is not at all adapted 
to the use of the average colporteur, who 
succeeds best with the usual methods: indeed 
the new method is suited only to those who by 
the grace of God can respond that they possess 
the eight qualifications for public ministry, 

R1746: page 393 

mentioned in our issue of Sept. 1; and it is consequently 
explained only to such as can and do 
thus respond. 

The "New Branch of Service," started some 
time ago, but mentioned and enlarged recently, 
—viz., the arrangement for the holding of 
meetings, by traveling representatives of the 
Tract Society— is proving spiritually profitable 
to the Church, as indicated by letters received 
from various quarters, which tell of spiritual 
good derived, and truth more clearly 
discerned. 

This work is carried on economically, too, 
that the means supplied by the Lord may reach 
as far and accomplish as much as possible. A 
reference to the Treasurer's report will show that 
only $403.88 has been expended in this way; 
and this was nearly all spent during the past three 
months. Brother M. L. McPhail only has been 
giving all of his time to this work, and he alone 
has all of his expenses paid out of the Tract 
Society's fund, the other laborers in this branch 
of the service, Brothers Antoszewski, Austin, 
Bell, Blundin, Bohnet, Draper, Merrill, Murphy, 
Owen, Page, Ransom, Richards, Thorn, 
Webb, Weber, Weimar, West, Williams, Wise 
and Witter, being traveling salesmen, colporteurs 
or business men whose expenses are met by their 
business or otherwise and who delight to give 
an evening or a Sunday, as they can arrange it, 
in serving the Lord's flock— pointing to the 
green pastures and the still waters and feeding 
and rejoicing with the "sheep." 

During the past five months Brother McPhail 
has visited groups of WATCH TOWER readers 
in fifty-three cities, and has held about one 
hundred and fifteen meetings in the states 
of Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, 
West Virginia, Ohio, Kentucky, Delaware, 



Indiana, Illinois and Michigan. The other 

brethren, all together, have probably held as 

many more meetings— some in New York, Pennsylvania, 

Ohio, Massachusetts, Iowa, Wisconsin, 

Indiana, Canada, Illinois, Texas, California, 

Oregon and Florida. Several others expect to 

engage in this branch of the work early next 

year. This branch of the service also deserves 

our sympathies, co-operation and prayers. 

The blessings attending these meetings will 

depend largely upon the sympathy and cooperation 

of those visited; and the Lord will 

not be unmindful of your labor of love and 

R1746: page 394 

service in such co-operation, in however humble 
the capacity; and he will reward with grace 
now and with glory hereafter. All who desire 
such meetings, and who would co-operate in 
making them a blessing to themselves and others, 
are invited to let us know of their desires. And 
any who make use of the "Good Hopes" blanks 
which accompany this issue may, if they so prefer, 
designate what proportion of their donations 
they wish to have applied to the forwarding 
of this special branch of the service. 

In view of the activity of our great Adversary, 
and his endeavor to counterfeit not only the 
light of truth, but also the ministers of the light, 
it is well that the Lord's people should be on 
guard against the agents of another gospel, which 
denies that our Lord bought them (2 Pet. 2: 1) 
and claims that he was merely an example and 
teacher. No such error need be feared from 
any of the Brethren who bear our Letter of Introduction 
and Commendation. 

Concerning the spiritual condition of the 
Church in general, we have exceptionally good 
opportunities forjudging, being in communication 
with many of the household of faith the 
world over; yet only the Lord can read the 
hearts;— "the Lord knoweth them that are 
his." However, we are glad to be able to report 
that while the love of many waxes cold, 
we have many cheering evidences that the 
spiritual warmth of others is constantly increasing; 
and although Satan is permitted to 
sift out some, as we were forewarned, others are 
by the same trial only the more firmly rooted 
and grounded and built up in the most holy 
faith. And for every one who leaves the ransom 
and the light of present truth, another, more 
earnest and zealous, comes forward— reminding 
us of our Lord's words, "Hold that fast which 
thou hast, that no man take thy crown."— 



Rev. 3:11. 

Not only do the letters received, and the reports 
from the traveling brethren and the colporteurs, 
testify to much earnestness and love 
for the truth, but the Treasurer's Report, which 
follows, testifies to the same in no uncertain 
tones; for where the poor give their hard-earned 
dollars their hearts must be also— especially in 
the recent close times. While the sum contributed 
would be small indeed for wealthy 
people to spend in forwarding the grandest tidings 
that ever reached the ears of man, yet we 
know that the donations of some have not been 
without considerable self-denial; for among our 
readers are not many great or rich in this 
world's greatness and riches. 

SECRETARY'S ACCOUNT. 



During the year from Dec. 1, '93 to Dec. 1, 
'94 there have been circulated, free, the 
following: 

Copies OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS, 1,159,091 
" ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 125,892 

Since tracts vary as to the number of pages, 
it is customary to reckon their circulation by 
pages. The foregoing, so stated, represent 
23,321,900 pages. 

TREASURER'S ACCOUNT. 



RECEIPTS: 

From "Good Hopes," $5,664.56 

" other sources, 4,076.00 



Total, $9,740.56 



EXPENDITURES: 

For Balance due from last year, $ 478.60 

" Tracts, TOWERS, etc., sent out free,. 5,738.97 
" Postage, freight, wrappers, 

etc., for same, 658.55 

" Labor, mailing same, 572.00 

" Foreign translations, plates, 

etc., Tracts and DAWNS, 1,025.26 

Assistance to colporteurs, DAWNS 

to the poor, etc., 553.30 

Interest on colporteurs indebtedness 

toT.P. Co., 310.00 

Expenses of traveling Evangelists, 403.88 



Total, $9,740.56 



Thus, by the grace of God, we start upon the 
new year free from all debts and hopeful of 
great privileges and opportunities just before 
us. Let us each do with our might what our 
Master has placed within our reach; and let us 
do it promptly and zealously, remembering that 
nearer and nearer comes the night when no 
man can work.— John 9:4. 

It is but our duty to mention that the foregoing 
statement takes no account of some five 
thousand dollars of credits extended to colporteurs 

R1746: page 395 

by the Tower Pub. Co., for which our 
Tract Society is pledged;— and the most of 
which it is to be hoped the colporteurs will 
soon be able to settle for themselves. Those 
who can do so should have their accounts paid 
ahead or else send the money with their orders, 
as our Society is obliged to pay interest on these 
balances. In this connection it is proper to 
mention that the items of rent, light, heat 
and clerical work are not omitted by accident 
from our account of expenditures. These are 
donated by the Tower Publishing Co. 

While the colporteur work for the circulation 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN is under the supervision 
and patronage of this Society, it is self-supporting 
to a very large degree;— the only liabilities 
being the guarantee of their accounts above 
mentioned and in the preparation of foreign 
translations. An item on this last account appears 
in the Treasurer's report, above. 



R1746: page 395 

THE PRINCE OF PEACE. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XII., DEC. 23, ISA. 9:2-7. 

Golden Text— "Of the increase of his government 
and peace there shall be no end."— Isa. 9:7. 

The standpoint of the Prophet here is that of 
the dawn of the Millennial age, immediately 
after the setting up of the Kingdom of God in 
the earth— both its earthly and its heavenly 
phases. 

Verse 2. "The people that walked in darkness 
have seen a great light." The reference here 



is to the world of mankind, all of whom will at 
that time recognize the presence of the Lord 
and his Kingdom established; for it is written 
that "every eye shall see him." (Rev. 1:7.) 
The world that has walked in the darkness of 
ignorance and superstition for six thousand years 
will then begin to see the glorious light of truth 
and righteousness, and in the earthly phase of 
the Kingdom they will see the grand illustrations 
and rewards of righteousness. 

"They that dwell in the land of the shadow 
of death [i.e., fleshly Israel under the condemnation 
of their law covenant*], a light 
shineth brightly over them." Yes, the light 
will shine with special brilliancy upon fleshly 
Israel: then their blindness will be turned away 
and the favors of the new dispensation will 
again be— "to the Jew first, and also [afterward] 
to the Gentile;" and through the secondary 
instrumentality of the fleshly seed of Abraham 
shall all the nations of the world be blessed. 
The ancient worthies of that nation will be the 
visible rulers of the world, and their new work 
will begin at Jerusalem, bringing order out of 
confusion, peace out of discord and making 
Jerusalem a praise in the whole world. It was 
with reference to this that the Prophet wrote 
again, saying, "Arise, give light, for thy light 
is come, and the glory of the Lord is shining forth 



*See our issue of November 1 & 15, '94. 

R1747: page 395 

over thee. For behold, the darkness shall cover 

the earth, and a gross darkness the people; but 

over thee the Lord will shine forth, and his 

glory will be seen over thee. And nations 

shall walk by thy light, and kings by thy brightness 

of thy shining.. ..And the sons of the 

stranger shall build up thy walls, and their kings 

shall minister unto thee; for in my wrath did 

I smite thee, but in my favor have I had mercy 

on thee."-Isa. 60:1-3,10. 

Verse 3. "Thou hast multiplied the nation 
[Israel— a reference to their gathering 
together again as a nation after the long dispersion 
of nearly two thousand years as fugitives 
among all the nations;— and also to their reinforcement 
by the resurrection of their ancient 
worthies and heroes], made great their joy: 
they rejoice before thee as with the joy in harvest, 
as men are glad when they divide the spoil." 
Such indeed will be the joy of Israel when 



the blessings of their restoration to divine favor 
begin to be realized. 

Verses 4,5. "For the yoke of their burden, 
and the staff on their shoulder, the rod of their 
oppressor [the heavy burdens of oppression 
imposed upon them and the persecutions inflicted 
by their Gentile enemies during the long 
period of their blindness and exile], hast thou 
broken, as on the day of Midian"— when a 
great victory was won for them by Gideon's 
small band of 300 under the Lord's direction, 
without bloodshed and without strife. (Judges 7:1-23.) 
Even so shall it be when the Lord 
shall again fight for Israel: it will not be by 
their own power that the victory of the final 
battle will be secured. —See Ezek. 38:11,15-23. 
Also compare verse 4 with Ezek. 39:8-15. 

R1747: page 396 

Verse 6. Why is all this return of divine 
favor to Israel? is it because of worthiness in 
them? Surely not; for to this day they are a 
stiff-necked people, and their blindness and hardness 
of heart continue although we are within 
only a score of years of the time when all these 
things shall be fulfilled. The reason for it is 
that the Lord hath remembered his covenant 
with their fathers (Lev. 26:42,45; Jer. 31:34), 
and that in fulfilment of that covenant a child 
has been born unto them who was destined to 
be a light to lighten the Gentiles and the glory 
of Israel; and now (at the time indicated in 
the prophecy) "the government is placed upon 
his shoulders." Dimly this light of the world 
shone upon Israel at the first advent of Messiah; 
but when "the light shined in the darkness, the 
darkness comprehended it not." "He came unto 
his own, and his own received him not." It is 
only at the second advent that they recognize 
him as the promised seed of Abraham and their 
long-looked-for Messiah. They shall look upon 
him whom they have pierced, and shall 
mourn for him.—Zech. 12:10. 

"And his name is called Wonderful [What 
a wonder indeed to Israel specially, that the 
despised Nazarene, the man of sorrows and 
acquainted with grief, whom they hated and 
crucified and reviled, even to this day, was indeed 
their Messiah, and they knew him not. 
What a wonder, too, to them specially, will be 
the forgiving love that so meekly bore their reproaches 
and sacrificed even unto death to redeem 
them from the curse of the law, and that 
now returns to restore and bless them ! Wonderful, 
wonderful love, wonderful condescension 



and grace, and wonderful exaltation and glory 
and power!], Counsellor [not counsellor 
of the mighty God, as some translators have 
rendered it; for Paul significantly inquires concerning 
Jehovah, "Who hath been his counsellor?" 
(Rom. 1 1:34.) He needed no counsellor, 
but poor fallen humanity does need such 
a wise counsellor, and he will teach them and 
they shall walk in his ways.— Isa. 2:3], The 
Mighty God ["a Savior and a great one"— 
Isa. 19:20], The Everlasting Father [the new 
life-giver to our dead race— the second Adam 
— 1 Cor. 15:45], The Prince of Peace [whose 
glorious reign shall be one of righteousness, 
bringing with it all the blessed fruits of righteousness 
—peace and joy and satisfaction and 
everlasting rest]." 

Verse 7. His dominion shall increase until 
all things are subdued under him. It shall extend, 
not only to the ends of the earth, but 
eventually all things in heaven and in earth are 
to be united under his headship as the representative 
of Jehovah, who would have all men 
honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. 
-Psa. 72:7; Eph. 1:10; John 5:23. 

"The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform 
this." Such is Jehovah's purpose, and thus he 
declares that it shall be accomplished; and our 
hearts leap for joy as we realize, not only the 
glorious import of this prophecy, but also the 
fact that the time is at hand, and that a score 
of years future will see the Kingdom established 
and its blessings beginning to be experienced. 

The common interpretation of this prophecy 
regards it as fulfilled upon Israel at the first advent, 
and the Kingdom of God as established 
then in the Gospel Church; and the great increase 
in the numbers and power of the nominal 
Church of all denominations, Papal and Protestant, 
as the predicted increase of Christ's government. 
—Verse 7. 

Such a fulfilment would not be worthy of the 
record. Christ does not reign in Christendom: 
its general character is antichristian. The 
only sense in which Christ's kingdom was begun 
at the first advent was in its embryo condition; 
and this, the only true Kingdom of 
Christ in the world, has, like the Lord, been 
unrecognized in the world, except, like him, to 
be despised and forsaken and to suffer violence. 
Its numbers have always been small and its circumstances 
humble; for not many rich and great, 
etc., are called.- 1 Cor. 1:26-29; Jas. 2:5. 

Nor did the nation of Israel at the first advent 
see or comprehend the light of Christ, 
nor did he at that time break their yoke or deliver 



them from the rod of their oppressor; for 

in consequence of their failure to recognize the 

light when it began to shine upon them, they 

were blinded, the rod of the oppressor came upon 

them with increased force and they have 

never yet been relieved, nor will they be until 

their Messiah is recognized as having come 

again, a second time; this time without a sin-offering 

unto salvation.— Heb. 9:28. 

Let us rejoice for them and for all mankind 
that the blessed day is nigh, even at the doors. 
Rightly viewed, this prophecy is full of rapturous 
inspiration. 

page 396 

REVIEW. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XIII., DEC. 30. 

Golden Text— "Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and 
to-day, and forever."— Heb. 13:8. 

As we endeavor to review the life of Jesus 
how blessed is this assurance of the Apostle, 
that he is, and ever shall be, the same unchangeable 
friend and lover of humanity! The review 
of his life and teaching should be our 
constant meditation. He was the living example 
of God's law of Love; and in him all the graces 
of the spirit focused. 



R1747: page 397 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Of the books 
I brought with me to Denmark, there are now 
none left, and several Christian friends are 
anxiously waiting with me for the new lot 
to arrive. The lady class leader of a large 
Methodist church, to whom I sold a copy 
of DAWN soon after coming here, has read 
a good part of it and has liked it so much 
that she is recommending it to S.S. teachers 
and pupils, and has sold several copies. 
People are not so prejudiced against it here, 
as some seemed to be in the United States. 

This is a very lively place, and everybody 
looks happy and contented. There are many 



churches. The state church is Lutheran, a 
dead, formal thing, which, as intelligence 
increases, is losing more and more of its influence 
over the people. 

There has been much talk lately among 
the dissenters, Baptists, Methodists and 
others, concerning a church union. A Mr. 
Edwards of England, one of the members 
of the S.S. committee in London, has been 
here several times, speaking in various 
churches upon the subject of joining all the 
Sunday Schools into one large body and 
using the "International S.S. Lessons." 

I have attended three of these meetings, 
the last one being held in the Baptist 
church; and for the first time here ministers 
of various denominations were seen and 
heard from the same platform. They seemed 
united to work their own scheme of "saving 
the whole world" before the Lord's 
Kingdom is set up. Oh, how blind the 
guides! and the people are in gross darkness 
concerning the Lord's real, glorious plan. 
May his Kingdom soon come! 

I would like very much to have a companion 
in the canvass, and am in hopes 
soon to get a young man, a clerk in a large 
book store, who is reading the DAWNS and 
likes them, to start out with me in the harvest 
work. I have not regretted that I left 
America, but am well pleased here in every 
way. I delight in doing some good work 
for the Lord, in finding and sealing his dear 
people, and feeding the truth-hungry with 
good meat from his table. Truly it is a 
glorious work, when rightly understood 
and appreciated, and I thank the dear Lord 
for the opportunity of being used in it. 

I remain, Your brother in Christ, 
JOSEPH WINTER. 

page 397 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I wish to 
ask a few questions in regard to some of 
the teachings in the WATCH TOWER and 
the Tracts. Should not we who come out 
of Babylon have some organization? [See 
TOWER, Sept. '93.] What is the form of 
worship followed in your Allegheny Church? 

We have started a Bible class at our house. 
We meet with a few interested neighbors 
every Thursday evening. Any suggestions 
as to what plan would be most conducive 
to our spiritual growth will be gladly considered. 
I do not want to take much of 



your valuable time. If the questions within 
are of enough general interest to be treated 
in the TOWER, I shall not expect a personal 
answer to this letter. 

I am in sympathy with the experiment of 
the TOWER Society in sending out teachers. 
May God be with the movement. With 
Christian love from Sister Heston and myself, 
I am yours in his name, 

E. H. HESTON. 



DEAR MR. RUSSELL:-You will be glad 
to know that we are continuing our weekly 
class at Mr. Sheward's house. We are 
now two-thirds through VOL. II. of the 
DAWN. It took us a whole year to master 
VOL. I., there being so many points that 
required close and careful thought; but I 
think we were amply repaid for the course 
we adopted.... 

Believe me, Yours sincerely, 

T. W. TOWNSEND. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose 
$ 1 .00 for which I would like you to send 
me copies of the October number of Z.W.T., 
which I will take great pleasure in circulating 
among my Methodist acquaintances 
—some ministers, who dare not express their 
sentiments for fear of the bishops. The 
"New Gospel" expressed in Bishop Foster's 
sermon, however, may loosen their bonds 
somewhat, and they may follow their leader, 
even though they have heretofore resisted 
the plain truth. The separating continues. 
"Forsake her, and let us go every one into 
his own country," is being fulfilled in Babylon. 
The "clouds of heaven" are growing 
thicker, and must soon burst into the final 
great storm. 

Yours in the patient waiting for the Kingdom, 
EDWIN C. MOTT. 

page 398 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I noticed in 
a recent TOWER the article on "The New 
Branch of the Work," but had not thought of 
myself as having a clear enough knowledge 
of divine truth, or as being otherwise competent 
to fulfil the requirements. However, 
I find that in some attempts to help others 



the Spirit of truth has greatly assisted me in 
bringing to my remembrance many truths of 
Scripture which I was not aware I had in my 
storehouse of memory. I have also found 
that all such efforts to help others have always 
been of great benefit to myself; and 
now, after prayer and consultation with the 
Lord, I feel that perhaps I can be used by 
Him to some extent at least in strengthening 
some of the "babes in Christ," by endeavoring 
to help them to a clearer understanding 
of God's wonderful plan. It is 
only by the grace of God that I can say that 
the eight qualifications are applicable to me; 
but by his grace I hope to be able to meet 
these requirements, and so am glad to offer 
all the time at present at my disposal. 

A recent Sunday I spend very pleasantly and 
profitably with a brother and his wife whom 
it was my privilege to interest in the truth. 
We spent the afternoon with relatives who 
have greatly opposed them in the new light, 
and with whom he has had long controversies, 
which, he now sees, have only hindered 
them instead of assisting them as he 
was anxious to do. After considering the 
matter, I thought best to avoid all controversy, 
and seek to talk only on subjects on 
which we could agree, not missing opportunities 
to show forth the love of Christ and to 
impress them with the fact that we had 
been with Him. The result was a very 
pleasant afternoon, and a cordial invitation 
to come again. 

May the dear Lord bless you and Sister 
Russell, and all of the laborers, and help 
each one of us in these trying times to stand 
firmly on the rock, Christ Jesus our Ransom. 

Your brother in Christ, A. L. WITTER. 



R1747: page 398 

DEAR BROTHER:-Christian love and 
greetings from me and mine to you and 
yours. The "transforming" influence of the 
"renewing of our minds" draws us nearer 
in love to all who are probationary members 
of the Church, as well as to Jesus and those 
with him who have been changed. 

The work of preparing the Bride is wonderful, 
and the new plan of sending out 
Brethren to strengthen and help those who 
are striving seems very wise, though the risk 
is apparent. From a little experience of our 



own it seems timely. We have found that 
the lack of many is systematic Bible study. 

As a confirmation which you did not 
mention [See TOWER, Aug. 1, "Is Death a 
Penalty or a Consequence?], as to Satan's 
power being exerted through various kinds 
of insect and other life, see Luke 10:17-20 
(Diaglott). Verse 19 reads, "Behold, I have 
given you authority to tread on serpents and 
scorpions, and on all that power which is 
of the enemy"— showing that those injurious 
creatures are counted part of his power. 

In our reading my wife and I came across 
the best proof we have yet found that the 
"remnants" of the so-called "ten lost tribes" 
were really in Palestine. Paul, in his speech 
before Agrippa, says, "And now I stand and 
am judged for the hope of the promise made 
of God to our fathers; unto which promise 
our twelve tribes, instantly serving God day 
and night, hope to come."— Acts 26:6. 

Our daily prayer is for you and Sister 
Russell and those associated with you, that 
you may indeed be led of the holy Spirit. 

Yours in the love of Christ, 

CHARLES C. BELL. 



page 398 

GENTLEMEN:— I have recently received 
two or three tracts from you, one of which, 
entitled "Do You Know," is of a character 
to command my attention and enlist my confidence. 
Your liberal attitude and anti-sectarian 
spirit, with your advanced Scriptural 
declarations, commend your publications 
sufficiently to induce me to seek a more intimate 
acquaintance with your Society and 
from what you assert in relation to the 
book, MILLENNIAL DAWN, I am induced to 
send for it; and, as the price is not given, I 
enclose one dollar, and you can send me 
anything that you consider "meat in due 
season." 

I am poor in spirit and purse, but rich in 
faith— looking for the coming of Jesus 
Christ, the King of kings, and loving his 
appearing. I belong to no sectarian organization: 
if a member of the Church, it is 
the one that fled into the wilderness from 
the face of the serpent, the only door to 
which is Christ. 

If your Society publishes a serial, send me 
a number. I will endeavor to help sustain 



every means of grace that seems to accord 
with Bible truth and "the faith once delivered 
to the saints." C. D. M 



page 399 

INDEX FOR ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

VOL. XV., 1894. 



JANUARY 1. 

Special Items: A New Leaf, etc 2 

View from the Tower 3 

Echoes from the Parliament of Religions 8 

The Book of Genesis (I.) 9 

Bible Study: The First Adam 12 

" " Adam's Sin and God's Grace 13 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light (Letters) 15 

He Calleth for Thee (Poem) 16 

JANUARY 15. 

Special Items: Good Shepherd Calendars, etc 18 

Are there Few that be Saved? 19 

The Future— Social and Religious 22 

A Savior and a Great One (Poem) 25 

Echoes from the Parliament of Religions 25 

Bible Study: The Murder of Abel 28 

" " God's Covenant with Noah 29 

" " Beginning of the Hebrew Nation 30 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers (Letters) 31 

FEBRUARY 1. 

Special Items: Senator Peffer's Foreview, etc 34 

"Hallelujah! What a Savior!" 35 

The Book of Genesis (II.) 43 

Bible Study: God's Covenant with Abraham 44 

" " God's Judgment on Sodom 45 

Keep Orders Separate 48 

FEBRUARY 15. 

Special Items: The European Outlook, etc 50 

Keep Your Eyes Open 51 

A Serious Question 56 

Faithful over Few (Poem) 57 

The Work for a Converted Will 57 

The Book of Genesis (III.) 59 

Bible Study: Trial of Abraham's Faith 61 

" " Selling the Birthright 62 



Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers (Letters) 64 

MARCH 1. 

Special Items: The Pope and the Bible, etc 66 

The Annual Memorial Supper 67 

The Unjust Steward 69 

Applying Truth to One's Self. 70 

Personal Liberty,— Its Responsibility 73 

Bible Study: Jacob at Bethel 76 

" " Wine a Mocker 77 

" " The Resurrection of Christ 78 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light (Letters) 79 

MARCH 15. 

Special Items: Binding the Bundles Tighter, etc 82 

Touched with the Feeling of our Infirmities 83 

The Financial Strain World-wide 85 

Striving Lawfully 86 

Behold the Bridegroom! (Poem) 88 

Our Sufficiency is of God 89 

Bible Study: Jacob's Prevailing Prayer 91 

" " Envy and Discord 93 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers (Letters) 94 

APRIL 1. 

Special Items: The Memorial Supper, etc 98 

The Import of the Emblems 99 

Feet Washing 101 

Bear Up the Feet 103 

Lest Ye Enter into Temptation 104 

The Work in England 105 

Bible Study: Joseph Sold into Egypt 109 

" " Joseph Ruler in Egypt Ill 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers (Letters) 1 12 

APRIL 15. 

Special Items: Watch with me One Hour! etc 114 

Immortality 115 

Jonathan Edwards Much Blinded 123 

Bible Study: Joseph Forgiving his Brethren 124 

" " Joseph's Last Days 126 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light (Letters) 127 

APRIL 25. (Extra.) 

A Conspiracy Exposed and Harvest Siftings. 

MAY 1-15. 

Special Items: Your Letter Received, etc 130 

The Shepherd and the Sheep 131 

Who hath Heard such a Thins? 134 



Vessels unto Honor 137 

The Memorial Celebrated 139 

Fervent in Spirit, Serving the Lord 140 

Bible Study: Israel in Egypt 141 

" " The Childhood of Moses 142 

" " Moses Sent as a Deliverer 143 

JUNE 1. 

Special Items: Letters of Congratulation, etc 146 

Cast Not Away Your Confidence 147 

The Retributive Character of Divine Law 149 

In My Name (Poem) 154 

The Test of Endurance 155 

Buying and Selling 156 

The Truth Shall Make you Free 158 

Bible Study: The Passover Instituted 159 

" " Passage of the Red Sea 160 

" " The Woes of the Drunkard 160 

" " Review 160 

To bring the Greek Church under Vatican Control 160 

page 400 

JUNE 11. 

Special Items: Earth's Labor Pangs, etc 162 

Oh! Give Thanks unto the Lord; for He is Good 163 

The Voice of the Church 175 

JULY 1. 

Special Items: The Assassination of Carnot, etc 210 

The Prize Set Before Us 21 1 

With a Pure Heart Fervently 214 

Retrospection (Poem) 215 

The Concision and the Circumcision 217 

What Shall I Render? 218 

In the Days of thy Youth 218 

Pleasing in His Sight 220 

Bible Study: The Birth of Jesus 221 

" " Presentation in the Temple 223 

" " Visit of the Wise Men 223 

JULY 15. 

Special Items: Can it be Delayed until 1914? etc 226 

View from the Tower: Labor Pangs of this Kosmos 227 

Angels which Kept not their First Estate 231 

Bible Study: The Flight into Egypt 239 

" " The Youth of Jesus 240 

AUGUST 1. 

Special Items: Go Labor On: Spend and be Spent 242 

Is Death a Penalty or a Consequence? 243 



The Prince of this World 249 

Bible Study: The Baptism of Jesus 252 

" " The Temptation of Jesus 253 

AUGUST 15. 

Special Items: A Remarkable Narrative, etc 258 

Bringing Back the King 259 

Forgiveness versus Malice 267 

Bible Study: The First Disciples of Jesus 269 

" " Our Lord's first Miracle 270 

" " Jesus Cleansing the Temple 271 

" " Jesus and Nicodemus 272 

SEPTEMBER 1. 

Special Items: The "Do You Know?" Tract, etc 274 

If Ye be Christ's 275 

Once in Grace Always in Grace 277 

Disintegration in the Church of Rome 282 

Religion in America: A Japanese View 285 

Upon this Generation 285 

Missionary Life 287 

Another Branch of the Work 287 

Bible Study: Jesus at Jacob's Well 288 

SEPTEMBER 15. 

Special Items: Why hast Thou Forsaken Me? etc 290 

Think on These Things 291 

These Many Years (Poem) 293 

The Pope's Encyclical 293 

Sunday Evening Revery 296 

Introducing T.T. Society Representatives 297 

Palestinian Colonization 300 

Honorable Service 301 

Bible Study: Daniel and his Companions 302 

" " Review 303 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers (Letters) 303 

OCTOBER 1. 

Special Items: Church and State in Italy, etc 306 

Bishop Foster's New Gospel, No. 1 307 

Thou hast the Words of Eternal Life 309 

Judgment— Its Use and Abuse 311 

If Thou Knewest the Gift of God 313 

Agree with thine Adversary Quickly 314 

Alexander Campbell's Views 316 

A New Branch of Service (Further Explained) 317 

Bible Study: Our Lord's Visit to Nazareth 317 

" " The Draught of Fishes 320 

OCTOBER 15. 

Special Items: Jewish Nationalization Movement, etc 322 



Bishop Foster's New Gospel, No. 2 323 

The Power of Faith 328 

Letters of Introduction 330 

Let Patience Have her Perfect Work 332 

A Sabbath in Capernaum 334 

A Paralytic Healed 334 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light (Letters) 335 

NOVEMBER l-15.-Double Number. 

Special Items: To New Subscribers, etc 338 

The Divine Law— Universal and Eternal; the Law 
Given at Sinai; the Fourth Commandment; the 
Law of the New Covenant; Romans VII.; Objections 

of Seventh Day Adventists Answered 339 

Bible Study: The Twelve Chosen 364 

" " The Sermon on the Mount 365 

" " Opposition to Christ 366 

" " Christ's Testimony of John 368 

DECEMBER 1. 

Special Items: Change of Address, Spread of Ritualism 370 

The Freedom of Christ's Bond-Servants 371 

Perfecting Holiness 374 

That I may Know Him (Poem) 376 

The Progress of Religious Union 376 

Bible Study: Christ Teaching by Parables 380 

" " The Twelve Sent Forth 384 

DECEMBER 15. 

Items: Good Hopes for '95; Jerusalem to be Probed 386 

Who Shall Ascend? 387 

Think it Not Strange 389 

A Thorn in the Flesh 390 

The Lord is my Shepherd 392 

Z.W.T. Tract Society's Annual Report 392 

Bible Study: The Prince of Peace 395 

" " Review 396 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers (Letters) 397 



