Announcements
WORKING TOWARD DELIVERANCE OF PEOPLE OF GODLY DEVOTION—2 Pet. 2:9, NW.
Jehovah’s witnesses are working toward deliverance of people of godly devotion. The significant trend of the times assures them that “this generation” will witness the climactic conclusion of the evil “system of things.” All who love Jehovah, know his truth and do his service will be working this month of May to aid others of godly devotion who are as yet uninformed about what is due to take place in the near future. Knowledge is essential! This knowledge will be brought to people in study form by the offering of two books and two booklets for $1. Endeavor to leave with each householder at least the latest booklet.
JOYFUL HOLY ASSEMBLY
“And Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah, and wrote letters also to Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of Jehovah at Jerusalem, to keep the passover unto Jehovah, the God of Israel. . . . So there was great joy in Jerusalem; . . . Then the priests the Levites arose and blessed the people: and their voice was heard, and their prayer came up to his holy habitation, even unto heaven.” (2 Chron. 30:1-27, AS) Such joy will be evident this summer when tens of thousands of Jehovah’s witnesses gather in holy assembly. Blessing from the hand of Jehovah most certainly will be evident. His spirit will be present, and heaven will take note of what is said and done. Hundreds of thousands will thrill to the public talk, “World Conquest Soon—by God’s Kingdom.” Which of such assemblies will you attend? Are your plans already made, and are they definite? You are invited to assemblies in England, France, Italy, Germany, Sweden and the Netherlands, as well as in the United States and Canada. Especially are you encouraged to attend the European assemblies. We hope to see you at these “Triumphant Kingdom” assemblies.
DALLAS SPANISH CONVENTION
The Spanish-speaking persons in southern United States and in neighboring countries will be interested in learning that facilities have been arranged for in the fairgrounds so Spanish meetings may be held in the afternoon and evening with the same schedule as in English. It should be kept in mind that it will be considered a part of the big convention in Dallas, sharing the same cafeteria and other departmental arrangements, and not an assembly removed from the other activities.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
June 5: Keep Your Place, ¶1-14. Page 276.
June 12: Keep Your Place, ¶15-29. Page 281.

