Manifesting the Spirit of Cain
THE clergy of Jesus’ day manifested the same spirit as did Cain. Like him, they ostensibly worshiped Jehovah God, but they let envy get the better of them. They became murderers, as did their prototype Cain, joining hands with the anti-God pagan Romans to get Jesus out of the way.
In Eastern Germany today there are some clergymen who manifest this same spirit of Cain. Noting God’s blessing on the activity of Jehovah’s witnesses, instead of endeavoring to ascertain why and then bringing their own worship in line, these clergymen oppose the witnesses and report them to the Russian overlords. Certainly in this they are without excuse, for they know full well the anti-God position of the Communists and how devoted Jehovah’s witnesses are to God’s Word.
Thus a young Christian woman who recently entered the full-time ministry of Jehovah was visiting the people in one village after another in Eastern Germany with nothing but her Bible in hand. The Lutheran clergyman of the town of Lohm/Westhavelland, reported her to the Communist State Security Service (SSD). As a result she was arrested and sentenced to ten years in prison. She, however, continues to keep integrity by preaching behind the prison walls.
In another town in the Soviet zone, one of Jehovah’s witnesses was asked to make a few remarks at the graveside of a funeral of one of Jehovah’s witnesses. The evangelical clergyman interfered, stating that the Communist police had phoned that no witness of Jehovah was to be permitted to speak at the funeral. Checking with the county police it was found that not they, but the clergyman, had phoned, who reported the witnesses and elicited from the Communists their ban on a funeral by Jehovah’s witnesses. However, in spite of Communist threats the funeral discourse was given at the graveside, to the enlightenment of those who attended. In almost six thousand years, hypocritical worshipers have not changed, and always their envy exposes their hypocrisy.

