The Truth Inspires Generous Giving
“Your Contribution Prospects”
SUPPORT KINGDOM WITNESS
“AND this good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for the purpose of a witness to all the nations, and then the accomplished end will come.”—Matt. 24:14, NW.
Under the direction of the Watch Tower Society this good news of the Kingdom was preached during 1954 in 159 lands and in upward of a hundred languages. Yes, it is being preached on all continents and in all zones, in the democracies and behind the iron, bamboo and rawhide curtains, from the northern tips of Finland to the southern extremity of South America.
At seventy-five branch offices scattered throughout the world upward of a thousand workers keep busy a minimum of 8 1⁄2 hours a day and 5 1⁄2 days a week. Among these are found youths not yet out of their teens, working alongside white-haired men in their eighties, old and young counting it the greatest privilege life affords to be having a part in preaching this good news of the Kingdom. Though many have spent from twenty-five to fifty years in such service they have not grown weary in well-doing, but set an example for younger ones in zeal and joy. They receive no pecuniary gain, just board and room and a stipend of $14 a month to take care of their personal expenses such as clothing and carfare.
The Society also has sent forth some 1,700 missionaries to all parts of the world, and assists upward of 17,000 full-time ministers who serve as home missionaries. For the privilege of serving in such full-time ministry these Christians deny themselves many of the “good things” of life. During the past year a peak of 580,498 ministers, part- and full-time, preached under the direction of the Society. Among the results of all this activity were a twelve per cent increase in ministers and 57,369 persons of good will being baptized in token of their having dedicated themselves to the doing of Jehovah’s will. Taking part in this preaching work are men and women nearing the century mark as well as children not yet in their teens.
Needless to say, to sponsor the preaching of the good news in 159 different lands and to keep branch organizations functioning in 75 countries involve a considerable outlay of money. The Society during 1954 spent three million dollars in supporting this work outside the United States, the keeping of missionaries in foreign lands alone involving the expenditure of a half-million dollars. In addition to supporting the Kingdom witness in foreign lands the Society operates a noncommercial radio station in the United States and defrays the expenses also of fighting legal battles in all parts of the world for the purpose of defending and legally establishing the preaching of the good news in all parts of the earth. Then, too, Jehovah’s witnesses throughout the world contribute to the upkeep of local Kingdom Halls.
MAN’S WAY NOT GOD’S WAY
Where does all the money come from? How is it gathered? From a few rich men interesting themselves in this work? No; for the Bible tells us that God’s kingdom message would not appeal to the rich, and the facts bear this out. Or do Jehovah’s witnesses operate bingo games or operate other games of chance such as raffling off automobiles at $10 a chance as some Roman Catholic churches do? No; for they recognize that by appealing to the desire to get something for nothing they would be encouraging selfishness, whereas Christianity is the very essence of unselfishness.
Neither does the Watch Tower Society send out professional pledge takers who parrot the sales talks of financial wizards by telling congregations that “statistics show that your family, your business, and your community will prosper in accordance with what you and others give. The more you invest therein the more you will get out.” Nor does it send out church canvassers as did the Episcopal church of the diocese of Long Island, New York, late in 1954, when 3,500 canvassers sought to collect 4 1⁄2 million dollars for that church. No; the Watch Tower Society does not solicit and never has solicited funds by any such means, for it holds that it is doing the work of God and therefore it would be most inconsistent for it to beg help for carrying on God’s work when he states that all the gold and silver and the cattle on a thousand hills belong to him.—Hag. 2:8; Ps. 50:10.
GOD PUTS IT IN THEIR HEART
Was it necessary for Moses to canvass the Israelites for supplies with which to build and furnish the tent of meeting in the wilderness? Why, upon the mere announcement that willing-hearted ones could make contributions the people gave so generously that they had to be restrained, for “the stuff proved to be enough for all the work to be done, and more than enough.”—Ex. 36:6, 7, NW.
The same spirit of generous giving was apparent at the time David gathered the necessary materials for the temple Solomon was to build. Their value has been estimated at thousands of millions of dollars, David’s gifts alone being valued at some one hundred million. No wonder he was caused to exclaim in prayer to Jehovah: “But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee.”—1 Chron. 29:14, AS.
Jehovah changes not, neither do his principles change, nor do those who truly know and love him change. By means of his Word, his earthly organization and his enlightening holy spirit, he is making known to men of good will just what a wonderful God he is, perfect in wisdom, love, justice and power; what he has done, is doing and will yet do, and therefore how right and wise it is for us to devote our all to him and to his cause. All who can possibly do so devote their entire time thereto, and those who cannot give what they can in the way of time, energy, influence and means. Yes, it is God-inspired giving that provides the financial sinews for world-wide preaching of this good news of God’s kingdom. He it is who puts it into their hearts to want to give even as Nehemiah spoke of his activity in rebuilding the walls of Jerusalem as being that which “my God had put into my heart to do for Jerusalem.”—Neh. 2:12, RS.
Just as Moses and David caused announcements to be made advising the Israelites of their privilege to contribute toward Jehovah’s worship, so the Watch Tower Society once each year brings to the attention of those dedicated to Jehovah’s cause their privilege to make contributions for the work of preaching this good news of the Kingdom in all the world for a witness. That the Society may properly plan its work it seems best that those who are in position to make contributions throughout the year advise the Society in advance as to what they hope to be able to give. This is in no sense of the word a pledge, for the Society will not at the end of the year make a comparison between what you hoped to do and what you actually did, but merely an expression on your part of your prospective contribution, and therefore such expressions are properly called “your contribution prospects.” Should any not wish to make such expression, that is perfectly all right.
The branch office of the country in which you reside may be addressed, and for the United States address your card or letter to: Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, Treasurer’s Office, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn 1, N.Y. Regarding “your contribution prospects” something to the effect as follows can be stated: “It is my hope that during the next twelve months I shall be able to donate to the work of preaching the good news of the Kingdom the amount of $‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐, which contributions I shall make in such amounts and at such times as prove to be convenient to me and as I am prospered by the undeserved kindness of Jehovah God through Christ Jesus.” [Signed] In addition to the above address of the head office in Brooklyn, a list of other branch offices is found on page 258 and a complete list is on the last page of most Society publications.
God’s Word reminds us that “except Jehovah build the house, they labor in vain that build it: except Jehovah keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.” (Ps. 127:1, AS) This being so, all those keenly interested in the work of preaching this good news of the Kingdom will not only support it with their time, energy, personal influence and means, but will also daily pray Jehovah’s guidance, protection and blessing upon it.

