Will You Reason on Religion?
“ONE thing I never discuss is religion.” Did you ever say that? Many people who will argue politics or sports or other issues for hours, trying to convince others of the wisdom of their views, will never speak about religion. “Too controversial,” they say. But are not politics controversial? Is having a right view in politics more important than having a right view on religion?
Probably one real reason why many people object to discussing religion is that they know so little about it. Some people do not even know for certain what the denomination that they support really teaches. Without facts to back up their beliefs they cannot satisfactorily uphold them, so they just get angry or consider themselves personally insulted when someone shows an imperfection in their belief. Generally people are anxious to talk about things upon which they are well informed.
Is it showing hatred to disagree with someone’s religious doctrines? Far from it! An intelligent discussion can be greatly beneficial. Sometimes even a degree of controversy may be a good thing, stirring us to investigation. Too few people really have investigated their religion. How did you choose your religion? Did you merely accept the one your parents had, or did you examine the facts for yourself? Is yours an inherited religion, or a believed one? There can be a great difference between the two.
But how can you tell whether a religion is right? By investigating and reasoning upon what it teaches in the light of the one firm guide on religion, the book that tells us what true religion was before it was divided into so many different denominational ways. That book, the Bible, is your guidebook, your road map, your book of instructions as far as religion is concerned.
But how familiar are you with the Bible? Can you prove what you believe from its pages? It is important that you be able to do so. Do you think the Bible is too deep for you to understand, and yet know a great deal about many much more difficult but less important things? It is true that some religious leaders have endeavored to make the Bible mysterious and to imply that only a theological student can understand it. But their theory is not true. Every Christian should be able to use the Bible and should be ready to defend his belief with it, because his belief is of value only if it conforms to this book that Jehovah God mercifully and lovingly provided for our benefit.
The One who inspired the Bible stated the principle: “Come now, and let us reason together.” (Isa. 1:18) Sound reasoning involves systematic thinking and accurate facts. It requires that we be informed upon God’s Word. The scripture tells us to be “always ready to make a defense before everyone that demands of you a reason for the hope in you, but doing so together with a mild temper and deep respect.” Speaking out the truth is of vital importance. Could you imagine Jesus’ apostles saying: “I never discuss religion,” or the zealous, enthusiastic first-century Christians being unable to support their beliefs from the Scriptures? Why, early Christians were so on fire with their message that they were accused of turning “the world upside down”! Do you have such conviction for your faith? If not, what did early Christianity have that your religion has not provided you? Understanding? Zeal? Christian maturity?—1 Pet. 3:15, NW; Acts 17:6.
John said: “Produce fruits that befit repentance.” (Luke 3:8, 9, NW) Is the man producing fruit who will not even speak up for his faith? who cannot defend it with Scriptural proof? Can he help others if he merely says: “My faith is right,” but cannot show why?
No one can deny that the Christian is expected to know such things. Paul wrote to the Hebrews that they should be mature teachers, not just babes. He said: “Solid food belongs to mature people, to those who through use have their perceptive powers trained to distinguish both right and wrong.” (Heb. 5:14, NW) Is the man training his perceptive powers who thinks right worship is not so important as the current political situation or the standing of his favorite sports team? who does not even know what his doctrines are? who will never talk about religion and who will never reason on it with others?
But those who reject the Bible, who do not think it is a sure guide, and who do not know what it says, are not the only people who do not obey God’s instruction to reason together. There is another group that loudly and vigorously proclaims its belief in the Bible, cites scriptures readily, is more than willing to pick an argument about religion, but still does not reason with others upon God’s Word. They are more concerned with proving themselves right than they are with finding the truth. They depend upon emotional tirades rather than logic, upon wrangling rather than informed discussion. They insult God by appealing, not to the intellect or intelligence of his creatures, but merely to their emotions.
The preacher who shouts and raves appeals to emotion rather than to reason. If he must appeal to prejudices rather than present facts, if he must endeavor to sway his hearers with the tone of his voice and the magnetism of his personality rather than with the truth of his claim, if it is upon these things rather than upon firm Scriptural support that he bases his argument, then he certainly is not obeying the instruction to reason upon God’s Word.
The truth of God’s Word is logical. It is on a high plane, for it represents the greatest intelligence in the universe. Yet its extreme logicalness makes it so simple that everyone who wishes can understand. It can be discussed in quietness and clarity, with neither emotionalism nor wrangling. The true Christian is anxious to reason upon God’s Word, to convince others of its truth. He is interested in religion and is informed upon it. He knows what he believes and why. He is eager to discuss his worship because it is so important. So do not draw away, do not refuse to discuss it, but come now and let us reason together upon the truth of God’s Word.

