A Special Interchange of Encouragement
1 Not a day passes without Jehovah’s people facing tests of their faith. Knowing he has a short period of time, the Devil is making a final onslaught to break our integrity to Jehovah. (Rev. 12:12) It is vital that we “go on acquiring power in the Lord and in the mightiness of his strength” so that we “may be able to resist in the wicked day and, after [we] have done all things thoroughly, to stand firm.”​—Eph. 6:10, 13.
2 Gathering with fellow believers is a provision from Jehovah to help us acquire power. The apostle Paul appreciated this. He longed to be in the company of his Christian brothers so that they could “be encouraged together” and “be made firm.” (Rom. 1:11, 12, ftn.) To fortify us in doing God’s will, the Governing Body has lovingly arranged to give us the opportunity to benefit from an interchange of encouragement at the upcoming “Zealous Kingdom Proclaimers” District Convention.
3 Be There to Benefit: Make it your goal to be present for all three days. We ‘benefit ourselves’ by arriving before the first song and remaining through our heartfelt “Amen” at the closing prayer. (Isa. 48:17, 18) Many will need to arrange their work schedule well in advance so that they have the time available to attend all three days. Granted, it may not be easy to get your employer to give you the time off, but we have Jehovah’s assurance that he will help us to do his will. (1 John 5:14, 15) If we have not done so already, now is the time to make definite arrangements for transportation and lodging, not leaving anything to chance. We can be confident that Jehovah will bless our efforts to attend all three days.​—Prov. 10:22.
4 Anticipate the Encouragement: Have you ever left a district convention, saying: “That was the best one ever!” Why might you have felt that way? It is because as imperfect humans we can gradually become worn down, finding ourselves in need of spiritual encouragement. (Isa. 40:30) One sister observed: “This system wears me down, and the conventions refocus my spiritual outlook, giving me the spiritual boost that I need. It seems as if the encouragement comes at just the time I need it the most.” Likely you have experienced similar feelings.
5 We receive needed encouragement not only by way of talks and interviews but also through other rich features of our conventions. One brother commented: “It is the clear, practical application of Bible principles that I really appreciate. Of course, the dramas are invaluable in showing how we can benefit from past examples, both good and bad. The releases are something I always look forward to, and I enjoy them long after returning home.”
6 Conventions are a vital provision from Jehovah during these “critical times hard to deal with.” (2 Tim. 3:1) They help us heed the inspired counsel: “Stay awake, stand firm in the faith, carry on as men, grow mighty.” (1 Cor. 16:13) Therefore, let us be determined to attend every session and enjoy a rich interchange of encouragement at our “Zealous Kingdom Proclaimers” District Convention!
[Box on page 3]
Plan to Attend All Three Days
■ Ask for time off from work.
■ Reserve lodging at the convention city.
■ Arrange transportation to the convention.

