Are You Using the Require Brochure to Start Studies?
1 Did you realize that if you regularly and systematically have Bible discussions, though brief, with an interested person and cover material in one of the recommended publications, you are conducting a Bible study? Yes, this is true even if the study takes place on the doorstep or over the telephone. Why not make a special effort during May and June to start such a study using the Require brochure?
2 Prepare for Success: When offering the Require brochure, have clearly in mind what you want to discuss. If you are making a return visit, think about the conversation you had on the initial call. Ask yourself: ‘Which paragraphs in the brochure can I feature to build on that discussion and lead into a Bible study?’ If you are calling from house to house, consider what subjects will appeal to a teenager, an older person, a man, or a woman. Review the brochure’s topics, and identify a subject of interest. After deciding on an approach, practice several times. This is one of the keys to success.
3 The January 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry insert gives eight “Suggestions for Presenting the Require Brochure.” The box “The Direct Approach” shows how to use the brochure to start studies. You might adapt the first suggestion as follows:
▪ “Did you know that in just a few minutes, you can find the answer to an important Bible question? For example, why are there so many religions that claim to be Christian? Have you ever wondered about that?” After the person responds, turn to lesson 13 and discuss the first two paragraphs. As time permits, read and discuss a scripture or two. Then read the last question at the top of the page, and say: “The rest of the lesson highlights five identifying marks of true religion. I would be happy to return and consider these with you.”
4 Be Persistent: Take advantage of every opportunity to demonstrate a Bible study in the Require brochure. Ask for Jehovah’s blessing. (Matt. 21:22) By persisting in your efforts, you may taste the joy of helping someone to respond to the good news!

