Does Your Congregation Have a Large Territory?
1 From the cities in Judea to the rurals of Galilee, Jesus gave an intensive witness throughout the large territory of ancient Israel. (Mark 1:38, 39; Luke 23:5) We too must reach as many people as we can with the good news. (Mark 13:10) However, this can be a challenge. Why?
2 Many congregations in the United States have territory that is mostly rural, covering hundreds of square miles. Foreign-language congregations may work in populous metropolitan areas, searching for people who speak their language. What can we do to help the people living in such extensive territories to learn the truth about Jehovah, Jesus, and the Kingdom?
3 Plan Carefully: The service overseer and the territory servant need to coordinate the congregation’s efforts to accomplish the most good. Perhaps special Saturdays can be scheduled when most are able to devote a full day to the work. When working distant territories, plan to spend longer days in field service if possible, taking along a lunch to enjoy at midday. You might meet for service earlier than usual to allow time for travel to the territory or hold the meeting for field service near the area to be worked. Keep car groups small so that all will stay busy. Arrange to work rural areas during seasons when weather and road conditions are favorable.
4 Those working foreign-language territories can save valuable time by having an up-to-date list of names and addresses and a current map. Organize territories so that a service group can call on all the addresses in a general area.
5 Be sure to take along an adequate supply of literature. If the territory is seldom worked, it may be appropriate to leave a tract or an older magazine at not-at-homes. If the tract Would You Like to Know More About the Bible? is available in your language, offer it to everyone you meet and leave one at not-at-homes.
6 Cooperate Fully: Working a large territory requires the cooperation of everyone in the congregation. When extensive driving is necessary, those traveling together can share gasoline expenses. Good judgment should be exercised when you find householders who are willing to talk. Be ever conscious of the need to reach all in the territory, and be considerate of those waiting in your car group. If you desire to continue a conversation with an interested person at length, could arrangements be made so that the rest of the group is not detained?
7 Make definite arrangements to follow up all interest. Besides the address, try to obtain the interested person’s phone number so that you can make contact and give a further witness by telephone. If rural roads are not named or houses are not numbered, carefully draw a map or write a description of how to find the interested one on the return visit.
8 What a privilege is ours to carry out Jesus’ instructions: “Into whatever city or village you enter, search out who in it is deserving”! (Matt. 10:11) Surely Jehovah will bless your efforts as you willingly give of yourself in this most rewarding work!

