Our Faith Moves Us to Good Works
1 Faith caused Noah, Moses, and Rahab to act. Noah built the ark. Moses forsook the temporary advantages of life in Pharaoh’s court. Rahab hid the spies and then obeyed their instructions, saving her household. (Heb. 11:7, 24-26, 31) What good works does our faith move us to produce today?
2 Witnessing: Faith moves us to speak about our wonderful God and his provisions for eternal happiness. (2 Cor. 4:13) At times, we may feel hesitant to give a witness. But when we ‘place Jehovah in front of us constantly,’ we are strengthened and fear subsides. (Ps. 16:8) Then our faith impels us to share the good news with relatives, neighbors, workmates, schoolmates, and others on every appropriate occasion.​—Rom. 1:14-16.
3 Meeting Together: Regular meeting attendance is another good work that springs from faith. How so? It shows our conviction that Jesus is present with us by means of God’s holy spirit when we gather at Christian meetings. (Matt. 18:20) It manifests our desire to “hear what the spirit says to the congregations.” (Rev. 3:6) We take seriously the instruction that we receive because our eyes of faith perceive that the one teaching us is our Grand Instructor, Jehovah.​—Isa. 30:20.
4 The Choices We Make: Strong conviction of unseen realities moves us to give spiritual matters priority in our lives. (Heb. 11:1) This often involves making material sacrifices. For example, an elder turned down a lucrative secular opportunity because it would have meant missing meetings, being away from his family, and relinquishing his pioneer ministry. May we likewise place our full confidence in the Bible’s assurance that Jehovah will provide for those who “keep on . . . seeking first the kingdom and his righteousness.”​—Matt. 6:33.
5 The powerful influence that faith exerts on our lives does not go unnoticed by others. Indeed, our faith is known earth wide. (Rom. 1:8) May all of us, therefore, demonstrate by our good works that our faith is alive.​—Jas. 2:26.

