Satisfy Your Spiritual Need
1 Our upcoming “Zealous Kingdom Proclaimers” District Convention affords us a wonderful opportunity to satisfy our spiritual need. Like a wholesome physical meal, the program promises to nourish us spiritually “with the words of the faith.” (1 Tim. 4:6) It will enable us to draw closer to Jehovah. And we can expect to receive counsel and encouragement to help us cope with trials in our lives. Jehovah assures us: “I shall make you have insight and instruct you in the way you should go. I will give advice with my eye upon you.” (Ps. 32:8) How blessed we are to have his loving guidance in our lives! Consider some practical steps we can take to get the most benefit from the convention program.
2 We Need to Prepare Our Heart: Each of us has a responsibility to safeguard his own figurative heart. (Prov. 4:23) This requires that we exercise self-discipline and that we be honest with ourselves. The convention is a time to meditate on our relationship with Jehovah, a time to ‘peer into the perfect law that belongs to freedom.’ To prepare our heart to ‘accept the implanting of the word,’ we should beseech Jehovah to search us through, to identify in us any “painful way” needing correction, and to lead us in “the way of time indefinite.”​—Jas. 1:21, 25; Ps. 139:23, 24.
3 Listen and Meditate: Jesus commended Mary for paying rapt attention to his words, saying: “Mary chose the good portion, and it will not be taken away from her.” (Luke 10:39, 42) If we have the same mental disposition, we will not allow trivial matters to distract us. We will make sure that we are seated and attentive during the entire program. We will avoid talking or walking about unnecessarily and will be careful not to distract others with cellular phones, pagers, cameras, and camcorders.
4 When we listen to the talks, it is good to take brief notes to help us analyze how the subject is being developed. We should connect what we hear with what we already know. This will help us to grasp and retain the material. When reviewing our notes, we need to do so with a view to applying the material. Each one of us can well ask: ‘How does this affect my relationship with Jehovah? What adjustments do I need to make in my life? How can I apply this information in my dealings with others? How can I use it in my ministry?’ Discuss with others the points that we especially appreciate. Doing these things will aid us in keeping Jehovah’s sayings ‘in the midst of our heart.’​—Prov. 4:20, 21.
5 Let Us Apply What We Learn: After attending a district convention, one delegate said: “The program was of a very personal nature, motivating one to examine his heart condition and that of his family, and to provide loving Scriptural help as needed. It has made me more aware of my obligation to give more assistance to the congregation.” Likely many of us have felt the same way. But it is not enough for us simply to go away feeling upbuilt and refreshed. Jesus said: “If you know these things, happy you are if you do them.” (John 13:17) We must diligently put into practice the points that apply to us personally. (Phil. 4:9) This is the key to fully satisfying our spiritual need.
[Box on page 5]
Meditate on What You Hear:
■ How does it affect my relationship with Jehovah?
■ How does it influence my dealings with others?
■ How can I apply it in my life and in my ministry?

