“Always Pursue What Is Good”
1 The Christian way of life involves ‘always pursuing what is good toward all people.’ (1 Thess. 5:15) When attending our district conventions, we have many opportunities to do something good for others. On those occasions, we are in the public eye, and all who come in contact with us form opinions about us based on the way we treat them. To preserve a fine reputation as Jehovah’s Witnesses, we need to show by our actions that we “honor men of all sorts.” (1 Pet. 2:17) That includes “keeping an eye, not in personal interest upon just [our] own matters, but also in personal interest upon those of the others.” (Phil. 2:4) Consider how this applies to the convention rooming arrangement.
2 Have you made your hotel reservations yet? (1) Since the hotel wants to fill all available rooms, do not reserve more rooms than you plan to use. (2) Do not expect the hotel to save your room unless you make the appropriate deposit in advance of your arrival. (3) When you check in at the hotel, display patience and respect toward the hotel staff as they endeavor to accommodate you. (4) If a complimentary breakfast is included, do not abuse this provision, which is made for hotel guests only. (5) Abide by all the hotel’s rules regarding the use of its premises. (6) Leave a customary tip for the housekeeper.
3 Teaching Children How to Do Good: On occasion, children who have been left without proper adult direction at hotels have caused problems. (Prov. 29:15) In some cases, parents were involved in other activities and left their children unsupervised in the room, at the swimming pool, or elsewhere in the hotel. Some children became so rowdy that the management found it necessary to restrict them from using certain facilities or had to close the pool or other recreational areas altogether. This disturbed and inconvenienced other hotel guests, both Witnesses and non-Witnesses.
4 Parents, prior to the convention, it would be helpful if you spend some time reviewing with your children the kind of Christian behavior that is expected of them at all times and in all places. (Eph. 6:4) For example, point out to them that genuine Christian love “does not behave indecently, does not look for its own interests, does not become provoked.” (1 Cor. 13:5) Adults can reinforce these words by setting the right example for all to see. Children, you can pursue what is good by obeying your parents, showing respect for hotel property, and being considerate of those around you. (Col. 3:20) As we unitedly strive to do good toward all, we “adorn the teaching of our Savior, God, in all things.”​—Titus 2:10.
5 Our fine conduct has a positive effect not only on observers in general but also on those who have been critical of us for one reason or another. In everything we do at the convention and throughout the convention city​—whether walking on the street, eating in a restaurant, relaxing at the hotel, or taking advantage of opportunities to give an informal witness—​our Christian speech and actions should prove that we want to pursue what is good.
[Box on page 4]
Please Remember:
■ Be patient and respectful toward the hotel staff.
■ Observe hotel rules, to the benefit of all guests.
■ Do not abuse complimentary breakfast provisions.
■ Properly monitor the actions of your children.

