page 1 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. JANUARY 1, 1902. No. 1. 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 

The Twentieth Century Church 3 

The Early Church 4 

Such As I Have, Give I Unto You 8 

Questions of General Interest 10 

Abraham's Wife— His Niece? 10 

Palestine as a Refuge 10 

Conventions are "Holy 
Convocations" 11 

The Father Draws Now, 

The Son Then 11 

Drinking at the Brook 12 

page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS MISSION. 



THIS journal is set for the defence of the only true foundation of 

the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 

through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 

aransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (I Pet. 1:19; 

I Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 

and precious stones (I Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 

of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 

of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 

that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 

God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, 

as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of this Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessings shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-I Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 
for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; John 1:9; I Tim. 2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
hisjoint-heir.-I John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be the kings and priests of 
the next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the 
hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church— when all the wilfully 
wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor. 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



WATCH TOWER BINDERS, POST-PAID 40 CTS. 

These hold two years' issues, keep them clean, orderly 
and ready for reference. This is wholesale-cost price; for 
your benefit. 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

We have these in good supply now; and the last lot 
is larger in size and of heavier paper than previous lots. 
Prices 25c per 100, $2 per 1,000, post or express, prepaid. 

HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 

The announcement of Motto Cards, etc., in our Dec'r 
1st issue opposite page 377 still holds good: A $2 lot for 
$1 plus 16c postage. We still have a good supply, and they 
are surely both beautiful and cheap and desirable. But 
we have in mind some of our readers who may not be able 
to invest even this modest sum in home-embellishments. 
What can we do for these? 

We can and will put up for these dear friends a cheaper 
packet, which will serve them well, and help to brighten 
their homes and to remind them also of the precious promises 
of our Father's Word. 

These will be 50 cents per packet, including postage. 

We will put up also a 25c post-paid packet— for those 
who cannot invest more. 



R2929 : page supplement 

WE EXTEND to our list of subscribers, and to 

all friends of our cause (all of whom we hope to 

have on our lists soon, as per suggestions in 

our December 15th issue), most hearty greetings, wishing 

you all A Very Happy and Spiritually Prosperous 

New Year- 1902. 

We trust that you were all greatly pleased with 
our report for last year. Its showing of a previous 
deficiency wiped out, and a snug sum on hand wherewith 
to begin this year's operations, are good cause 
for joy, and for thankfulness to God. 

The outlook for the present year, you will be glad 
to learn, seems to us very encouraging. We are expecting 
much, and believe the Lord's providences and 
his Word justify these expectations. We hope to 
prepare, shortly, an article dealing further with the 
Call of this Gospel Age: showing some of our reasons 
for surmising that the next four years should quite 
double the present numbers of the interested, and the 
present operations in the service of the "harvest" message. 
It will appear as soon as possible, and we believe 
will be convincing to all. We mention the matter 



now, in advance, because we think that some are 
slackening their efforts, through a mistaken supposition 
that little more is to be done. We hope to convince 
and revive them; that they may renew their 
efforts in the service, and thus increase their joy and 
their usefulness. 

We know not what is before us in the year, dear 
brethren,— nor do we need to know. If we have 
committed our all, for time and eternity, to the Lord's 
care, let us assure our hearts, afresh, of divine wisdom 
and power as well as love. Resting confidently in the 
everlasting arms, we may take whatever his providence 
may permit; not only willingly, but joyfully. If 
the year shall bring us blessings, prosperity and encouragement 
in spiritual matters, we can while rejoicing 
lay by a store of grace; for stormy times of 
trial later on. If the year brings us sorrows, physical 
or mental anguish, let us receive them with resignation: 
saying, with the Master, "The cup which my 
Father hath poured for me, shall I not drink it?" 

If, dear brethren, life's experiences are accepted 
with faith, in the manner indicated, we may rest assured 
that this will be not only a happy but a blessed 
year for us. It is with each to determine this for 
himself under the Lord's grace. Faithful is he who 
hath called us;— let us be faithful. 



R2929 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE TWENTIETH CENTURY CHURCH. 

-AN "ORTHODOX" VIEW.- 

THE REV. HAWEIS, of St. James Church, London, 
England, gives his views of this subject 
in the London Daily Chronicle, from which we extract 
the following interesting items:— 

"The only hope for the Church of the Twentieth 
Century is that it should make a clean sweep of 1900 
years of theology and get back to Christ. We now 
know what this theology can do for us. It has done 
a great deal, for its statements at different times have 
approved themselves to different ages, and been the 
vehicles of a certain amount of Christian truth; but as 
Dean Milman said in his wise History of Christianity, 
Theophilus of Antioch, who invented the doctrine 
of the Trinity— or, at all events, coined that theological 
word— did not thereby very greatly benefit 
the Church. The same may be said of every other 
Christian dogma. It isn't that we don't believe the 



very important spiritual truths underlying every 

Christian dogma, but a form of expression of truth 

which is a living and a satisfactory one to an age immediately 

becomes false and dangerous when a better 

and a more complete expression is devised. 

THE NEED FOR RE-STATEMENT. 

"The Twentieth Century Church will insist upon 
Re-Statement on a large scale. Present theological 
text books are obsolete. They practically teach men 
and women infidelity. The Cimmerian darkness of 
Sunday-school teaching must be abandoned; the conscientious 
agonies of devout Sunday-school teachers 
must be relieved. They don't believe in the old hell 
themselves, but they have to teach it; the children 
don't believe it, but they have to put their hands behind 
their backs and tell the teachers these naughty 
lies every Sunday. The teacher does not believe in 
the Bible in the way in which he is supposed to teach 
it. No one believes it unless he is a fool or a brainless 
idiot.... His creed, in the same way, as has 
been finely said, "merely stands sentinel over the 
heart to keep it empty." "I believe," he says, "in 
the resurrection of the body." He doesn't; nobody 
does; but he is not allowed to teach instead: "I believe 
in the survival of myself," which was practically 
all those of old meant by the phrase, "the survival of 
the self," being to them inconceivable apart from the 
resurrection of the body, and so on ad infinitum. 
Our mistake is in pretending to believe obsolete statements 
which once expressed truth, but which are now 
seen to be defective. We should discard them openly 
and plead for proper re-statements.... 

"People now despise the clergy on account of 
the old rubbish they are not ashamed to teach. The 
twentieth century will not tolerate them unless they 
mend their ways. The twentieth century will go solid 
for fact in the shape of re-statement. 'Dear me!' 
people say, 'the working man doesn't go to church. 
How odd!' Very much odder if he did. The twentieth 
century will insist upon a clear statement of 
what we may call exact knowledge of God or the 
moral nature of the Sovereign Will ruling the universe. 
...Then the twentieth century will have to 
entirely change its attitude to the religions of the 
world, and it will have to admit that God has always 
been revealing Himself, His will, His purpose, as fast 
as man could receive it, and that the different and imperfect 
faiths and creeds are the result of the obscured 
mediums of the intelligence and the undeveloped 
spiritual faculties of man. The sun that always 
shines is seen through many diverse and distorting 
media— smoked glass, clouds, or mere tiny 
cracks in a darkened room, or again the prism, sunset 
clouds, or through folded lids of closed eyes seen 



hardly at all, but still the sun is always there. The 
teachings of Buddha, Zoroaster, Confucius, Moses, 
by a certain moral and spiritual solidarity, show that 
all religions are of Divine origin, though Christianity 
is the religion which belongs to the fulness of 
time. 

MISSIONS AND THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. 

"Then all this will surely alter the twentieth century 
Church's ideas of missions! Just think for a moment. 
When missions were most active last century 

R2930 : page 4 

the universal belief was that all savages were doomed 

to everlasting fire. With the abatement of that fear 

there will be a certain diminution of enthusiasm to 

break up the privacy of their lives. We must distinguish 

between missions and missions. There is 

an enormous difference between attacking with the 

most inferior statements of Christianity, ancient civilizations 

and religious philosophies promulgated by 

some of the greatest and best men and deepest 

thinkers of antiquity, and simply interposing in case 

of savages in order to prevent cannibalism and 

slaughter. Anything which stops that is, on the 

face of it, more than respectable, although under the 

influence of clothes and the brandy bottle, which 

seem to follow disastrously in the wake of the Bible, 

what we call the lower races show a tendency to improve 

themselves off the face of the earth. 

"The whole missionary method must be altered 
in the coming century. 

"The Christian religion can only spread properly 
from the Christian life— the lives of Englishmen and 
Englishwomen, not merely from the Christian dogma, 
nor the Christian machinery, the Christian calico, 
or even the Christian bayonet. The only way for 
missions to be healthy is for the English people 
abroad so to improve their minds and intelligences 
as to make the natives come and implore them to reveal 
the secret of such marked superiority and goodness, 
which under their own faulty system they seem 
unable to attain. The real Christian influence should 
spread as Christ spread His religion, by enthusiasm 
for ameliorating the physical as well as the spiritual 
condition of the people. These things must spread 
not by way of proselytism— plucking the brand from 
the burning, which was the way of the Inquisition; 
true Christianity is the unconscious outflow from a 
positive life. 'Let your light so shine before men 
that they may see your good works.' At present 
what they mostly see is a whirl of Bibles, beer, 
brandy, mutual jealousies, shoddy stores, and bad 
lives. The twentieth century must change all that. 



"Don't I think the clergy want educating in their 
own theology? 

"Yes, but the more you educate them on the 
present lines the worse they will be. The proper education 
of the clergy would consist in teaching them 
to understand the real nature of the Bible, instead of 
only teaching them what various theologians in the 
past have thought about the Bible, which is a very 
different thing from what modern research has shown 
about its records and the value to be attached to 
them. It is unfortunate that the chief doctrines of 
Christianity, as understood by the clergy, should 
have been left out of the Sermon on the Mount, the 
most perfect expression as some suppose of the Christian 
religion. It is also unfortunate to note that no 
one can read the closing chapters of St. John without 
seeing that our Lord can hardly be accounted 
quite sound on the doctrine of the Trinity, as it is 
stated in the Athanasian Formula. The twentieth 
century will probably read the Sermon on the Mount 
again.... 

"Humanitarianism, or pulpit interest in Politics 
and Sociology, is a wholesome tendency as far 
as it goes, because it shows the irresistible pressure 
put upon the clergy to make their moral instruction 
bear directly on affairs of practical life; but it is dangerous 
as tending to confuse what is roughly called 
the secular with the spiritual. You can't insist too 
much on the fact that Culture is not religion; religion 
always means one and the same thing— the sense of 
a spiritual nature— and dependence upon a spiritual 
source external to ourselves. I hope the twentieth 
century will develop both. They run on parallel not 
antagonistic lines, though it would not be fair to say 
they will never meet, for there is moral and physical 
intercommunication between the two. The Church of 
the twentieth century will be deeply spiritual, even 
spiritualistic, I am sure, in a very wide sense of the 
word. Spiritualism, in all its many forms, however 
people may dislike it, does, nevertheless, stand as a 
stout protest on behalf of man's spiritual nature and 
his spiritual affinities, and the twentieth century 
Church will have to look very largely to the recognition 
and development and purification of these spiritual 
manifestations and beliefs." 



R2930 : page 4 

THE EARLY CHURCH. 
-ACTS 2:37-47.-JAN. 19.- 
"The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. 



THE MEAGER outlines of the preaching on 
the day of Pentecost, afforded us by the extracts 
from Peter's discourse, indicate simplicity, 
wisdom and courage, such as we should expect 
in those who were guided by the holy spirit. 
The Apostle first took advantage of the charge of 
some that the speakers were intoxicated. He 
showed the unreasonableness of the proposition on 
the surface and then explained the true meaning 
of the phenomena, referring his readers directly 
to Joel's prophecy, "And upon the servants and the 
handmaids in those days I will pour out my spirit." 
-Joel 2:29. 

It may be well to note in passing that Joel's 
prophecy is a double one, and that, probably for the 
very purpose of hiding the truth until due, it states 
matters in their reverse order; telling first about 
the general blessing of the Millennial age "afterward," 
and telling subsequently about the blessing 
of the Gospel age, which is confined exclusively to 
God's servants and handmaidens— "in those days" 
—during the Gospel age, prior to the general outpouring 
of the spirit which will follow the establishment 
of the Kingdom. 

Having gotten the attention of his hearers, many 
of whom were believers in the prophets— and 
"waiting for the consolation of Israel," which they 
promised— the Apostle proceeded to preach Christ 
unto them. He did not becloud his subject and 
confuse his hearers by saying: You have heard 
of great philosophers and great teachers amongst 
the Gentiles, and as Jews we have had some great 
prophets ourselves, one of whom was Jesus; but 
he came directly to the point he wished to impress, 

R2930 : page 5 

and declared to them that Jesus, the despised Nazarene, 
of whom, doubtless, the majority had heard 
something, probably derogatory, was indeed the 
Messiah; that though he had died he had arisen; and 
having arisen and ascended on high he had shed 
forth his power upon these speakers, who were now 
his representatives and mouthpieces in the world, 
to declare his mercy. Neither fear of rulers nor 
shame in confessing the crucified one to be his 
Master is the least apparent in the Apostle's language. 
He fully identified himself with the crucified 
one, and as plainly declared that the rulers had 
been wickedly and sinfully responsible for his death, 
in that they had incited the Roman governor to its 
accomplishment. He pointed out that this was no 
mischance, but God's foreknown and prearranged 
plan— that it was necessary that Messiah should 



die as the Redeemer of the people, before he could 
deliver them fully. He pointed out that although it 
was necessary for Christ to die nevertheless a heavy 
responsibility, a curse, hung over that nation which 
had thus, in its wickedness of heart, rejected and 
crucified God's Son. 

The word of truth, as always, was a savor of life 
unto life or death unto death. (2 Cor. 2:16.) To 
many the words were foolishness and had the death 
odor, and they passed on; but to those deeply interested 
ones who remained, the Apostle's explanation 
of matters was forceful,— especially as he backed 
this up by quotations from the prophets, showing 
that God had foreknown the death of Messiah, and 
had foretold his resurrection also, and this miraculous 
outpouring of his spirit, of which they all were 
witnesses. The record is that many of the hearers 
were pricked to the heart— conscience-smitten. 
They noted the aptness of the Apostle's quotations 
and their application, and the logic of his reasoning; 
and doubtless in all these things they remarked 
of the apostles what they had previously remarked 
of our Lord— that the teaching was not like that of 
the scribes and Pharisees, uncertain, indefinite, but 
with force, with authority, with distinctness, with 
conviction of its truth. 

And after this same sort is all the preaching of 
God's true servants, done under the influence of the 
holy spirit. It is illuminating and not confusing. 
Error is never clear; it is always confused and confusing. 
Clearness and simplicity, on the contrary, 
are marks of the truth. For various reasons the old, 
old story, which the Apostles here preached, is considerably 
neglected in our day by professed ministers 
of the Gospel of Christ. One reason is that 
those who attempt to teach realize their own confusion 
of thought, and need first to be taught of 
God through his Word, by his holy spirit, and 
through such channels as the holy spirit may use in 
granting illumination of mind and appreciation of 
the Word. Another reason is that the nominal 
churches have in great measure ceased to believe 
the old, old story, and have accepted instead an evolution 
theory. Only to a small minority of Christian 
people, therefore, is the true Gospel precious. The 
majority more and more have itching ears for something 
new— a new gospel of education, refinement 
and wealth.— 2 Tim. 4:3,4. 

R2931 : page 5 

As the Apostle clinched one feature after another 
of his argument, and showed how completely 
Jesus had fulfilled the declaration of the prophets 
in respect to his life, his teachings, his miracles, 
his death, his resurrection, and the holy spirit now 



poured out upon his followers, conviction of the 
truth was forced upon the minds of many of the 
hearers, and they cried out, "Men and brethren, 
what shall we do?"— is there any mercy for us, seeing 
we are members of this nation, whose rulers 
have thus despised God's grace, and crucified his 
Son? 

This was exactly the condition of heart which 
Peter desired to awaken. He wisely realized that 
people must see the provision for their forgiveness 
and rescue before they will lay hold upon salvation. 
He would not begin by tendering mercy, but 
by showing the right, the truth, and the wrong. But 
now that his hearers were in the right condition of 
heart the Apostle did not seek to terrify them, 
but promptly told them of God's mercy and love, 
assuring them that they were still his favored people, 
and that if they would come to the repentant 
condition of heart they would be accepted of the 
Lord, even as the other believers were already accepted; 
and that they, too, would have the blessing 
of the holy spirit and its gifts. There is a pattern 
in this preaching which all of the Lord's Royal 
Priesthood should take note of and practice as they 
have opportunity to dispense the good tidings. Instead 
of ranting, they should use logic, reason and 
Scriptural quotations;— and those convicted, and 
seeking to know the way, should not be terrorized, 
but should be promptly assisted and guided in the 
Lord's way, and assured of his mercy. 

The Apostle was fully justified in telling his 
hearers that the promises were still theirs as a people; 
for it was clearly declared by the Lord, through 
the prophet, that Christ should be cut off in the 
midst of the seventieth symbolical week of Israel's 
favor, leaving one-half of that seventieth week, viz., 
3-1/2 years, of special favor to Israelites individually, 
after their national favor had ceased.*— Dan. 9:25-27; 
Matt. 23:37,38. 

Specifically, Peter's answer was that his conscience-stricken 
hearers should individually repent 
and be baptized. He did not make the mistake that 
some are inclined to make, when they suppose that 
sorrow for a wrong is repentance. Peter perceived 
that they already were sorry, "perplexed in their 
hearts." Sorrow is not repentance, but, as the 
Apostle explains, "Godly sorrow leadeth to repentance." 
(2 Cor. 7:9,10.) Repentance would be the 
proper fruitage or result of a proper sorrow. Repentance 
would mean a full retraction of all share 
in the great national sin of Israel, the rejection and 
crucifixion of Messiah. It would mean, therefore, 
an acceptance of Jesus as the Messiah, and the 
confession of him as such. And this, in turn, would 
mean that confessing him to be the Son of God they 
would become fully submissive to his teachings, 



become his disciples. Repentance, therefore, rightly 

understood, meant a great deal, and it means no 

less today than then. Whoever today refuses to acknowledge 



*Millennial Dawn, Vol. II, p. 201. 

R2931 : page 6 

Christ as the Messiah, the sent of God 
—whoever refuses to obey his teachings, to follow 
him— is unrepentant; no matter how fully he may 
believe that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah, 
the sent of God, the Redeemer; and, even though he 
sorrow at the record of the sufferings of Christ, he 
has not come to the point of repentance until he 
has renounced the sins for which Christ suffered, 
and become a follower of his teachings. Only such 
as are thus repentant have part or lot in the household 
of faith. God's proposition is not to save people 
in their sins, but to save them from their sins; 
and during this Gospel age the first condition of 
acceptance, and even a reckoned salvation, is that 
the sinner shall renounce his sin and accept the 
Lord and the righteousness and harmony with God 
for which he stands as representative. "He that 
hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the 
Son of God hath not life."— I John 5:12. 

The persons whom the Apostle addressed 
were all Jews, and hence he said, "Be baptized 
for the remission of your sins." Baptism is not God's 
appointed channel for the remission of sins; for, as 
the Apostle declares, "Without the shedding of 
blood there is no remission." (Heb. 9:22.) However, 
the Jewish nation, under God's arrangement 
through Moses, was accepted of him as a whole, as 
a nation, and sin-offerings had been made for them 
all as a nation, and had been accepted, and a covenant 
had been made called the Law Covenant. 
Those whom the Apostles addressed, being under 
the Law Covenant, were under all these favorable 
conditions, under the blood of the typical sacrifices, 
typically justified and reconciled; and to them, consequently, 
God's promises pertained, as they did not 
pertain to the Gentiles, who had not come under 
such typical reconciliation through typical sacrifices. 
The sin which the Apostle wished his hearers 
to emblematically wash away in baptism was 
not, therefore, original sin, but was a sin against 
their Law Covenant,— including their national sin 
in the rejection of the Messiah. With these purged 
away, with the symbolical washing, they would be 
back to the standpoint of true Israelites, "Israelites 
indeed;" and as such they would have every right 
and privilege belonging to the Israelites, but belonging 



to members of no other nation. 

The Apostle Paul explains this relationship 
(Rom. 11), saying that the Israelites were the natural 
branches in the olive root of the Abrahamic 
promise. As branches already in that root they 
would not need to be grafted in, as do we who by 
nature are Gentiles. They were already in relationship 
to God, and all that they needed to do was to 
repent of their sins and figuratively wash them 
away, when they would be fully acceptable branches 
in the olive tree, which would not be broken off, 
but, on the contrary, would receive now a special 
share in the Pentecostal blessing. Subsequently, 
when exhorting Gentile converts to baptism, the 
Apostle Paul explained most clearly its difference 
from this baptism of Jews for the remission of sins. 
(Acts 19:1-6.) He shows that our baptism signifies 
or emblemizes our introduction into the body 
of Christ, as wild olive branches grafted into the 
approved stock, to be partakers of the richness of 
the promises through the root. (Rom. 6:3-5.) We 
should, however, remark that the Jew no longer 
holds this same peculiar relationship; so that if the 
Apostle were addressing Jews today we believe he 
would address them exactly as he would address 
Gentiles on this point of seeking union with Christ. 
Our reasons for so thinking are: That as the 
national favor to Israel ended with the death of 
Christ, in the midst of their "week" of favor, so the 
individual favor to the Jew above the Gentile ceased 
with the breaking off of the natural olive branches 
during the remaining thirty-three years of their 
"harvest," which ended with the destruction of their 
polity, A.D. 70. A natural branch once broken off 
could be reunited only by engrafting— in no way 
differently from a wild-olive branch. Consequently, 
any Jew, seeking to come into Christ since the 
day of wrath upon his nation, could come in only 
under the same terms and conditions as a Gentile. 

The Apostle would have his hearers understand 
that the rejection of Christ and his crucifixion did 
not end the mercy of God toward them. These matters 
were merely steps in the divine plan for the 
execution of divine mercy;— the promises were still 
theirs, yea, they would be for their children, and 
ultimately for all mankind, however far they might 
be from God at that time. But he intimates distinctly 
that a divine election is connected with the 
matter, and that only those called of God could 
at present be expected to hear and to respond. And 
this we see about us today, and as we look back 
through the past. As Abraham sent his servant, 
and invited Rebekah to be the bride of his son, 
Isaac, so the Heavenly Father has sent his servant, 
the holy spirit, during this Gospel age, to call the 
antitype of Rebekah, the Church, to be the bride 



of Christ,— joint-heir with his Son. As not all the 

women of the world were called to be the bride of 

Isaac, so at present not all mankind are called to 

be the Bride of Christ. Those invited to this join t-heirship 

must first be related to God, even as the 

one invited to be Isaac's bride was a relative of 

Abraham. Hence the step preparatory to this call 

to join t-heirship with Christ is justification through 

faith. The Apostle's hearers, being members of 

the typically justified nation, needed only to accept 

Christ, as the antitype of Moses, and to recognize 

spiritual Israel as the antitype of natural Israel, in 

order to be fully in relationship to the Lord's call. 

Evidently the Lord was guiding in respect to 
every feature of the establishment of the Church, 
and it was on this account that so large a number 
as three thousand persons were prepared to accept 
the message,— to accept Jesus as their Redeemer 
and King, and to avow themselves his followers, 
his disciples. It is not necessary that we should 
suppose that they were all baptized in the one day, 
nor are we, indeed, certain that they all avowed 
their allegiance to Messiah in the same day; but 
that as a result of that one day's preaching about 
three thousand were added to the Church. These 
were not added to a denomination, a party, a sect, 
but were additions to the one Church, the body 
of Christ,— members added to the one head of the 

R2932 : page 7 

Church. We do not read that their names were 

enrolled as members of the Church, nor that they 

took certain vows, nor that they assented to certain 

confessions of faith. He who accepts Christ 

as his Redeemer and as his instructor, who pledges 

himself to obedience to him, and to walk in 

his footsteps, has taken the only obligation which 

the Scriptures define as marking those who are 

probationary members of the true Church. And it 

is still proper to make an outward acknowledgment 

or sign of this acceptance of Christ by a symbolical 

baptism. The real baptism, the real consecration 

of the heart, or will, its burial into Christ, 

takes place first; the outward or symbolical representation 

of this in water is the good confession 

by which the individual shows, in God's appointed 

way, to his fellows or to whoever may witness, 

that he has died to the world and become alive 

toward God through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

That the new converts were "Israelites indeed" was 
demonstrated by the fact that they did not speedily 
fall away and become cold. On the contrary, 
we are informed that they continued stedfast, 
recognizing the teachings of the apostles— 
that God specially used them as his representatives 



and mouthpieces for the instruction of his Church. 
They thus continued in fellowship with the household 
of faith, and this would imply meeting with 
them every first-day of the week to celebrate the 
Lord's resurrection, to unite their prayers at the 
throne of grace, and to build one another up in the 
most holy faith. Breaking the spiritual bread on 
these occasions, they also united in a common meal, 
in remembrance of the Lord's first meeting with 
them and making himself known after his resurrection 
in the blessing and breaking of bread. 
(Luke 24:35.) This has no reference to the Memorial 
Supper, which was celebrated yearly, and not 
with bread alone, but also with the cup, of equal 
importance. 

"Fear came upon every soul"— reverence— an 
appreciation, to some extent at least, of the wonderful 
relationship to God into which they had been 
introduced, and of the wonderful power of God 
working in their midst, and especially manifested 
through the miracles and signs which the apostles 
were thus permitted to perform for the establishment 
of the faith of the justified. 

It has been assumed by some that communism 
as that term is applied today, was practised in the 
early Church; and it is the claim of some that it 
should never have been discontinued, but should 
always obtain amongst the Lord's people. We answer, 
first, that the early Church did not practise 
what is now known as communism; second, 
that something akin to what the early Church did 
practise (but modified) still is the rule amongst 
the Lord's saints; third, the extreme view (and 
practice) of the early Church was apparently not intended 
to remain, was never enjoined by the Lord 
nor the apostles, and serves rather as an evidence 
against the feasibility of the doctrines of communism 
under present conditions. 

So far as the record shows there was no compulsory 
division of wealth, such as communism 
proposes. On the contrary, everything was voluntary; 
and everything of the same kind is just as 
free, just as voluntary, and just as proper, now as 
then,— no more so, no less so. Some of those who 
owned farms and personal property sold them and 
brought the money and placed it at the Apostles' 
feet— gave it into their charge. Some may have 
given all that they had in this manner, but it is 
not so stated. On the contrary, various things give 
the inference that Barnabas, who sold the field and 
gave the money, may still have retained other properties, 
which no doubt, he would have been willing 
to have disposed of later, and to have made similar 
use of the money as it might be needed. The sin 
of Ananias and Sapphira did not consist in their 
not putting all of their property into the common 



treasury, but in their deceitfulness in the matter; 

—in their pretending to give the entire proceeds 

of one property when they did not do so. Some 

Scriptures clearly intimate that some of the Lord's 

people at that time had private possessions aside 

from those which were put into the common fund. 

(See Acts 12:12; 21:16.) It is possible, of course, 

that in the two instances cited the properties might 

have been given to the community and might have 

been returned when the community failed, and 

when the believers were scattered abroad. On the 

other hand, we think it reasonable to suppose that 

the selling of the possessions was merely to such 

an extent as was necessary to supply the wants of 

all— so that none of the Lord's people might lack 

while others had superfluity. This kind of brotherliness 

and common interest should still prevail 

amongst the Lord's people. Indeed, to a considerable 

extent it must prevail, or else we are none 

of his. We are not to forget, however, that the 

necessity for private provision of this kind today 

is less than it was eighteen centuries ago; for now 

there are many more opportunities for earning a 

livelihood, and many provisions for the aged, the 

sick and the infirm. The public provision for the 

poor today is probably quite superior to that which 

was accorded to the poorer brethren under consideration. 

The same spirit of charity finds ample 

opportunity today. On every side we see brethren 

and sisters having need, not of the meat that perisheth, 

but of the "meat in due season," the spiritual 

food, and having need also of the robe of justification. 

There is abundant opportunity for all to 

join in dispensing these blessings, worth so much 

more than temporal good things to those who have 

need of them. 

It is noteworthy that the apostles neither commanded 
nor advised communism; nor do their writings 
intimate that it prevailed in the early Church. 
As showing that there were both rich and poor in 
the assemblies of the primitive Church, note the 
Apostle Paul's words to Timothy, "Charge them 
that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, 
nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living 
God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy: 
that they do good, that they be rich in good works, 
ready to distribute, willing to communicate; laying 
up in store for themselves a good foundation against 
the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal 

R2932 : page 8 

life." (I Tim. 6:17.) The same Apostle reproves 
some of the wealthy brethren for improper displays 
in connection with the Memorial Supper, saying, 
"Have ye not houses to eat and drink in, or despise 



ye the Church of God, and shame them that have 
not [wealth]?" (I Cor. 11:22.) The Apostle John 
intimates differences in financial condition when he 
asks, How could he who loves God shut up the 
bowels of compassion against a brother, who lacks 
life's necessities. (I John 3:17.) The Apostle 
James says, "If a brother or sister be naked and 
destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto 
them, Depart, and be ye warmed and fed, notwithstanding 
ye give them not those things which are 
needful to the body, what doth it profit?"— 
James 2:15,16. 

Indeed, in our judgment, the necessary lessons 
of life could not be so well learned, either by the 
rich or the poor, if community of goods were either 
the law or the rule amongst Christians. There can 
be no question, however, respecting the propriety of 
community of provision for those who are in want, in 
distress. It is in harmony with this thought that 
the Apostle advises each to lay by him on the first 
day of the week, according as God hath prospered 
him, a share of his income,— for good service to the 
Lord and to the brethren, in temporal and spiritual 
things. (I Cor. 16:2.) No doubt, after the Millennial 
Kingdom shall have brought the willing and 
obedient of mankind to perfection, there will be 
some kind of communism such as we may presume 
obtains amongst the angels. Even then it will be 
a communism which will recognize some head or 
authority; for amongst the angels, we are informed, 
there are principalities and powers, cherubim and 
seraphim, and God over all. 

The early Church, full of love for the Lord and 
for each other, is a beautiful and in many respects 
an ideal picture, in which we can rejoice: no wonder 
it is recorded that they had joy, gladness, in 
their hearts, and in their thanksgiving to God, and 
that the people in general, their neighbors, were 
pleased with them and rejoiced in their loving 
spirit. How delightful it would be if all the Lord's 
people in the world today could be thus in harmony 
with each other and appreciated by their 
friends and neighbors. Indeed, we must suppose 
that the Lord specially shielded the infant Church 
for a short season, until it should become somewhat 
established in knowledge and in faith, else 
the Great Adversary would have raised up opposition 
and persecution more quickly than he did. 
Even as it was, it was but a little time until the persecution 
arose, and with it the testing of those who had 
espoused the cause of Jesus. Then came the great 
scattering under persecution, so that those who had 
learned the way of the Lord learned additionally 
patience and obedience;— some of them even unto 
death, and others being scattered abroad became 
preachers of the gospel of Jesus and their newly-found 



hopes in him. 

The Lord "added to the Church daily such as 
should be saved," says our Golden Text; or, as the 
Revised Version renders it, "such as were being 
saved." As the same Apostle Peter declares, the 
salvation promised us is still future,— we are waiting 
for it; it is "to be brought unto us at the revelation 
of our Lord and Savior Jesus," at his second 
advent. (I Pet. 1:13.) But meantime there is a 
beginning of this salvation in the present life. Even 
now we are, as the Apostle declares, "saved by 
hope." (Rom. 8:24.) The salvation is not merely 
of hope, either, but it begins to take hold upon us, 
mentally, morally and physically— the regenerating 
work begins; the new mind, the new will, is 
the start, and from that proceeds true obedience to 
the Lord's Word, progress in knowledge and progress 
in grace, and all the progress of the new 
creature. It often, indeed, means the sacrifice of 
the earthly interests of the natural man, but it 
means the development of the new creature. It 
means the progress of the work of salvation in the 
heart, which alone God recognizes; and the new 
creature thus making progress is ultimately to be 
perfected in salvation by a share in the "first 
resurrection." 



R2933 : page 8 

SUCH AS I HAVE, GIVE I UNTO YOU. 

-ACTS3:1-10-JAN. 26.- 

"The Lord is my strength and my song; 
he is become my salvation."— Exod. 15:2. 



PROBABLY it was not long after the day of 

Pentecost that the events of this lesson 

transpired. Our last lesson notes the fact 

that the believers, filled with their new joy, went 

frequently to the Temple for prayer and thanksgiving. 

This lesson shows us Peter and John attending 

the Temple service at the hour of prayer, 

three o'clock in the afternoon. These two had been 

with the Lord and with each other for now several 

years. Both had been disciples of John the 

Baptist, and previously they two had been together 

in the fishing business. They were also specially favored 

amongst the twelve, being with Jesus on the 

Mount of Transfiguration, and in the inner circle 

in the Garden of Gethsemane, etc. Although Peter 

was probably the eldest of the disciples, and John 



probably the youngest, and although their dispositions 
were quite different in many respects, apparently 
there was a strong element of harmony between 
them— they both loved the Lord very intensely, 
and they were both of ardent temperament. It was 
natural, therefore, that these two should be considerably 
in each other's company because of special 
compatibility. While it is well for the stronger 
brethren to pray with and company with the 
weaker sometimes, for the assistance of the latter, 
it is well also that kindred spirits should come together 
in communion with each other and with the 
Lord, as in this case. 

As the apostles evidently went frequently to the 
Temple, and probably often by the same route, 
through the "Beautiful Gate," it is more than likely 
that the lame beggar, who had long been accustomed 
to that locality, in seeking alms, had seen 
them almost daily. Indeed, it would not be surprising 
if a knowledge of the Pentecostal wonders 

R2933 : page 9 

which had converted several thousand, and been 

"noised abroad," had reached the poor beggar, as 

well as many others of the religious class, who assembled 

almost daily at the Temple. Quite evidently 

therefore, the beggar knew Peter and John in advance 

of his healing. If so, it would to some extent 

account for his readiness of faith, by which, 

accepting the Apostle's word and hand, he was 

healed. 

Why the Apostle Peter on this particular occasion 
was led to bestow a blessing upon this man 
we may never know, for it is probable that in that 
time, when there were no hospitals for the lame 
and blind, etc., the Apostles frequently passed by 
others as badly crippled and distressed as this one, 
without proffering aid. It would seem, however, 
that the man was an "Israelite indeed"— from the 
way in which he received the Lord's blessing. 
Otherwise, instead of having a heart overflowing 
with gratitude and thankfulness, he before would 
have been in an attitude of discontent, repining at 
his lot and complaining of divine providence; and 
in such a frame of mind his attitude after his healing 
would have been one of complacent satisfaction 
rather than of gratitude. He would have felt that 
he had received no more than his due. The connections, 
therefore, seem to indicate that the Lord's 
providence directed the apostles to him specially, 
on this account. And so it is with those of the 
Lord's people today who are in a right attitude of 
heart. They will, whatever their condition, find 
much to be thankful for, and can trace the Lord's 
providence and grace in life's affairs, notwithstanding 



its trials and difficulties. Such people are the 
objects of God's care, and have the assurance that all 
things are working together for their good. The 
Lord's providence may not always bring them physical 
health and strength, but it will surely bring to 
such the highest blessings which it brought to the 
poor cripple of this lesson— a knowledge of the Lord 
and a share of his spiritual favors. 

At that time, when there was no provision for 
the indigent and helpless, alms-begging and almsgiving 
were entirely proper. It is creditable to the 
civilization of our day and land, however, that the 
helpless are provided for at public expense— all 
property paying a poor tax or alms tax. It strikes 
us as being as much wrong to encourage public 
begging now, as it was right to respond to it at the 
time mentioned. If the friends of the indigent cannot 
amply provide for them the public can, and 
should, and generally does; and it would be a false 
pride which would ignore these ample provisions 
and not blush to seek others. 

The Apostle said, "Silver and gold have I none." 
We can scarcely suppose that he intended this 
statement to be taken literally, for in the preceding 
verses we have the record that considerable property 
was sold, and the proceeds laid at the Apostles' 
feet— put at their disposal. But this evidently the 
apostles considered as belonging to the Lord and 
not to themselves— as trust funds. We assume, 
therefore, that the Apostle meant, Silver and gold 
we have none to give you, but we have something 
better to give you, something which God intended 
we should dispense. And undoubtedly what the 
Apostles gave was more valuable than money to 
the poor cripple. 

So it is today; we are unable to respond as liberally 
as we would like to the requests which sometimes 
come to us for financial aid. The means which 
the Lord has put into our hands we understand him 
to intend us to transform in the main into spiritual 
food and clothing and strength and help, for the 
sin-sick and lame and for the error-blinded; and accordingly 
we are sometimes compelled to say, silver 
and gold we have little to give; but of the spiritual 
blessings we are willing to give liberally— without 
money and without price. 

Our Lord's words were, "The poor ye have always 
with you; but me ye have not always." In 
seeking to be helpful to brethren in the Church and 
to the unfortunate in the world it is well that all 
should cultivate a largeness of heart; and yet it is 
well also to remember that in the cases of many of 
the Lord's children adversity has evidently been of 
the Lord's intention, to bring to them blessings 
which they would not be prepared to receive in any 
other manner. We are to endeavor to be helpful to 



each other, while seeking not to conflict with the 
operations of divine providence, and the learning of 
important lessons by those whose welfare we seek. 
We should never forget the Apostle's inspired words. 
-2Thes. 3:10. 

"It is more blessed to give than to receive." Undoubtedly 
every child of God has realized the truthfulness 
of this; God is ever a bountiful giver, and his 
people, in proportion as they cultivate this quality, 
generosity, are therefore cultivating a grand, God-like 
quality. "Do good and lend, hoping for nothing 
again [no reward]; and ye shall be children of the 
Highest." (Luke 6:35.) If we cannot always give 
much money, or if we cannot give as much as we 
would like to give, to those who are in need, we 
may always, like Peter, give something. We cannot, 
like him give health and strength miraculously, 
since we are not endued with those apostolic 
powers; but we can give a word of encouragement, 
a kindly look, a helping hand over difficulties; and 
these will often be more valuable than money, and 
sometimes more appreciated. Even an "enemy" 
should be fed, if hungry; but neither friend nor foe 
should be encouraged in indolence, nor in 
wastefulness. 

We notice how distinctly Peter acknowledged 
the source of his power, and how he was not ashamed 
of any feature of divine truth. He boldly declared his 
miracle to be in the name of "Jesus of Nazareth." 
He did not say, in the name of Jesus, the greatest of 
all Jews, the highly esteemed friend of Joseph of 
Arimathea, and of Nicodemus, one of your influential 
rulers; but, ignoring all such human weaknesses, 
he plainly declared that it was Jesus the Nazarene, 
the despised one, whose power had healed. We 
find some of the Lord's people today far less courageous 
than Peter; inclined rather to feel ashamed 
of the truth and ashamed of the agencies God has 
used in its dissemination;— for fear that these would 
be a reflection against it. We should rather follow 
the Apostle's course, and be very courageous and 

R2933 : page 10 

ready to publicly affirm whatever we find possessing 
divine sanction. Whatever agencies God may make 
use of in connection with his service we may be sure 
that he has some purpose, some object in view, and 
that his purposes will best be accomplished by 
plain, candid, truthful statements, like Peter's. 

The description of standing, leaping and walking, 
may well represent the first efforts of one who 
had been born lame, and who consequently had 
never learned how to walk. However, the strength 
was in his limbs, and abundantly testified to the 
miracle wrought. The poor man was not ashamed 



of the agents whom God had used in his restoration. 
He shouted praise to God, and held on to his two 
benefactors, advertising them to the people, and 
thus advertising also the Gospel message, which 
they had to give, which undoubtedly was the very 
purpose the Lord intended. Here, too, is a lesson 
for us, not to be ashamed of those whom the Lord 
may use in connection with our spiritual healing- 
much more valuable, much more to be appreciated 
and acknowledged before God and men, than any 
temporal blessing. Indeed, the natural sight, natural 
hearing, natural walking, and natural enjoyment of 
every kind, are insignificant in comparison with the 
spiritual enlightenment and hearing and strength to 
walk in a spiritual way, as the spiritual joys are 
higher than the natural. 

Peter was not self-seeking; he was alert to use 
every opportunity, every opening, that might come 
to himself, to the glory of the Lord and of his 
cause. And so when the multitude gathered together 
he used the miracle of healing as his text— 
as a demonstration of the power of the risen Jesus, 
operating through him; and he straightway declared 
to the people that this was the same Jesus whom 
their rulers had crucified some two months previously. 
He distinctly disowned that either he or 
John had any power of themselves to perform such a 
miracle; he did not say, either, that the healing was 
by a natural law operated by the man's faith; nor 

R2934 : page 10 

did he say that the healing was by "Science"; nor 
did he deny the facts, and claim that the man's impotence 
was merely a wrong thought, the correction 
of which had given relief. He told the truth,— 
that the man had been ill but was now made sound 
by the power of Jesus. Nor did he spare his hearers, 
but pressed home the truth of the responsibility of 
their nation for the crucifixion of one who not only 
was innocent and just, but who was the sent of God, 
the Messiah, the Prince of Life. 

Here is another lesson for us. When we obtain 
the attention of men it is not to be frittered away, 
either in the discussion of unprofitable topics or in 
personal boastfulness; but is to be turned directly 
to the Lord's glory, to the preaching of the good 
tidings of redemption through the precious blood, 
that it may be known that all blessing of every kind 
comes through the merit of that sacrifice, and from 
our risen glorified Lord. 

Our Golden Text surely represents the heart-sentiments 
of every member of the household of 
faith. The Lord is our strength; we lean not upon 
human might,— neither of our own or of other 
men. We hold the Head, from whom not only 



come the laws which govern us, but from whom 
come the strength, the direction, the protection, 
the care, which we need and which we enjoy. The 
Lord is become our salvation; he has saved us from 
the condemnation of sin through faith in the blood; 
he has rescued us from the love of sin. He has not 
only revived us, but strengthened us, and enabled 
us to walk in the narrow way, and to do so with joy 
and gladness and leaping. He is our salvation 
already— the salvation that is to be brought unto us, 
and thus to be complete in us, in the first resurrection, 
is already begun— for we are already passed 
from death unto life, and have the witness of this 
in the holy spirit. 



R2934 : page 10 

QUESTIONS OF GENERAL INTEREST. 



ABRAHAM'S WIFE-HIS NIECE? 



Question.— In the Tower for July 15, 1901, p. 233, 
Sarah is mentioned as Abraham's niece. How can 
this be harmonized with Gen. 20:12, "She is my sister; 
she is the daughter of my father, but not the 
daughter of my mother"? 

Answer.— In olden times it was customary, instead 
of speaking of grandchildren, to call them 
children, as, for instance, "the children of Israel." 
"All the souls which came out of the loins of Jacob 
were seventy souls"— yet some of these were grandchildren 
and some great grandchildren. The 
thought is that Haran was the eldest son of Terah; 
that he had two children, Lot and Sarah, and that 
these were near enough their uncle Abraham's age 
to be his companions. Under the rule above mentioned 
Sarah, if the daughter of Haran, would be 
counted the daughter of Terah, not by his wife, but 
by Haran's wife. We would not insist that this 
view of the matter is beyond question, however, and 
those who think differently have full right to do so. 

PALESTINE AS A REFUGE. 



Question.— What are the facts respecting Palestine 
at the present time? Is it being rapidly settled 
by the Jews in colonies or otherwise? Would it be a 
good place for those who have a knowledge of present 



truth to emigrate to? Would it be a good place 
for serving the truth, or would it be a favorable place 
as respects escaping the coming time of financial and 
social trouble? 

Answer.— We could not recommend friends of 
the truth to emigrate to Palestine. They would find 
almost no opportunity for serving the truth, and, as 
respects the time of trouble, we might say that the 
poor of that land are continually in trouble enough, 
and that even in the future the Scriptures assure us 
that the time of trouble will reach Palestine. Furthermore, 
not only would it be impossible to circumvent 
the Lord and thus escape the coming trouble, 
but additionally the Lord encourages his faithful 
people to believe that he will deliver them from the 
trouble wherever they may be. As respects the resettlement 

R2934 : page 1 1 

of the land; it progresses very slowly; 

first, because few of the Jews are interested deeply 

enough to live in such a country under present conditions. 

Second, because Jews have not been permitted 

to settle there since the Sultan's ukase prohibiting 

their settlement in 1892. Jews going 

thither are only permitted to land if provided with 

permits, which allow them to remain about 30 days. 

The Zionists are hoping to report some new and 

more favorable arrangement at their next Congress. 

CONVENTIONS ARE "HOLY CONVOCATIONS." 



Question.— Are the conventions, such as the one 
recently held in Cleveland, and the One-Day Conventions 
mentioned from time to time in the Watch 
Tower, of real benefit? Do they not reach merely 
the rich, who can afford to make the journey, etc.? 
Are they in harmony with Scriptural precedents? 

Answer.— Yes, we have every reason to believe 
that the Lord's blessing is with this department of 
the work, as well as with the other departments. 
Of course all of the friends are not able to attend the 
conventions, but this is not, we think, an argument 
against them. All are not able to attend the regular 
gatherings of the Church every time, sometimes because 
of sickness, and sometimes for other reasons. 
If both husband and wife cannot attend a meeting 
it should be to the advantage of the absent one that 
the other does attend, because of the rehearsal of 
truth upon his return. Similarly with the Conventions. 
Our experience is that those who attend the 
Conventions and return home are greatly blessed 
themselves, as they endeavor to repeat to the 
brethren some of the precious thoughts they have 



gleaned, and to inspire their hearts with the letter 
and sentiment and spirit of the truth. 

Furthermore, it would be quite a mistake to suppose 
that those who gather at these Conventions 
are wealthy; very few of the Lord's people are rich 
in this world's goods. We never advise anyone 
to spend for travel money that is needed for bread 
or clothing; but as a rule those who are in attendance 
find themselves abundantly rewarded for the 
time and money expended. In our judgment the 
Conventions are indeed a great blessing, and it is 
for this reason that we are extending the One-Day 
Conventions in various directions. The Pilgrim 
visits are somewhat similar; they cannot visit every 
town, but friends from nearby places, seeing mention 
of their coming to the vicinity, can attend at 
small expense, upon writing us for any particulars 
necessary. 

As to Scriptural precedent: We remind you that 
the Jews had numerous Holy Convocations; and that 
our Lord and his disciples frequently attended these, 
especially the Feast of the Passover. The Apostle 
Paul also hasted in his journey that he might be present 
at the Passover, and en route we remember that he 
sent on for the elders of the Church at Ephesus to 
meet him, and hold a little by-convention. However, 
in matters of this kind, where the spirit of the truth is 
being carried out, it would not matter if we had not 
an exact correspondence in deed in the early Church. 
For instance, they had neither books nor tracts nor 
journals, nor Bibles with marginal references, or 
otherwise. Some of these things are blessings which 
accrue to us because we are living in the most favored 
day which the world has ever seen. As our day brings 
many additional trials, besetments, enticements and 
cares, to "choke the Word," so, by God's grace, it 
brings also many opportunities for assembling ourselves 
in little and in larger groups. For all of these 
we give thanks, and all of them we endeavor to use 
to the Master's praise and to the comfort and upbuilding 
of one another. 

THE FATHER DRAWS NOW, THE SON THEN. 



Question.— In the Watch Tower you have pointed 
out that in the present time only a limited number are 
drawn, and they by the Father, to the intent that, following 
on, they may become members of the Church, 
which is the Bride of Christ; you have also pointed 
out as Scriptural that during the Millennial age the 
drawing will be general— "all men"— and that it will 
be done, not by the Father, but by the Christ. I recognize 
that these statements are in full accord with 
the presentations of Scripture, but am at a loss to 



know in what manner the drawing of the future will 
differ from the drawing of the present time, and this 
is my question. 

Answer.— The drawing or influencing of all men, 
by and by, will be through the truth; and the same is 
the drawing power now. Few are drawn now, because 
darkness, ignorance, prejudice and superstition 
prevail, the god of this world blinding the masses 
and keeping them deaf to the voice of righteousness 
and truth, so that only they can now hear and appreciate 
the truth who have "an ear to hear." The majority 
of the race are fallen, and their appreciation 
of the principles of righteousness is too warped and 
twisted to permit the truth to have its proper weight 
and influence upon their hearts in drawing them to 
Lord. Yet this is the only class that God wishes 
specially to draw now, and even of those who are 
thus amenable to the influences of righteousness now, 
and somewhat drawn by it, comparatively few are so 
in love with truth and righteousness that they are 
willing to sacrifice every other interest as respects the 
present life, on its behalf. Yet only such are now 
sought by the Heavenly Father to be joint-heirs with 
his son. 

R2935 : page 1 1 

But by and by, when under the Father's arrangement 
the Son shall begin his reign as King of the 
earth, he will exercise a drawing influence upon all, 
by restraining Satan from deceiving, and by opening 
the eyes and ears of understanding, and by causing 
the knowledge of the truth to fill the whole earth as 
the waters cover the great deep. Thus, although the 
drawing of that Millennial age will be very similar 
to the drawing of this present time, as to kind, it will 
be much more general, reaching every class and every 
condition, and helping each and all, who will respond, 
out of degradation and ignorance and sin and death, 
back to full harmony with the principles of righteousness. 
The special drawing which the Father accomplishes 
is in connection with what is called "the 
election according to favor," while the drawing which 
Christ will accomplish in the next age will be the 
operation of free grace, upon all and for the benefit of 
all. 



R2935 : page 12 

DRINKING AT THE BROOK 

"He shall drink of the brook in the way: 
therefore shall he lift up the head."— Psalm 1 10:7. 



OUR TEXT refers directly to our Lord Jesus, 
and secondly to all the members of the church, 
his body, each one of whom must share his 
experiences— walking in his steps and drinking of 
the same "brook," if they would in due time share 
with their Lord in his exaltation, to glory, 
honor, and immortality; this exaltation being 
represented in our text by the expression, 
"lift up the head." In ancient times as at 
present, human language was full of figures and 
symbols, water representing truth, and drinking of 
water representing appropriation of the truth, 
namely, wisdom (See Prov. 18:4); and lifting up the 
head, exaltation.— See Gen. 40:13. 

Our text is given as the reason for the glorious 
blessings and honors predicted of the Christ and described 
in the preceding verses of the same psalm. 
Let us notice these. The first verse is directly applied 
to our Lord by the Apostles (Acts 2:34; Heb. 1:13; 
I Pet. 3:22), and our Lord applied the same to 
himself. (Matt. 22:44.) A figure of speech is again 
employed, descriptive of our Lord's relationship to 
the Father in Glory; he is not literally seated beside 
him at his right hand, but he has been honored 
with a superior station, a position above all others- 
he specially is at the right hand of divine power. 
Nor does his second coming hinder or change this 
relationship; at his second coming he will still be 
at his Father's right hand as he himself, declared 
(Matt. 26:64.) At the Father's right hand during 
the Millennial Age, the Father, through him, shall 
subdue all things to himself— put down all opposing 
authority and insubordination; blessing those who 
come into heart-harmony with his kingdom of righteousness, 
and destroying from the earth all who after 
fair knowledge of good as well as evil, choose the 
evil. These will be considered as followers of Satan 
instead of followers of God, and the second death, we 
are specifically told, is for the Devil and his messengers, 
servants. -Matt. 25:41. 

The description of the Millennial Kingdom is continued 
by the Prophet, who declares, "Jehovah 
shall send the rod of thy strength out of (or 
through) Zion"— primarily the Church, the 
"Bride," the "body" of Christ; the rod or 
sceptre or authority shall be exercised through 
the Church, by the Lord Jesus the Head of 
the Church, under the divine commission,— "Rule 
thou in the midst of thine enemies." This is not 
in any measure fulfilled yet. Jesus when in the flesh 
did not rule in the midst of his enemies, and the 
Church has not thus ruled; on the contrary, both he 
and his followers have been subject to the powers 
that be, and the violent have taken the kingdom by 



force and have despitefully used the Head and the 
body members. (Matt. 11:12.) The enemies are 
not yet made the footstool of the Lord, Zion has not 
yet been glorified, and Messiah's sceptre or authority 
has not yet gone forth therefrom. On the contrary 
we are still in "this present evil world," we still wait 
for the completion of the elect Church that together 
she may be glorified with her Lord— enter into His 
glory— when he, the due time having come, "shall 
take unto himself his great power and reign;"— then 
the nations will be angry, etc., (Rev. 11:18) and divine 
wrath will come upon them; and following that "day 
of wrath" shall come the promised blessing, upon all 
who shall demonstrate under the good opportunities 
of that Millennial Kingdom, that they love righteousness 
and hate iniquity. 

This latter class— those who during the Millennial 
age, during that day of his presence, shall become 
the Lord's people (I Cor. 15:23)— are referred to by 
the Prophet when he says,— "Thy people shall be 
willing in the day of thy power." The day of his 
power is not yet here, as the poet declares: 
"Wrong and evil triumph now." The "Prince 
of this world" still rules and is "god of this 
world" as the Apostle asserts; because our Lord 
has not yet taken to himself his great power nor 
begun his reign. The people who shall be willing in 
the day of his power are not, therefore, the saints of 
this Gospel age: these latter are only the "first fruits 
unto God of his creatures" and are willing before the 
day of his power— willing to hear the Shepherd's 
voice and to follow him; willing to sacrifice all and 
to lay down their lives in his service, for the brethren. 

Evidently, therefore, those referred to as "Thy 
people" who shall be willing in the day of Christ's 
power, the Millennial Age, are those whom our Lord 
represents as his "sheep," in the parable of the sheep 
and the goats. They are those who after the Son of 
Man shall be seated on the throne of his glory, and 
after his Church is seated with him in his throne, 
and after the judgment or trial day for the nations, 
the world, is ended,— after the knowledge of the Lord 
has filled the earth, after it has gradually proved the 
savor of life unto life, or death unto death to the 
world, shall be found truly "his people,"— willing, 
nay, glad to serve him when they know him and 
understand his will. As his sheep they will desire 
to follow in the way of righteousness, truth and holiness; 
as his people they will not need to be coerced 
further, but learning the truth in the day of his 
power, when the adversary is bound and when the 
eyes of their understandings are opened, they will be 
willingly his people. And all who shall not then become 
willingly his people will be esteemed his enemies, 
"goats," angels or messengers or servants of 
the adversary, and be destroyed with him in the Second 



Death. 

"In the beauties of holiness, from the womb of 
the morning thou hast the dew of thy youth." That 
is to say, as morning after morning comes forth fresh 
and vigorous as its predecessor, as the sun grows not 
old and feeble, so with Messiah, and so also with those 
accepted as the members of his body, they will have 
perpetually the freshness and vigor of youth,— glory, 
honor, immortality, the divine nature— this is part of 
the blessing that is promised, and which will result, 
our text tells us, from drinking of the brook in the 
way. 

Having told us of the kingly power and authority 
of Messiah, it is appropriate that the Lord through 
the prophet explains to us that Messiah's priestly 
office is to be also of a higher type than the earthly, 
—that his priest and kingly offices are to be blended 
and united as was typified in Melchisedec, who was 

R2935 : page 13 

both king and priest. Our Lord when on earth was 

not of the Aaronic priesthood, nevertheless, Aaron 

was his type, and the sacrifices which Aaron performed 

were typical of the "better sacrifices" performed 

by the antitypical priest, in the laying down 

of his own life and in the consecration and sacrifice also 

of all those who are his during this Gospel age, who 

thus "fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of 

Christ." By and by our High priest will have completed 

all that was illustrated in the Aaronic type, he 

will have finished the Day of Atonement sacrifices, 

and then the glory promised will follow,— instead of 

a suffering priesthood there will be "a royal priesthood" 

—a reigning priesthood.— I Pet. 2:9; 

Rev. 5:10. 

Then follow assurances that this glorious priest-king 
will prosper, that his reign of righteousness will 
be successful; the assurance being that God will be 
at his right hand supporting him and bringing matters 
to a successful issue,— smiting down kings and 
wounding the heads over many countries, and subduing 
all things mightily. The great day of trouble 
coming is very generally referred to as "the day of 
Jehovah,"* the day of His wrath, although it will be 
under the direct supervision of our Lord Jesus, for the 
purpose of introducing and establishing his Millennial 
dominion. 

These, foregoing, descriptions of the greatness of 
Messiah and his kingdom, lead up to our text; and 
it, as before suggested, is given as the reason why so 
great blessings, honors, and dignities and authority 
are conferred. "He shall drink of the brook in the 
way; therefore shall he lift up the head— [be 
exalted.l" 



LEARNING OBEDIENCE BY THE THINGS SUFFERED. 

As we look into the Word for testimony upon the 
subject, we find that our dear Master did indeed learn 
certain lessons of experience; as the apostle declares, 
he "learned obedience in the things which he suffered." 
Not that he had ever been disobedient to the Father's 
will, but that his testing at the time that he came 
into the world to do the Father's will was of a character 
and of an intensity such as never before had been 
brought to him nor any other creature. His obedience 
attested his love to the Father, attested his 
faith in the Father's love and justice; and in all these 
things he fully approved himself of the Father; 
he overcame every trial, he drank frequently 



♦Millennial Dawn, Vol. 1, Chap. 15. 

R2936 : page 13 

of the brook of wisdom, in connection 
with these lessons. Moreover, it was expedient 
that he, to be the great High Priest of 
mankind, should be touched with a feeling of their 
infirmities, and therefore that he should be tempted 
in all points like as his followers are tested— along 
the line of personality, of self will; along the line of 
worldly ambition; along the line of faith and trust; 
along all the lines of obedience to God's plan. He 
drank deeply of the cup, and rejoicingly said, "The 
cup which my Father hath poured for me, shall I not 
drink it? "-John 18:11. 

And now we come to a point of special interest 
in our text; for we perceive that if it was necessary 
for our glorious Lord from the heavenly courts to 
drink of the brook of experience, and gain wisdom 
by the things he suffered, endured, and thereby to 
demonstrate his confidence in God, it is equally necessary 
that all the members of his body should likewise 
drink of the brook in the way, if they would hope 
to share with the Lord in the Kingdom blessings- 
glory, honor and immortality, the divine nature. 

Our dear Master's time for drinking at the brook 
is past, yet the lessons and encouragements therefrom 
are still before us in the Scripture records. It is now 
our time to drink of the brook of experience,— to 
learn the lessons that are necessary to our preparation 
for the Kingdom. It is not enough that we have 
tasted of the brook of experience, that we have 
learned something of obedience, that we have endured 
some trials, that on some occasions we have 
learned obedience through the things we have suffered; 
we must continue drinking until we can gladly 
say— Father, thy will, not ours be done! If we 



drink not of the brook in the way we shall not share 
in the glory to follow. 

Some of the Lord's people not discerning the matter 
in its true light, are disposed to pray that they may 
be spared from trials and temptations; whereas they 
ought to understand that the trials and difficulties of 
the consecrated are witnesses of the spirit *that they 
are children of God, and are under his training and 
preparation for a glorious share in the Kingdom, to 
which he has called us. Because if we are not tried 
we cannot be "overcomers"; if we do not suffer with 
him, and learn to endure hardness as good soldiers, 
and to esteem our trials and difficulties from the right 
standpoint, and to count it all joy when they come to 
us, knowing their object and knowing the Lord's sustaining 
grace and strength, we will not be "fit for the 
Kingdom." 

Others interpret the trials of life as evidences of 
divine disfavor, and fail to realize that they are designed 
of the Lord to shape and polish our characters 
and thus to work out for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory. Because of their misunderstanding 
they are profited little by many of life's 
experiences through which they are called to pass— 
they feel the rod, but not discerning the loving purpose 
behind it, they fail to learn the lesson intended. 
Let us become more and more awake, more and more 
alive to the things of God,— to the facts of the case as 
he presents them to us in his Word— to our call to 
joint-heirship to the Kingdom, and incidentally to 
the drinking of the brook of experience and wisdom in 
the way that will fit and prepare us for the glories 
to follow. 

Drinking of the brook does not, however, imply 
that we sorrow and are disconsolate above others; on 
the contrary, those who drink of the brook properly 
are full of joy. As the apostle declares, they are enabled 
in everything to give thanks unto God,— in life's 
difficulties, as well as in its pleasures— even as he 
again says, Count it all joy when ye fall into divers 
difficulties, knowing that under divine providence they 
will work out for you a greater blessing. (James 1:2.) 
It is the world, which must also share its part 
of life's difficulties, that sorrows as those who have 
no hope, or who have false hopes. The apostle points 
out side by side the world's condition and the 



*See Millennial Dawn, Vol. 5. 

R2936 : page 14 

Church's condition under the trials and difficulties 
of this present evil world, saying, "The whole creation 
groaneth and travaileth in pain until now, waiting for 



the manifestation of the sons of God." Then he explains 
the position of God's people, begotten of his 
spirit, who are walking in the Lord's footsteps, and 
drinking of the brook in the way, saying, "We ourselves 
also groan within ourselves waiting for the 
adoption, to wit, the deliverance of the body"— the 
body of Christ, the Church. This hope, which we 
have, gives a changed coloring and silver lining to 
every dark and troubled subject which comes to us in 
common with mankind; so that inspired by draughts 
from the brook we can sing in the house of our pilgrimage, 
even though as yet we must also groan, because 
we are in this imperfect tabernacle, this unsatisfactory 
mortal body. 

We want to ask the Lord, our Master and Head, 
that he will bless us more and more, as with fresh 
zeal we shall endeavor faithfully and rejoicingly to 
drink of the brook of life's experiences, and gain 
wisdom therefrom that will fit and prepare us for his 
service by and by; and which will the better fit and 
prepare us for his service also in the present time, and 
enable us by his grace to show forth his praises in 
all the trying circumstances and vicissitudes of life so 
as to glorify him in our bodies and spirits which are 
his. Let us, as we drink of the brook, take a lesson 
from the little birds, which when drinking repeatedly 
lift the head as though giving thanks to God. Let us 
continually give thanks to our Lord for every taste 
of life's experience, for every lesson, for every trial- 
appropriating them all to our spiritual development. 
The time for lifting up our heads in glory is nearing, 
too, and already the Master directs that seeing (with 
the eye of faith) the evidences of their approach, we 
may lift up our heads and rejoice, knowing that our 
redemption draweth nigh.— Luke 21:28. 



R2936 : page 14 

INTERESTING LETTERS FROM FRIENDS. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

Pray do not think that I write in a captious spirit, 
but the extracts from "The Jew," are statements so grossly 
overdrawn, if not absolutely and entirely untrue, that 
if you were to cause such accusations to be verified here 
before inserting them in the Tower, where absolute truth 
alone should appear, they certainly would not appear 
therein, except so far as true. 

There is, and has been of late, a great influx of Jews 
("Infidels, Turks, and offscouring of Europe") into England, 
London particularly, and it is not surprising that 
their ignorance of the language and generally, their clannish 



herding together, their filthiness and their habits 

and manners, as well as their injury to the employment 

of others, should be resented almost exclusively by a 

poor and uneducated people whom they displace or come 

into unpleasant contact with (and particularly at this 

time). 

Precisely the same feeling is manifested toward Chinamen 
in San Francisco, and on the Pacific coast, etc., the 
difference being that in the United States there is legislation 
against them,— but here Jews and any nationality 
have absolute freedom and assured and certain protection 
and even-handed justice. 

Such articles as that from "The Jew" are calculated to 
produce hatred, because they manifest a spirit of gross ingratitude, 
and wilful lying (there is no other word for 
it), when the Jew question is considered broadly and not 
from perhaps some isolated case. As to the political parties 
being pledged to anti-Semitism, or any other charges 
against them as a people, or even against their capitalists 
(except it may be one or two German Jew South African 
firms), these are on a par with the rest of it and not 
worthy of notice. The fact is that newly found freedom, 
with some, cause them, from ignorance, to be aggressively 
and offensively assertive, and presume upon the liberty of 
action and speech, etc., accorded them— and so they assist 
largely in bringing about that of which they 
complain. 

I write out of warmest personal regard, and respect 
and sincere Christian love. 

I am, dear Brother, Yours truly in Christ, 
B. C. HUGHES-England. 



[Nothing was farther from our intention than to intimate 
that the masses of the British are Jew-baiters: nor 
that those who do the baiting are without provocation. 
We merely mentioned it as "news;" and as evidence that 
the Jew will yet, as the Bible declares, be persecuted in 
every nation and thus be driven back to Palestine when 
Zionism shall succeed in opening that door.— Editor.] 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

Greetings from the Church of Los Angeles! 

According to 1 Cor. 16:2, we have endeavored to follow 
Paul's advice, and have provided a treasury, from 
which is drawn, the expenses of the church, the expenses 
for volunteer service, also the expenses of any in need; 
and from this treasury we now send the Tract Society a 
little thank-offering. We, as a body, unite in the desire, 
to express our appreciation of the privilege of obtaining 
this literature for "Volunteer" work, and of the opportunity 
to serve it, while it is yet called day. Our earnest 
desire is to help the Bride to make herself ready; our earnest 



prayer is for the establishment of the kingdom. 
We desire to thank you and the "Tower" office assistants, 

R2937 : page 14 

for your labor of love to the Church, especially for 
all efforts expended in our behalf. Above all we thank 
our Heavenly Father, who is the giver of every good and 
perfect gift, and we know of no better way to express our 
gratitude than to send to the fund the enclosed $50.00, 
which has been raised for this purpose together with the 
surplus in our treasury. 

We cannot hope to pay for the thousands of pages we 
have distributed; but we trust you will accept this as an 
expression of our gratitude. 

We ask your prayers, that each of our number may 
be more zealous, more faithful, more fervent in spirit to 
serve our God and lay down our lives for the brethren, 
loving His approval above all else. 

With Christian love and prayers for your steadfastness, 
we remain, your fellow-servants, in Christ, 
Church of Los Angeles. 



My dearly beloved Bro. Russell:— 

My poor heart overflows with gratitude to our dear 
Lord, for the beneficial and sweet moments we have so 
richly enjoyed with you during this, the first Christian convention 
that I have ever seen in the city of Richmond. 
Dear brother, rest assured that your labor is not in vain 
here; for the 12th and 13th of October, 1901, will long be 
a pleasure to think of. The feast of good things continued 
with some of us the next day, while God's dear children 
before leaving the city have been telling of the joy 
and benefits received. No jars, no objections, no schism 
or worldly contention; but praise and thanks to God from 
every quarter,— that we attended the convention and all 
received such a blessing. 

Truly our prayers for this season of refreshing were 
answered. We thought that we loved you, very dearly before, 
and esteemed you very highly for your works' sake; 
but these sessions with you have kindled our love so 
much, that we almost feel impatient for the beginning of 
eternity when in God's kingdom we part no more. O 

R2937 : page 15 

brother, the Lord knows that I feel these sentiments, and 
I believe that the other dear ones also do. This season 
with you has built us up in the most holy faith, and we 
pray that it may long, yea, very long last us. The dear 
brethren leaving for their homes were saying, "How clear 
this point was made; and how rich was that thought; 
and how long I have wanted to see dear brother Russell, 
the channel through which our God has sent us the blessed 



truth, and my longings have been realized." 

We do hope, that it may meet with your approval to 
still further encourage us by reporting our convention in 
the next "Tower." With this hope, I give as nearly as I 
could count them, the number present, i.e., believers. I 
made the count one hundred and twenty-eight, possibly a 
few over or under. Fourteen symbolized their consecration 
by water baptism. Five states and District of Columbia 
were represented. Pray for us here, dear brother, 
that we may continue faithful, and let our light shine, 
through love and humility as well as otherwise. May our 
Father's richest blessings be with you to the end. 
Your brother in the love and service of our dear Lord, 
M. L. STAPLES,-Virginia. 

[This report is late;— crowded out of our previous issues. ED.] 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

How I long to see you. I have had a big fight and 
gained a glorious victory. I send you my article prepared 
for the Conference. I had a hard time to get a hearing, 
as my name was called before I reached the seat of Conference. 
Had I been there then I could have had the 
floor; but after that it was difficult. After pressing the 
matter they allowed me five minutes to speak and I read 
rapidly until I reached the sentence, "Thy Kingdom come," 
two thirds through, and there the Bishop called me to 
order. He said I had used up six minutes and I asked for 
an extension of time but could not get it. (They had 
enough.) So I asked our own City Editor if he would like 
to publish it and he consented. 

There was a great surprise I assure you, at Syracuse 
Conference, when I withdrew from it and gave my reasons 
even partially. I commenced giving out tracts— 
until all were gone. When I gave one I said, "Read that 
carefully, when you are all alone." I have a good many 
old friends in the Conference and Church (Nominal), but 
thanks be to God, I am the Lord's free man. 

Some have asked me what church I am going to unite 
with, and my answer is the "Church of the first born, 
whose names are written in heaven." 

Yours in love, B. F. WEATHERWAX,-New York. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

I wrote you a short time since for some samples of 
your publications to which you kindly replied, by forwarding 
me several copies of the "Watch Tower" and some 
tracts, all of which I have carefully read. I am more 
than ever convinced of the correctness of your views of 
Scriptural truth. I try to make the Word of God the 
Counsellor and Guide of my life, and I rejoice in every 
development of light and truth. 



Have you a Church organization? if so, what is it 
called, and what is the form of your church government? 

What is required of persons desiring to unite with 
the Church? Have you a regular ministry? and how are 
they appointed and employed? An answer to the foregoing 
questions, and all information you may be able to 
furnish will be much appreciated. 

That you may not be in ignorance as to whom you 
address, I will say, that I am a minister in the Congregational 
Church, and if you desire can give you satisfactory 
references. 

Since writing you, Vol. I., "The Plan of the Ages," 
has been recovered, and though much mutilated, is still 
readable. I herewith enclose you 25c in stamps for which 
please send me Vol. II., "The Time is at Hand." The 
other volumes, I will order later on, or after carefully reading 
this. 

There is great unrest and dissatisfaction among professing 
Christians, and it seems to me they desire, as they 
truly need, instruction concerning the truth as it is in 
Jesus. How shall this be furnished? It may be you have 
tracts for free distribution; if so, and you feel like entrusting 
me with a small supply, I will endeavor to place 
them where they will do the most good. 

Pardon my long letter, and if you find time, amidst 
your arduous labors, I would be glad to receive a reply. 
Yours in Christ, 

L. F. WAY,-Texas. 

[We sent the Brother a copy of "Zion's Watch Tower" 
containing an article on "Which is the True Church?" 
with our answer and hope to hear from him further, and 
still more enthusiastically after he has read more.— 
Editor.! 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

The brethren have done excellently in distributing the 
tracts sent us. 

They had an amusing, though joyful experience in 
distributing at the last meeting of the "Christian" Church 
Convention. They began distributing to the few stragglers 
that came out before the close of the meeting. Among 
these was a minister who upbraided them and told them 
that he should warn the people against them. This he 
did, announcing from the pulpit that there was literature 
being distributed at the door that should not be read and 
everyone should refuse to accept it. The result was that 
the people crowded around the brethren with outstretched 
hands eager to get them. The clerical gentleman probably 
never served God better in his life than he did when 
he forbade the people reading the tracts. Everyone was 
surely read in search of forbidden fruit. 

We have already had an illustration of the truth of 
your prediction in the last Tower. Last Sunday a local 



preacher in talking of the people who had "jumped the 
track" after defining Christian Science and the Dowieites 
said,— "There is another class of people, who claim to 
hear the call 'come out of her,' who separate themselves 
and put a weird interpretation to the Scriptures. What 
are these? "Religious anarchists! nothing more, nothing 
less." 

Surely this is an indication of what we may expect in 
the near future. May the dear Lord strengthen us that 
we may be prepared to stand fast in the faith when that 
evil day shall come. 

Yours in the blessed hope, 

(Mrs.) J. M. WHITE.-Iowa. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

I know that you will be gratified to learn that the 
Cleveland Convention has proven an increasing blessing 
to me, the Lord using it and its influence, among other 
things, to increase my hungering and thirsting for righteousness, 
i.e., the walking more zealously in the footsteps 
of the dear Master, using every occasion, and as far 
as possible, making occasion, to do his commandment- 
love the dear brethren as he loved us. Then, too, what 
grand opportunity we occasionally have to bear testimony 
to the world of our faith in the kingdom, and how it will 
make all things right. Our little band of faithful ones 
here is growing in zeal and knowledge, and the spirit 
of the Master. 

I want you to rest assured, dear brother, of my increasing 
love for you, and appreciation of your work in 
the Lord. As Paul was to Timothy, so, in a great measure 
at least, have you been to me, a father in Christ; and 
in the Lord's own good time and way, I hope to testify 
more fully to you my appreciation of all you have done 
and are doing. It comforts me to tell you that in every 
prayer— secret— I bear you to the throne of favor, realizing 
that as the Lord has appointed you to be so prominent 
a teacher, you receive a correspondingly severer 
trial, or testing. Thank God, we know His grace is sufficient 
for all your needs, and that having begun He can 
finish His good work in you. May your faith fail not. 

I did not intend so long a letter, realizing how fully 
your time is occupied. Remember me in love to the 
household with you. 

In the bonds of Christian fellowship, 
W. E. PAGE.-Wisconsin. 


