From Our Readers
DRUG ADDICTION
I want to thank you for publishing the timely warning in the article “The New Drug Addicts.” All readers need to understand the danger of prescription drugs. Especially the pointed article on the much abused drug Valium was needed. Communication with the doctor is so vital. People should know the drug, the risks and the side reactions.
S. C., Ohio
Congratulations on your timely article “The Drug Addicts​—Anybody You Know?” I was a drug addict. My drug of choice​—Valium. I was treated in the hospital for drug addiction. Now my life without chemicals is beautiful. I only wish I could alert other women to the dangers of this terrible addiction. Keep up your good work. The public needs to be informed of the dangers of overcoping.
J. K., New York
Due to the rampant use of drugs in elementary schools, our teacher had us look for publications mentioning the problem. My parents helped me to look in issues of “Awake!” Other girls brought many clippings on crime news. However, the teacher expressed appreciation for the “Awake!” articles. She said: “I have never found literature that dealt so thoroughly with the problem.”
A 10-Year-Old Reader, Italy
JEWISH HERITAGE
I just finished reading the article “Something Was Missing from My Jewish Heritage.” It’s so good to know that there is another person just like myself. Why, it’s almost as if I were reading about my own personal experiences! Please continue including personal experiences such as these. They are truly encouraging and faith strengthening.
S. G., New York
CONDUCT OF YOUTHS
I just had to thank you for the recent articles on youths. Our teenage son was described perfectly in the article “What Makes Them Act That Way?”, under the subheading “Diet​—How Important?” Also, the article “What Can Parents Do to Help?” was like a prescription from a doctor, and it worked! Both my husband and I applied the things outlined in these articles. One was the removing of white sugar from our diet, and it made all the difference in the world in our teenager’s personality. His moodiness has improved and so has his disposition. Also, we have been able to cope with his feelings better. Needless to say, the atmosphere in our home has improved greatly.
F. C., California
I am writing to express my appreciation for the love you have shown for us teenagers. When I read articles such as “Children​—Does It Matter How You Act?” I feel very happy inside. Seeing the problems of peer pressure and our sexual desires discussed openly and frankly is a great help to me. I am 17. The articles in recent issues of “Awake!” have been a great encouragement to do what is right.
L. W., Wisconsin
I want to express my appreciation for the articles that are helping us to live with and understand one another better. I am referring particularly to an article for parents entitled “You Are Your Children’s Greatest Gift.” Just the title alone made me realize how very important I am to my two little girls. Thank you.
P. B., Florida

