God Did It First
HUMANS ARE COPYCATS
THEY GIVE NO CREDIT TO GOD FOR HIS INVENTIONS, BUT THEY TAKE OUT PATENTS FOR THEIRS
THERMOMETERS
Man has made very sensitive thermometers and other heat gauges, but they are crude compared to the built-in abilities certain snakes have exercised for thousands of years. A rattlesnake, for example, can detect a heat change of one-thousandth of one degree Celsius. A boa constrictor responds to a heat change in 35 milliseconds, whereas a sensitive man-made instrument takes a minute to make the same measurement. Such snakes use this heat-sensing ability to search out and capture warm-bodied prey in the dark. The heat sensors also indicate the direction of the heat source.
HYPOTHERMIA
Surgeons now lower body temperature and slow heartbeat and breathing for certain operations, but long before this, animal hibernators practiced hypothermia. The tiny thirteen-lined ground squirrel, for example, during summer activity has a heartbeat and breathing rate of a few hundred times a minute. During winter sleep, however, its heart slows to one or two beats a minute and it takes a slow breath every five minutes. Body temperature drops to within a few degrees of the winter cold outside. Yet through it all the blood circulates, pressure remains normal, oxygen is supplied, and muscle tone is maintained.
ELECTRICITY
Prompted by Luigi Galvani’s treatise on animal electricity, the Italian physicist-chemist Volta made the first artificial constant-current electric battery. Millenniums before, however, some 500 varieties of electric fish had batteries. The African catfish can produce 350 volts, the giant electric ray of the North Atlantic puts out 50-ampere pulses of 60 volts, and the South American electric eel’s shocks have been measured as high as 886 volts. The currents are produced by banks of electroplaques​—in effect, voltaic cells. Each electroplaque is an individual electrochemical cell producing only a small fraction of a volt. But when thousands and sometimes millions of them are connected variously in series and in parallel in God’s creations, a natural electric battery is the result.
CHEMICAL WARFARE
Nerve-gas shells have two canisters of relatively nontoxic chemicals, but when the shell is fired the chemicals mix and upon explosion the deadly nerve gas is released. Long before this, and strictly for defensive purposes, the bombardier beetle had used chemical repellants. Glands produce two different chemicals, stored in separate chambers closed off by muscular valves. When it is attacked, the valves open and the two chemicals flow into a third heavily walled chamber. There an enzyme causes an explosive reaction, with an audible pop, and a noxious mist shoots out of a turret that the beetle can aim in any direction. The bombardier beetle can fire repeatedly, dozens of times in minutes, and ants, spiders, praying mantises, birds or snakes retreat gasping.
COMPUTERS
Computers do fantastic things, but they do not compare with human brains. The human brain​—three pounds of mystery, 2 percent of the body weight, uses 20 percent of the blood and 25 percent of the oxygen supply. Estimates of the number of its neurons range from 10 billion to 100 billion, and from 100 trillion to 500 trillion neuronal connections (synapses). A hundred million bits of information pour in every second, and the brain scans itself every one tenth of a second, operating on 20 watts of power. It receives, processes and evaluates information, makes decisions, sets goals, initiates actions, creates music and art. Only in the human brain are there systems programmed for speech. And only in the human brain is there an innate need to believe and to worship a higher power.
As one scientist said: “Anyone who speaks of a computer as an ‘electronic brain’ has never seen a brain.” Little wonder that Dr. Richard Restak says that the human brain is “immeasurably more complicated than anything else in the known universe.” And anthropologist Henry Fairfield Osborn once declared: “To my mind, the human brain is the most marvelous and mysterious object in the whole universe.”
GOD’S FIRSTS ARE ENDLESS
Bats and dolphins use sonar; octopuses use jet propulsion; mosquitoes use hypodermic needles; wasps make paper; beavers build dams; ants make bridges; bees and termites use air conditioning; fish, worms and insects make cold light; birds weave, tie knots, construct incubators, do masonry, build apartment houses, desalinate seawater, have compasses and internal clocks, and navigate; beetles use aqualungs; spiders use diving bells, make doors, are balloonists; some fish and beetles have bifocals; snapping turtles and water scorpions use snorkels; animal eyes, like man’s solar cells, turn light into electricity; ants do gardening and tend livestock; a beetle prunes trees​—on and on could go the listing of creation’s mechanisms that human inventors copy. Men’s works are said to be due to their genius; God’s are dismissed as blind chance​—at least, by the evolutionist. Incredible!

