The Choice: No Future, Bright Future
BEFORE YOU CHOOSE, BE INFORMED!
THE TRUTH MANY WON’T FACE: HOPE IN GOD OR RELINQUISH HOPE
SCIENTISTS predict that the expanding universe will run out of energy, grow dark and end all life. Or that it will collapse in upon itself and end all life. Scientist Peacocke says: “Thus science fails to answer ‘the ultimate question of hope.”’ It “raises questions about the ultimate significance of human life in a universe that will eventually surely obliterate it.”
If we credit our presence here to evolution, eliminate God and the Bible and moral restraints, we also eliminate any purpose and meaning our lives might have had. We become brother to ants and elephants, worms and crabgrass, cockroaches and cats. Of what consequence are ants? Or crabgrass? Or men?
Evolutionists, having stripped us of meaning, feel the pressure to make us meaningful. Many conclude their books with flabby little speeches about the glory we share in being a rung in the evolutionary ladder that millions of years from now will plant our descendants on some superb pinnacle of grandeur.
Empty Philosophizings of Evolutionists
Professor Millikan emotes on the “tremendous emotional appeal” man can derive from participating in the evolutionary ascent to future heights. Geneticist Herman Muller quails before the biological armageddon mutations threaten us with, but still thinks they will evolve us to “undreamed-of heights.” The proof of the pudding is in the eating, but he isn’t about to take a bite by wanting mutations for himself. Dobzhansky says man’s strivings to evolve upward bestow hope and dignity and meaning on life, and concludes: “So, let me repeat, evolution bestows hope.”
Such empty talk comforts no one. Sullivan, in “Limitations of Science,” correctly says: “Our religious impulses cannot be satisfied with anything less than a belief that life has a transcendental significance.” (Pp. 149, 150) If our end is eternal oblivion, nothing really matters. And if that is also the ending for our grand, hypothetical offspring millions of years hence, their existence is pointless. By their empty philosophizings evolutionists grope to still the inherent need for God. They whittle new crutches to replace the religious ones they have cast aside. They refuse to face this truth: hope in God, or relinquish hope.
The Biblical Hope
In contrast, what is the hope from God? He made the earth to last forever, to be a paradise forever, to be inhabited by obedient human creatures forever. (Eccl. 1:4; Isa. 45:18) People do not make fine watches, beautiful buildings, exquisite gardens, simply to destroy them. Neither will Jehovah God’s purpose in creating the earth and all life upon it be defeated. “I have purposed,” he says, “and I will do it.”​—Isa. 46:11, “An American Translation.”
His concern for the earth is shown by his edict concerning men who are now polluting it, which is to “bring to ruin those ruining the earth.” (Rev. 11:18) God’s kingdom under Christ Jesus will bring about the conditions described at Revelation 21:3, 4: “Look! The tent of God is with mankind, and he will reside with them . . . And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”
The evolutionary “hope” is hopeless. It is eternal oblivion. The Biblical hope is for a bright future of everlasting life in a paradise earth. Each one makes his own choice. Before you make yours, be fully informed.

