The Fossil Record​—Their Best Proof
THEIR CLAIMS, THEIR FACTS
WHAT THE EVOLUTIONISTS THEMSELVES SAY ABOUT THE FOSSIL RECORD
THEIR STAR WITNESS
“Fossils constitute the best evidence of evolution.”​—Introduction to Protozoology, page 36, by Reginald Manwell.
“By the aid of fossils paleontologists can now give us an excellent picture of the life of past ages.”​—A Guide to Earth History, page 48, by Richard Carrington.
“The truth of evolution was proved conclusively by paleontology.”​—Genetics, Paleontology, and Evolution, page 87, by D. D. Davies (book edited by Jepson, Mayr and Simpson).
THEIR STAR WITNESS SAYS
On origin of life
“Geology tells us nothing of the origin of life.”​—Plant Life Through the Ages, by A. C. Seward.
On microscopic life
“We still know little of protozoan evolution.”​—Introduction to Protozoology, page 42, Manwell.
On plant life
“The theoretically primitive type eludes our grasp; our faith postulates its existence but the type fails to materialize.”​—Plant Life Through the Ages, Seward.
On insects
“There are no fossils known that show what the primitive ancestral insects looked like.”​—Life Nature Library, The Insects, page 14.
On fishes
“The first fish evolved. . . . To our knowledge, no ‘link’ connected this new beast to any previous form of life. The fish just appeared, with that structure which divides all animals into higher and lower life: the backbone.”​—Marvels and Mysteries of Our Animal World, page 25, by Jean George (a Reader’s Digest book).
On fish becoming amphibians
“Only a few remains of this presumed transitional stage have been found.”​—Life Nature Library, The Fishes, page 64.
On amphibians becoming reptiles
“One of the frustrating features of the fossil record of vertebrate history is that it shows so little about the evolution of reptiles during their earliest days, when the shelled egg was developing.”​—Life Nature Library, The Reptiles, page 37.
On reptiles becoming mammals
“Fossils, unfortunately, reveal very little about the creatures which we consider the first true mammals.”​—Life Nature Library, The Mammals, page 37.
“There is no missing link [that connects] mammals and reptiles.”​—Life Nature Library, The Reptiles, page 41.
On reptiles becoming birds
“There is no fossil evidence of the stages through which the remarkable change from reptile to bird was achieved.”​—Biology and Comparative Physiology, W. E. Swinton, Vol. 1, p. 1.
On Apes
“For the whole Tertiary period, which involves something like 60 to 80 million years we have to read the history of primate evolution from a few handfuls of broken bones and teeth.”​—June 1956, Scientific American, page 98, by Eiseley.
“Unfortunately, the fossil record which would enable us to trace the emergence of the apes is still hopelessly incomplete.”​—Life Nature Library, The Primates, page 15.
From ape to man
“Unfortunately, the early stages of man’s evolutionary progress along his own individual line remain a total mystery.”​—Life Nature Library, The Primates, page 177.
“Even this relatively recent history is shot through with uncertainties; authorities are often at odds, both about fundamentals and about details.”​—Mankind Evolving, page 168, by Theodosius Dobzhansky.
OUR CONCLUSION:
We have followed a procedure Jesus once indicated: “Out of your own mouth I judge you.” (Luke 19:22) Evolutionists say that fossils give the best evidence of evolution, provide an excellent picture of it, prove it conclusively. Then they say:
‘No fossils on how life began, none on how microscopic life began, none on how plant life began, none on how insects began, none on how fishes began, none on how amphibians began, none on how reptiles began, none on how mammals began, none on how birds began, none on how apes began, and none on how man began.’
Their “best evidence” is no evidence. Their “excellent picture” is a total blank. Their ‘conclusive proof’ proves nothing. How do they escape this unsatisfactory testimony by their star witness? The following article reveals their revised tactics.

