VOL. XV. MARCH 1, 1894. NO. 5. 

THE ANNUAL MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



THIS year, Thursday, April 19th, after six 
o'clock P.M., will mark the anniversary 
of our Lord's "Last Supper," which he gave 
as the memorial of his death on our behalf, 
saying, "This do in remembrance of me."— 
Luke 22:19. 

In previous issues of this magazine, we have 
given the evidence that the Last Supper was 
given us to take the place of the Jewish Paschal 
Supper, and to be celebrated at the corresponding 
time, yearly. As the Paschal lamb typified 
Christ, the Lamb of God, so its death was 
typical of his death, and therefore his death 
was upon the same day. We have shown, also, 
that the Jewish method of reckoning time, as 
beginning the day at six P.M., was so arranged 
that our Lord could institute the Last Supper 
upon the same night in which he was betrayed 
(1 Cor. 1 1:23)— the same day in which he died. 

As a Jew, under the Law Covenant, not yet 
supplanted by the New Covenant, it was the 
duty of our Lord to eat first of the typical 
lamb; and it was after that supper that he took 
bread and wine, as the symbols of his own flesh 
and blood, and instituted the Memorial Feast 
which we and all of his people since delight 



to celebrate. 

Taking the place of the typical lamb, our 
Lord could be crucified only upon the fourteenth 
day of the month Nisan; and the commemoration 
of his death, and the passing over 

thereby effected, taking the place of the commemoration 
of the Passover lamb and that 

typical passing over, it follows that the commemoration 
of the antitype should be an annual 
observance, as was the commemoration 
of the type. 

This we have seen was the custom of the 
early Church, which adopted for centuries the 
Jewish method of reckoning which we follow; 
viz., the evening, following the thirteenth of 
Nisan, which was the beginning of the fourteenth. 
This method of reckoning was afterward 
changed by the Church of Rome, although 
the thought and custom of a yearly commemoration 
of our Lord's death is still observed 
on "Good Friday" by the Church of Rome, 
the Greek Church, the Syrian Church and the 
English Church. 

Protestant Churches got the Romish doctrine 
of the Mass confounded with the Lord's 
Supper, whereas they have no correspondence 
(See Mass in M. DAWN, VOL. III. Pp.98- 101); 
and as a result they adopted various times and 
seasons, morning, noon and night, and monthly, 
bi-monthly and quarterly, seeing no reason 
for any particular date, and supposing that the 
Apostle's words, "as oft as ye do it," etc., 
Give full license to celebrate it at any time. 
On the contrary, we understand the Apostle 
to mean, Every time (yearly) that ye do this. 

Some dear Christian people have even fallen 
into the error of commemorating this feast 
every first day of the week; because they have 
not noticed what the supper means in connection 
with the type which it displaces; and because 
they erroneously think that they find a 
precedent for their course in the expression of 

R1625 : page 68 

the New Testament, "On the first day of the 
week, when the disciples were come together 
to break bread." This does indeed show that 
breaking of bread every first day was the custom 
of the early disciples; but it does not 
prove that the Memorial Supper is meant. 
Indeed, the fruit of the vine was as important 
as the bread in the memorial; but it is never 
mentioned in connection with these weekly 
meetings for breaking of bread and for prayers. 
These, on the contrary, celebrated, not our 



Lord's death, but his resurrection. They were 
remembrancers, not of the Last Supper, but 
of the "breaking of bread" on the day of our 
Lord's resurrection, when their eyes were 
opened and they knew him, and he vanished 
out of their sight. 

Had the Memorial Supper been meant, it 
surely would have been so stated. Like ourselves, 
the early disciples ate or brake bread 
every day: but they did not come together to 
do it except on the first day of the week, which 
celebrated our Lord's resurrection and not his 
death. 

A little investigation will convince any one 
that these weekly gatherings were customary 

R1626:page68 

with all Jews, who, however, met on the last 

or seventh day and on festivals, instead of on 

the first day of the week for their "social" 

meals. On this point let us quote from McClintock 

and Strong's Religious Cyclopedia, 

Vol. 8, page 68, merely enough to corroborate 

our statement above, as follows:— 

"In consequence of the vigorous laws about 
the observance of the Sabbath, it was enacted 
that no Israelite is to walk on the Sabbath beyond 
a certain distance, called a "Sabbath-day's 
journey," nor carry anything from one 
house to another. The Sadducees, or priestly 
party, who celebrated their meals on the Sabbath 
in different places, could go from one 
to another, and carry to and fro anything they 
liked, because they regarded these meals as 
constituting part of their priestly and sacrificial 
service, which set aside the sanctity of the 
Sabbath. But the Pharisees, who made their 
Sabbatic repast resemble THE PRIESTLY SOCIAL 
MEALS, had to encounter difficulties arising 
from the vigorous Sabbatic laws." 

THE CELEBRATION. 



Simplicity should combine with reverence 
in all of our worship; and our Lord's example 
in respect to this memorial speaks of solemnity 
combined with simplicity and reverence. 

On Thursday evening after six o'clock, April 
1 9th, therefore, let as many as love the Redeemer 
and have pledged themselves to be his 
followers in faith and practice, celebrate his 
death— "for our sins; and not for ours only, 
but also for the sins of the whole world." 



Meet with all of like precious faith convenient 
to you, who would like to meet and celebrate 
this, the greatest event of history. It is to be 
a gathering of professedly consecrated believers 
in the Redeemer; but if others come in making 
such profession reject them not: remember 
that Judas met with the Lord and the other 
eleven. Remember, too, that the greatest among 
you is servant of all, who washes the feet; i.e., 
Performs even the humblest service for the 
cleansing of God's people from the defilements 
of earth. 

The emblems used by our Lord were unleavened 
"bread" and "fruit of the vine." 
Unleavened cakes can generally be had of some 
Jewish neighbors for a few cents; if not, water 
crackers are practically the same thing. It is 
probable that our Lord used a "light" wine; 
but he has merely said, "fruit of the vine": 
hence we may with propriety use unfermented 
grape juice or raisin-juice— from raisins stewed 
in water. This is as truly fruit of the vine as 
intoxicating wine would be. And we believe 
that our Lord would approve it, seeing how 
many are now addicted to the abuse of liquor, 
and might be misled by even a taste of such 
wines as are generally obtainable. 

In our April 1st issue we will make a few remarks 
upon the meaning of these symbols. 

THE ALLEGHENY MEMORIAL SERVICE. 



The service here will be held, as usual, in 
Bible House chapel, No. 58 Arch St., at 7.30 
O'clock P.M. All who trust in our Lord Jesus' 
death as their ransom, and who are fully consecrated 
to him, will be made very welcome. 
But we extend no special invitation to visitors 

R1626:page69 

from a distance this year; nor are there any 
arrangements for other than our usual Sunday 
services, except as above mentioned. If there 
be any solitary ones in near-by towns, we shall 
be glad to have them attend with us; but 
where there are even two or three who can 
unite in this memorial, our suggestion is that 
they had best meet together at home. 

On previous occasions of conventions here, 
we have always been rather painfully aware of 
the fact that the various local gatherings of believers 
were interfered with and impaired by 
the absence of those who were most needed. 



This year we would like to see this matter quite 
reversed; and therefore advise that, wherever 
even two or three can meet together, they do 
so; and that even the solitary ones, if within 
reach of a larger and a smaller circle of believers, 
prefer to give their presence to the 
smaller rather than the larger gathering, and 
thus encourage and help those who need their 
presence most. Those who thus strive to do 
good to others will be the more blest themselves. 

We request that a Postal Card Report from 
each little group celebrating this Memorial be 
made out by the one who officiates on the occasion, 
and sent to the TOWER office the next 
day. 



R1626:page69 

THE UNJUST STEWARD. 

--LUKE 16:1-8.-- 



THIS parable furnishes a text for a discourse 
on the claims of God and Mammon upon 
Christians. (Verses 9-16.) The parable is plain, 
if it be borne in mind that stewards in olden 
times had much greater power and authority 
committed to them than now. They had all the 
authority of the master himself to make and 
to settle accounts. The steward of this narrative, 
when informed that he was about to 
lose his situation, used the power still vested 
in him to make personal friends out of his 
master's debtors, by treating them leniently. 
When the master of this worldly-wise steward 
heard of his course, he commended it as a 
stroke of worldly wisdom and prudence. Nor 
are we sure that the steward's course was one 
working injury to his employer's real interests: 
in view of the disproportionate reductions of 
twenty per cent on one account and fifty per 
cent on the other, it seems not improbable 
that the steward saw that the one never could 
pay more than fifty per cent of his debt, nor 
the other more than eighty per cent of his. 

This illustration of worldly wisdom or prudent 
thought for his own interests in the future 
was our Lord's text for a little discourse to his 
disciples. They were each stewards of certain 
talents, opportunities, money, etc. Two masters 
claimed their allegiance; viz., Sin and 
Righteousness, and they must choose to which 



they would be loyal; for they could not serve 
both. "Ye cannot serve God and Mammon." 

Sin claimed them and all of Adam's race, 
with all their talents, as his servants, since all 
had been "sold under [captivity to] Sin." 
They knew, however, that Sin had no just, no 
true right of control, but merely one of force: 
hence in every way that they could they had a 
right and privilege to divert their talents from 
the service of Sin and to devote them to the 
good of others. Wealth and influence in the 
present time are properly reckoned as the 
mammon of Sin. Sin, at present the master of 
the world, is represented as having control, 
not only of the people (Rom. 6:12,14,17,18,22,23; 
7:14), but also of all the wealth-talents 
of the present; so that he claims each individual 
to be merely his steward, and demands that he 
use his mammon in his interest, else he will 
dispossess him. But our Lord taught that allegiance 
really belonged to another Master, even 
God, and that they should not serve Sin; that 
our Lord, as God's representative, was about 
to set up God's Kingdom, and overthrow Sin- 
binding the strong Master of the present time 
and spoiling his arrangements. (Matt. 12:29; 
Mark 3:27.) In view of this knowledge, our 
Lord said to his disciples:— 

"I say unto you, Make to yourselves friends 
out of [or by means of] the mammon of unrighteousness 
[the earthly wealth or valuables 
under your control now, which at one time 

R1626:page70 

were in whole or in part controlled by Sin, 
your long-time task-master]; that when ye fail 
[when the present life ends], they may receive 
you into lasting habitations," into heavenly 
conditions— the using of our talents, once active 
in Sin's service, in the Lord's service being 
counted as laying up treasures in heaven. 

This is the wise, proper course, whether you 
have little of earthly riches— honor, money, 
talent— or whether you have much; for "he 
that is faithful in that which is least is faithful 
also in much: and [knowing to which master 
his allegiance and talents really belong] he that 
is unjust in the least is unjust also in much." 

If, to please "the prince of this world" and 
to be in harmony with those who serve him, you 
own Sin as your master and selfishly serve him, 
using time and talents as his steward, for the 
short time of the present life, and for the small 
advantages which such a course would bring 



R1627:page70 

you, your unfaithfulness in these respects would 
prove you unworthy of the share promised to 
you in real riches of the real kingdom soon to 
be set up.-Rom. 6:14-18. 

As those who have deserted the service of 
Sin the Usurper, and who have consecrated 
their all to God, you have been appointed by 
him stewards of those consecrated talents, with 
a promise that if faithful he will in the world 
to come make you more than stewards— kings 
and priests unto God. But if you prove unfaithful 
to your stewardship, if you love and 
serve mammon [wealth, either honor, money 
or other wealth of this world, highly esteemed 
by all natural men], can you hope that God 
will give you the true Kingdom riches which 
are yours conditionally? Be assured, "Ye cannot 
serve God and Mammon." 

This was our Lord's discourse to his disciples 
respecting their proper course in life as 
stewards of the manifold grace of God. "And 
the Pharisees who were covetous [who dearly 
loved the riches and honors of this present 
time] heard all these things; and they derided 
[ridiculed] him. And he said unto them, Ye 
are they which justify yourselves before men 
[you succeed in getting men to think you very 
holy]; but God knoweth your hearts [that 
much that you do is merely of outward show, 
mock humility and pretended self-denials]: 
for that which is highly esteemed among men 
[which deceives the natural man, which he 
thinks very praiseworthy] is abomination in 
the sight of God."-Luke 16:14,15. 

The Law and the Prophets were until John, 
—but now a new dispensation is being ushered 
in; and if you were wise you would see the 
change at hand and begin to act accordingly. 
Now the Kingdom of God is preached, and 
every man desires to get into it. You therefore 
should begin at once to so dispose of the 
stewardship yet in your hands that you might 
at least be on favorable terms with those who 
shall so soon possess the power of the Kingdom. 
This, to the Jews, was not a case of deserting 
the Law Covenant to which they were married; 
the Law Covenant was fulfilled, died a natural 
death, which permitted them to give their allegiance 
to Christ and the New Covenant.— 
Verse 18; Rom. 7:4. 



R1627:page70 



APPLYING TRUTH TO ONE'S SELF. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I cannot tell you 
how highly I have appreciated the WATCH 
TOWER of 1893. I have derived much spiritual 
benefit from its study. Every number has 
been full of rich things— things which should 
be treasured up in the hearts of those who are 
running for the great prize and striving to 
make their calling and election sure. 

Your aim has been to make the TOWER readers 
better men and women— more like our 
blessed Redeemer and Lord, and also to protect 
them from the snares of the adversary. 

Your articles, From Glory to Glory, Taking 
God's Name in Vain, Unequally Yoked, and 
others of a similar character, must have had a 
transforming power over the truly consecrated 
—those who are anxious to have the Lord's 
will done in them— while your various articles 
on the Ransom and Pulpit Infidelity have 
been and will be a source of protection to those 
who are truly the Lord's (in this evil day). 
I have found out that the TOWERS have not to 
be read, merely, in order to be appreciated, 
but they have to be studied. While away from 

R1627:page71 

home I copied parts of various articles from 
the TOWER and sent them to Sister McPhail to 
copy and return to me. I changed all the pronouns 
to the first person singular. I consider 
this an excellent way to study the TOWER, and 
would recommend it highly to all its readers. 
It helps to impress it upon the memory, and 
it gives one the power to tell what he knows or 
what he has copied. I know that it has been 
of great benefit to me. 

I enclose you parts of two articles which will 
explain what I mean. Remember me kindly 
to Sister Russell and all of your household, and 
may the Lord bless you in all your efforts to 
"send out the light and the truth." 

Your brother, in Christ, M. L. McPHAIL. 

The articles referred to follow. 

TO BE ESTABLISHED IN THE PRESENT 
TRUTH SIGNIFIES 

That I have carefully studied and thoroughly 
proved it by the law and the testimony (Isa. 8:20), 



and 

That as a consequence I am convinced of its 
verity, so 

That my faith is steadfast and immovable. 
--1 Peter 5:9; 1 Cor. 15:58. 

That I know in whom I have believed. -- 
2 Tim. 1:12. 

That I have tasted and seen that the Lord is 
good.-Psa. 34:8. 

That I have partaken of the sweets of fellowship 
with him.— 1 John 1:3-7. 

That I have partaken of his spirit of meekness, 
faith and godliness to such an extent as 
to be led into a joyful realization of the fulness 
of his grace as manifested in the wonderful, divine 
"plan of the ages."-John 14:26; 16:12-15; 
1 Cor. 2:10-16. 

That I have been permitted to see not only 
the various features of that plan,— The Worlds 
and Ages, Permission of Evil, Ransom, Restitution, 
Kingdom of God with its Human and 
Divine Phases, Second Death, Great Time of 
Trouble, Times and Seasons, Chronology, Harvest 
and its Work, etc., but also the necessity 
and reasonableness of its various measures in 
order to the full accomplishment of its glorious 
outcome in the fulness of the appointed times. 

This is what it is to be established in the 
present truth. It is indeed a most blessed condition, 
bringing with it such peace and joy as 
the world can neither give nor take away. 

But though I be thus established in the 
present truth, there are quite a number of 

THINGS WHICH I MUST REMEMBER. 

That my election to the high position to 
which I am called is not yet made sure— the 
race for the prize of my high calling is still 
before me. 

That I am yet in the enemy's country, surrounded 
by many subtle and powerful foes. 

That if I would be successful I must fight 
the good fight of FAITH. 

That the weapons of my warfare are not 
carnal, but (God's truth is) mighty to the 
pulling down of the strongholds of error, superstition 
and inbred sin.— 2 Cor. 10:4. 

That I wrestle not with flesh and blood, but 
against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against 
spiritual wickedness in high places."— 
Eph. 6:12. 

That it is in view of the warfare before me— 
the subtlety of my temptations, the weaknesses 
of the flesh— that the faithful Peter urges all 



diligence in the cultivation of the Christian 
graces, and a continual calling to remembrance 
of the precious truths I have learned— that I 
may be strengthened for the conflict, and thereby 
able to make my calling and election sure. 

That faith is a good thing (without which I 
cannot please God, I cannot be justified, I 
cannot maintain my justification or have access 
into the additional favor, I cannot be an overcomer); 
yet faith without virtuous works is 
dead; and to hold the truth in unrighteousness 
is worse than never to have received it. 

That the truth is given to me for its sanctifying 
effect upon my heart and life— it should 
have free course and be glorified— its precious 
fruits should appear more and more from day 
to day. 

That I must add to my faith, VIRTUE- 
true excellence of character that will mark me 
as separated from the world and its spirit. 

That in me the world should see those moral 
qualities which they must approve— however 
they may oppose (the objects of) my faith. 

That I must add sterling honesty, truth and 
fair dealing in all business relations; moral 
integrity in all social relations; manifestly 
clean hands and a pure heart, and a bridled 
tongue that works no ill to a neighbor. 

That all of these the world has a right to 
expect from me and all others who call themselves 
Christians; and that all of these are 
indispensable features of that virtuous character 
which must be added to my faith. 

That if my hands be clean, they will not 
dabble in anything that is not virtuous;— they 
will have nothing to do with unrighteous 
schemes or projects in business. 

That if my heart be pure, it will not devise 
evil things, or harbor evil thoughts, or plot 
mischief. 

R1627 : page 72 

That if my tongue be bridled, it will not be 
given to evil-speaking, but will hold its peace 
when it cannot speak well and wisely. 

That the promptings of virtue go further 
than merely these negative features which refuse 
to do anything which would work ill to a 
neighbor; they incite not only to passive, but 
also to active goodness— in benevolent charity 
which seeks to alleviate suffering; to sympathize 
with sorrow; to comfort those in distress, 
and to elevate and bless others; to assist "all 
men as" I "have opportunity." 

That I must gain a KNOWLEDGE of 



God's character in order that I may the more 
thoroughly imitate it, and of his truth, that 
I may more fully conform to its teachings. 

That I must exercise TEMPERANCE--or 
self-control— in all things, letting my moderation 
be known unto all men, and taking care 

R1628:page72 

not to be hasty, hot-tempered, rash or thoughtless; 
but endeavoring to be evenly balanced, 
thoughtful and considerate. 

That my whole manner should be characterized 
by that carefulness which would indicate 
that I am ever mindful of the Lord's pleasure, 
of my responsibility to him as his representative, 
and of my influence upon my fellow-men 
to see that it always be for good, never for evil. 

That I must let "PATIENCE have her 
perfect work, that I may be perfect and entire, 
wanting nothing." 

That this grace smooths the way for every 
other, because all must be acquired under the 
process of patient and continuous self-discipline; 
and that not a step of progress can be 
gained without the exercise of this grace. 

That not one of the graces more beautifully 
adorns the Christian character, wins the approval 
of the world's conscience or glorifies 
the God of all grace, whose truth inspires it. 

That it is long-suffering meekness earnestly 
striving to stem the tide of human imperfection 
and weakness, and endeavoring with painstaking 
care to regain the divine likeness. 

That it is slow to wrath and plenteous in 
mercy; quick to perceive the paths of truth 
and righteousness and prompt to walk in them; 
mindful of its own imperfections, and sympathetic 
with the imperfections and shortcomings 
of others. 

That I must add to "patience GODLINESS" 
—I must carefully study and imitate 
the divine character as presented in the Word. 

That I must exercise BROTHERLY 
KINDNESS towards my fellowman. 

That I must add to brotherly kindness 
LOVE. 

That kindness may be manifested where but 
little love exists toward the subject of such 
kindness; but I cannot long persevere in such 
acts of kindness before a sympathetic interest 
is awakened; and by and by that interest, continually 
exercised, deepens into love, and even 
though the subject may be unlovely in character 
the love of sympathy for the fallen and 
the degraded grows, until it becomes tender 



and solicitous and akin to that of a parent for 
an erring son. 

That Peter describes a most admirable character 
—one which cannot be acquired in a day, nor a 
year, but the whole life must be devoted to it. 

That day by day, if I am faithful, I will be 
able to realize a measure of growth in grace 
and development of Christian character. 

That it is not enough that I know the truth 
—nor should I be contented to hold it in unrighteousness. 
I must see to it that the truth is 
having its legitimate and designed effect upon 
the character. 

That if I receive the truth into a good and 
honest heart, I have the assurance of the Apostle 
that I shall never fall, and that in due time 
I shall be received into the Kingdom of my 
Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. 

That I should see the necessity of ever keeping 
the instructions and precepts of the Lord 
fresh in my mind, and of drinking deep into 
their inspiring spirit— although I am already 
established in the faith. 

That to be established in the faith is one 
thing, and to be established in Christian character 
and in all the graces of the spirit is quite 
another. 

In claiming to be a divinely recognized child 
of God and a follower of his dear Son, I stand 
before the world as God's representative; and, 
presumably, all my words and actions are in 
harmony with his indwelling Spirit. 

I stand as a guide-post in the midst of the 
world's dark and uncertain way; and, if I am 
not true to my profession, I am a deceitful 
sign-board, causing the inquirer to lose the 
right way and to stumble into many a snare. 
Therefore, to take the name of God, claiming 
to be his son, a Christian, a follower of Christ, 
without a fixed determination and careful effort 
to fairly represent him, is a sin against God of 
which I will not be held guiltless! 

I realize that to undertake the Christian life 
is to engage in a great warfare against iniquity; 
for, though the grace of God abounds to 
me through Christ to such an extent that my 
imperfections and short-comings are not imputed 
to me, but robed in Christ's imputed 
righteousness I am reckoned holy and acceptable 
to God, I am not, says the Apostle (Rom. 6:1,2), 

R1628:page73 

to continue in sin that grace may 

abound; for by my covenant with God I have 

declared myself dead to sin and that I have 



no longer any desire to live therein. But having 

made such a covenant with God and having 

taken upon myself his holy name, if I continue 

in sin, or cease to strive against sin, I am 

proving false to my profession. (Rom. 6:1,2,11,12.) 

This means a great deal. It means 

a constant warfare against the easily besetting 

sins of my old nature; and the struggle will 

be long and constant until the power of sin is 

broken; and then only constant vigilance will 

keep it down. 

If I be true to my profession, I will daily 
strive to realize an increasing mastery over sin 
in myself, and will be able from time to time 
to distinguish some degree of advancement in 
this direction. I will grow more like Christ- 
more self-possessed, more meek and gentle, 
more disciplined and refined, more temperate 
in all things, and more fully possessed of the 
mind that was in Christ Jesus. My old temper 
and unlovely disposition will disappear, and my 
new mind will assert its presence and power. 
And thus the silent example of a holy life will 
reflect honor upon that holy name which it is 
my privilege to bear and to represent before 
the world, as a living epistle, known and 
read of all men with whom I come in contact. 

1 realize that the formation of such a noble 
and pure character is the legitimate result of 
the reception of divine truth into a good and 
honest heart. Or, rather, such is the transforming 
power of divine truth upon the whole 
character, when it is heartily received and fully 
submitted to. "Sanctify them through thy 
truth: thy word is truth," was the Lord's petition 
on the Church's behalf; and may I not 

fall into the error of some, of presuming that 
the sanctifying work can go on better without 
the truth than with it?— 2 Peter 1:4; 1 John 3:3; 
John 15:3; 17:17; Eph. 5:26; Rom. 12:2; 

2 Cor. 3:18; 7:1; Psa. 19:7-14; 1 Tim. 4:16. 

I need the instruction and guidance and inspiration 
of the truth for holy living; and our 
Lord's words imply that all the truth that is 
necessary to this end is in the Word of God, 
and that, consequently, I am not to look for 
any further revelations through visions or 
dreams or imaginations of myself or others. 
The Word of God, says the Apostle (2 Tim. 3:16,17), 
is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, 
for correction, for instruction in righteousness 
(Heb. 4: 12), that the man of God 
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all 
good works. It reveals to me the spirit, mind 
or disposition of God, and exhorts me to let 
the same mind dwell richly in me; and in conjunction 



with the study of the mind of God as 
revealed in his Word and communion with him 
in prayer, I receive the blessed influences of 
his spirit, which brings me more and more into 
conformity with his perfect will. I realize 
that to live a holy life is not to do some great 
and wonderful things: it is only to live from 
day to day a life of quiet unostentatious conformity 
to the will of God— of secret communion 
with him in my closet, devotions and 
daily walk, and of jealous activity to the extent 
of my ability and opportunity in his service. As 
I have named the name of Christ (2 Tim. 2: 19), 
it is my determination— God helping me— to 
depart (more and more) from iniquity and 
apply my heart unto instruction, confident that 
I shall be led of God into green pastures and 
beside still waters: my table will be richly and 
bountifully spread, and my cup of blessing 
and joy and gladness will overflow; while the 
wrath of God will in due time be revealed 
against all who take his hallowed name in vain, 
however they may band themselves together, 
and however loudly they may proclaim themselves 
heaven's appointed messengers. 



R1628:page73 

PERSONAL LIBERTY,-ITS RESPONSIBILITY. 



LIBERTY always increases responsibility. 
Each consecrated believer has the full 
liberty to use his consecrated talents in the 
Lord's service; but each should see to it 
that he does not misuse this liberty. Some 
are naturally inclined to undervalue their 
own abilities, and hence fail to be so useful 
servants of the truth as they might be. Others 
overestimate their natural talents, and waste 
valuable opportunities in trying to do things 
for which they have little or no talent; and 
neglect the exercise of other talents which 
they really do possess. 

"Use not your liberty for an occasion of 
the flesh"— to cultivate pride and vainglory 
in yourself or in others. Let a man "think 
[of himself] soberly, according as God hath 
dealt out to every man the measure of faith." 
"All things are lawful for me [permitted by 
the loose rein of Christ's commands], but 
all things are not expedient: all things are 
lawful for me, but all things edify not." 



R1628:page74 

"Having then gifts differing, according to 

the grace given unto us"— whether our gift 

be a qualification for prophecy, serving, 

teaching, exhorting, giving of means, or presiding, 

let us use to our best ability the gift 

or gifts possessed; rather than fail by trying 

to use other gifts not granted to us;— 

"In honor preferring one another,"— "Mind 

not high things,"— "Be not wise in your 

own conceits."— Rom. 12:3-16; 1 Cor. 10:23. 

R1629:page74 

These Scriptural injunctions apply to 
everything we may do, or endeavor to do, in 
the Lord's service. Those who have the 
money talent should not only use it "with 
simplicity" (without ostentation), but they 
should use it with wisdom. It should not 
go to assist in preaching either slight errors 
or gross ones, if they know it— neither by 
assisting in paying the expenses of meetings, 
nor in paying publishing expenses. And 
each one should know, directly or indirectly, 
what he is assisting to promulgate as 
truth. If you have read and failed to comprehend 
a publication, do not suppose your 
mind incapable of grasping anything so 
deep and complex, and then proceed to circulate 
it among others; but conclude that if 
you have not the mental capacity to understand 
it, your safest plan will be not to run 
the risk of choking anyone else with it. 
"Whatever is not of faith is sin," applies to 
this as well as to other matters. 

These criticisms apply to WATCH TOWER 
publications as well as to others. Prove by 
God's Word all that you receive from this 
office. (1) See if it squares with the doctrine 
of the ransom: if it does not, you need 
go no further with the proving. (2) If it 
is in accord with that foundation of the 
gospel, proceed to examine it in the light 
of all the Scriptures. (3) If it stands these 
tests receive it and hold it fast, as being 
from God; and (4) circulate it wherever 
you can. (5) But if ever you get from us 
either tract or paper which you do not find 
in harmony with the Scriptures, surely let 
us know wherein it disagrees, and do not 
circulate it. 

This advice in no way conflicts with our 
Lord's words in Mark (9:39), when, in reply 



to the disciples' statement that they had 
forbidden some one to cast our devils because 
he followed not with them, he said, 
"Forbid him not." It is not for us to forbid 
anyone the exercise of his own talents 
according to his own wisdom. But if any 
one exercise his talents in a manner which 
we consider unwise or wholly or partially 
erroneous, it is our duty not to render any 
assistance to the unwise course. It is one 
thing to forbid, and to use sword and fagot 
to restrain, and quite another thing to leave 
them to themselves and to exercise your 
own talents according to your own judgment 
of the Lord's will. Some who are only 
babes in the present truth send in manuscript 
for publication in the TOWER and as 
tracts. With childlike simplicity they sometimes 
remark that their articles, etc., are 
chiefly extracts from the DAWN and TOWER. 
We have but one motive in publishing— 
namely, to disseminate the truth, as the 
Editor understands the Word of God to teach 
it. Let others publish what they please, and 
how they please; we forbid them not, and 
we assist them not if they follow not the 
lines of truth as we have been guided of the 
Lord to see them, and are seeking to follow 
them. Nevertheless, to guard against the 
rejection of truth from other quarters, if the 
Lord shall choose to send it, we have appointed 
a committee of three, consisting of 
the Associate Editor and two others, to examine 
every article sent in for publication. 
Upon the recommendation of any two of 
that committee the Editor will publish any 
manuscript sent in;— even though he should 
think it necessary to review and contradict 
the conclusions reached. It is the truth, 
and the truth only, that we desire to publish 
and circulate, and that in the best form 
of statement known to us. Take it kindly, 
therefore, if your articles are oftenest rejected; 
and know nevertheless of our love 
and sympathy and appreciation of your desires 
and efforts. 

Some of the dear friends while desiring 
to do good are in danger of doing the reverse, 
by expecting that MILLENNIAL DAWN 
colporteurs have all the gifts and talents 
necessary for the public expounding of the 
truth, and therefore encouraging some to 
do so who have not those talents. This is 
a serious mistake which has already drawn 
some discredit upon the truths we all love 
to honor. The leaven of pride and ambition 



is perhaps not yet fully purged out of 
any, but is merely kept in subjection by 
grace; and all require help to overcome it 
and to purge it out, rather than suggestions, 
etc., which might develop it. Let us consider 
one another to provoke to love and 
good works. If you find a humble one with 
ability, encourage him in its exercise; but 

R1629:page75 

if he be not humble minded encourage him 
not, even though he have the ability; for the 
higher you push him the greater will be his 
fall; because "Pride goeth before destruction, 
and a haughty spirit before a fall." — 
Prov. 16:18. 

None love or appreciate the Colporteurs 
and the work they are doing for the Lord 
and his sheep in the spread of the truth 
more than do we. But none more than we 
realize the danger to which some of them 
are exposed by dear Brethren and Sisters 
who, meeting them, expect that they are 
Masters in Israel and able expounders of 
the Word. In endeavoring to meet this expectation 
some stumble over supposed types, 
and some over parables and over symbols 
of Revelation, and in general, over "questions 
to no profit, but to the subverting of 
the hearer." Read 2 Tim. 2:14-21. 

Of course the abilities or talents of God's 
servants differ; and it is proper that we 
should encourage such as have talents to 
use the best they possess in the most useful 
manner; but great care should be exercised 
to encourage only the humble, and then only 
in the exercise of talents or gifts possessed, 
and not in grasping for gifts with which 
they are not endowed. Our experience 
surely confirms the Lord's Word, that Not 
many great or learned or wise hath God 
chosen— now, nor at any time. Surely our 
Lord's leading and blessing seem to have 
accompanied the circulation of the printed 
truth in a remarkable degree, in the present 
harvest: Had he desired that the work 
be carried on in another way, he would 
have raised up more possessing the requisite 
abilities. 

The Lord's blessing has wonderfully attended 
the colporteur work; so that through this 
agency over half a million volumes of the 
DAWN series are in the hands of the people, 
each preaching sixteen sermons on the Bible 
over and over again, and yielding greater and 



more lasting results than any public speaking. 
But the tendency we here mention (far more 
than the stringency of the times) has recently 
caused a great slackening of the colporteur 
work. Some of the ablest "harvesters" are 
doing less than one-tenth what they formerly 
did. And this in turn puts them back in their 
accounts with the TOWER office, so that at present 
the indebtedness of Colporteurs amounts 
to about seven thousand dollars, and causes 
serious inconvenience at a time when it is 
difficult to borrow money at a high rate of interest. 
This latter, however, is a secondary 
matter. We are glad to be able to give credit 
to all who need it, and whose time and energy 
are being expended in the work in the manner 
for which they have shown that they have the 
necessary gift or talents. 

If we thought this to be a leading of Divine 
Providence, pointing us to a change of methods, 
we should at once fall into line with it and cooperate. 
But we do not so view it. We believe, 
on the contrary, that it is but another 
of Satan's delusions and snares by which he 
would hinder the work and injure the harvest 
laborers. If we knew of any better publications 
for presenting the truth than those of the 
Tower Tract Society, we would surely discontinue 
present publications and put our energy 
upon those. But so long as you and we 
know of no other publications in any degree 
entering the field of present truth and standing 
fast upon the one foundation— the ransom 
—we cannot doubt that this agency, so far 
used, should continue to be used, with all of 
our united energies, until the Lord shall say 
"Well done, thou good and faithful servant: 
...enter thou into the joy of thy Lord," or 
until we see some better way and are sure it is 
the Lord's way. On the contrary, the Lord 
is continually sending out new laborers, and 
opening the way for translations of M. DAWN 
into other languages. 

Since Christmas a Baptist Brother has received 
the truth, and is working at his trade 
and laying by the money needful to defray his 
expenses to New Zealand, where he hopes to 
spread the truth. And we have a proposition 
from two others to go to Australia. 

All who are in agreement with the above sentiments 
should cast their influence by word and 
deed with their judgment. But let none misunderstand 
the loving motive which prompts 
you. Speak the truth in love (Eph. 4: 15); 
"others save with fear, pulling them out of the 
fire. "-Jude 21-23. 



To those possessed of fewer or humbler talents 
than some others, and who are diligently 
and faithfully using such as they do possess, 
we would suggest that the time is not far distant 
when all the faithful will be crowned with 
the perfect abilities which will be common to 
all who shall become partakers of the divine 
nature. Meantime, each should use what talents 
he has to the best of his ability; assured 
that the faithful over one or two talents will 
receive the same blessed plaudit as the faithful 
with five talents— "Well done, thou good and 
faithful servant:... enter thou into the joy 
of thy Lord." 



page 76 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1629:page76 
JACOB AT BETHEL. 



I. QUAR., LESSON X., MAR. 11, GEN. 28: 10-22. 

Golden Text— "Behold, I am with thee, and will keep 
thee."-Gen. 28:15. 

VERSES 10,1 1. Because of his faith in 
the promises of God and his appreciation 
of them, Jacob now undertook a long and 
lonely journey on foot, and unaccompanied, 
that he might escape the murderous wrath 
of his brother. And in so doing he was 
leaving behind him and practically abandoning 
the earthly inheritance of flocks and 
herds, the wealth of his father Isaac, to 

R1630:page76 

Esau his brother, while he went forth empty-handed, 

with nothing but his staff. But he 

had what he appreciated more than all else, 



the blessed inheritance of the Abrahamic 
covenant, whose fulfilment could not be 
reasonably expected until the city for which 
Abraham looked (Heb. 11:10, the Kingdom 
of God) should be established in the 
earth. He evidently did not expect temporal 
blessings, and he actually forsook them; 
but while he sought first the Kingdom of 
God and its righteousness, all needful temporal 
blessings, and more, were added. 

VERSES 12-15. Here is sufficient evidence 
of the correctness of our estimate of 
Jacob's character, as presented in our last 
lesson. Jacob was neither condemned nor 
repudiated by God. On the contrary, his 
faith and his appreciation of God's promise 
made him beloved of God; and now, as he 
was a wanderer from home and family for 
the sake of his trust in God's promises, God 
went with him on his lonely journey; and this 
confirmation of the original covenant must 
have been most refreshing and strengthening 
to him. Truly, "If God be for us, who 
can be against us?"— Rom. 8:31. 

A comparison of verse 14 with chap. 22:17 
will show that while the Abrahamic 
covenant was to have a double fulfilment- 
first, in a literal sense to him and his posterity; 
and, second, in a spiritual sense to the 
spiritual children of God of whom Abraham 
was a type (Rom. 4:17— margin), and 
who are therefore called the children of 
Abraham— this covenant makes mention 
only of the literal fulfilment which is to be 
realized by Jacob and his descendants— 
"Israel after the flesh"— as well as by Abraham 
and Isaac and all the prophets who shall 
constitute the earthly phase of the Kingdom 
of God.-See MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
VOL. I., Chap. xiv. 

The promise to Abraham in part was, "I 
will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, 
and as the sand which is upon the sea 
shore," which language, in the light of subsequent 
revelations of the Apostles, is seen 
to signify both a spiritual and an earthly 
seed, the former being Christ and his body, 
the Gospel Church (Gal. 3:16,29), and the 
latter, the literal descendants of Abraham 
and Jacob— "Israel after the flesh." And in 
this seed of Abraham and posterity of Jacob, 
in both the literal and spiritual senses, all 
the families of the earth shall be blessed. 
The two phases of the Kingdom will cooperate 
in the glorious and blessed work of 
the restitution of all things, foretold by the 



mouth of all the holy prophets since the 
world began. —Acts 3:19-21. 

VERSE 15 was the blessed assurance to 
Jacob of that which is now very shortly to 
be brought to pass, and which is even now 
beginning to be fulfilled. It signifies the 
regathering of Israel— often called Jacob; 
see Rom. 1 1:26— to the land of promise. It 
signifies not only their regathering out from 
among all the nations whither they have 
been scattered (Ezek. 11:17; 20:34,41; 28:25), 
but also their coming out of their 
graves. (Ezek. 37:12-14.) Consequently, 
at the appointed time (See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. II.), we expect that Abraham 
and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets and 
all Israel will be regathered from "the land 
of the enemy"— the grave, and from among 
all nations whither they have been scattered, 
and firmly planted in the land which God 
sware unto Abraham and unto Isaac and 
unto Jacob. We expect all this and much 
more when the city is established for which 
Abraham looked, and unto the promise of 
which all the ancient worthies had respect. 
-See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III. 

VERSES 16-19. Jacob's reverent appreciation 
of the Lord's communion with him 
in the dream is commendable. Wherever 
God communes with his people the place 
becomes a sanctuary— Bethel, or house of 

R1630:page77 

God. Now the Lord speaks to us through 
his Word, and we speak to him in prayer; 

"And wheresoe'er God's people meet 
There they may find the mercy seat: 
Where'er they seek him, he is found, 
And every place is hallowed ground." 

VERSES 20-22. A realization of God's 
favor, instead of making Jacob arrogant and 
haughty, as less noble natures are often affected, 
led him in humility to a grateful 
consecration of himself to God, and to a 
sense of his own unworthiness. The word 
"if" in this verse might more properly 
be substituted by the words since, or inasmuch 
as, because Jacob is not here introducing 
a condition with God, but is expressing 
his acceptance of God's promise (of verse 15) 
to do these things. Then note how 
moderate were Jacob's desires for temporal 
blessings. All he craved for the present 



life were the simple necessaries of existence, 
while he solemnly obligated himself to tax 
all that he might in future acquire at the rate 
of 10 per cent, for the Lord's special service. 
And there he set up a memorial pillar that 
that place should ever thereafter be to him 
a sacred place of worship and a reminder 
of the goodness of God, of his covenant 
and of the obligations which he had assumed 
as a thank-offering to the Lord. 

This grateful consecration on Jacob's part 
was a voluntary offering, not from constraint, 
but from love and gratitude. And 
in the course of all the ancient worthies 
who shall inherit the earthly phase of the 
Kingdom we see the same spirit of grateful 
sacrifice, which is only excelled by that of 
our Lord Jesus and those who closely follow 
in his footsteps, freely consecrating and 
actually sacrificing, not only one tenth, but 
all that they have— even unto death— that 
they may thereby accomplish the work 
which God has given them to do, and prove 
their worthiness of the covenant blessings 
to the spiritual house of Israel and seed of 
Abraham. 

Those who have thus solemnly covenanted 
to present themselves as living sacrifices 
together with Christ, that thereby they may 
be heirs together with him of the spiritual 
blessings vouchsafed in this Abrahamic 
covenant, would do well to mark with what 
faithfulness the heirs of the earthly inheritance 
paid their vows unto the Most High. 
Mark also how thoroughly they were tested, 
and how bravely they stood the tests 
applied; and from their noble examples let 
us take courage while we run our race, inspired 
by the exceeding great and precious 
promises hidden for us also in that Abrahamic 
covenant. If Jacob asked no more 
than the actual necessities for the present 
life, surely we may be satisfied with nothing 
more; while we look for a still more 
glorious inheritance in the promised time 
of blessing. "Having food and raiment, 
let us therewith be content."— 1 Tim. 6:8. 

Yet it is to be feared that many who covenant 
to sacrifice their all in the Lord's 
service actually render far less than one 
tenth. The size of our sacrifice is the measure 
of our love and zeal in the Lord's 
service; and time and influence, as well as 
financial ability, are parts of our possessions 
to be rendered to the Lord as thank-offerings, 
while out of that consecrated to him 



the things needful for our sustenance may 
be retained in harmony with the spirit of 
our covenant. 

And, while we run, let us remember for 
our consolation the promise to Jacob, and 
through him to us— "Behold, I am with 
thee, and will keep thee." "Faithful is he 
who hath called you, who also will do it." 
--1 Thes. 5:24. 

R1631 : page 77 

WINE A MOCKER. 



I. QUAR., LESSON XL, MAR. 18, PROV. 20:1-7. 

Golden Text— "Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging; 
and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise."— 
Prov. 20:1. 

The moral precepts of this lesson need 
little comment; but it is well for all to lay 
them to heart. There can be no vital piety 
where the simple precepts of morality are 
ignored. He who would live godly must, 
at the outset, abandon every vile and evil 
thing— must seek to purify the earthen vessel, 
and pray for divine grace to keep it so, 
and he must earnestly strive against all the 
downward tendencies of his fallen nature. 

It has been well said that the intemperate 
use of spiritous liquors is an apt illustration 
of the course and effects of sin in 
general. It benumbs the sensibilities, beclouds 
and stupefies the judgment, weakens 
the will, enslaves and degrades the whole 
man, and finally wrecks his health and all 
his manly hopes and aspirations, and brings 
him in haste and disgrace to the grave. 

Yet, while this vice is a visible and most 
prominent illustration of the course and effects 
of sin, such is the actual tendency of 
all sin, though its effects may not always be 

R1631 : page 78 

so visible, nor so hateful, nor so rapidly ruinous. 

All sin is intolerable in the sight of 

God; and to love and cherish it in its less 

obnoxious and more secret forms is as worthy 

of condemnation as enslavement to its 

grosser forms. Only those who abhor sin 

in all its forms, and who strive against the 

sinward tendencies of their fallen nature, 

and who, because of such realized and acknowledged 



tendencies, avail themselves of 
the robe of Christ's righteousness through 
faith in his precious blood as their ransom 
price, are acceptable to God. Let us flee, 
therefore, from every sin, and from every 
appearance of evil; and let us manifest our 
hatred of sin by a continual and lifelong 
striving against it; and day by day and year 
by year will manifest more and more of a 
mastery over it. 

Below we add some statistics showing in 
figures something of the immense expense 
of the single sin of intemperance in the use 
of spiritous liquors; yet we may safely say 
that the half cannot be told in any such way. 
But who can compute the enormous expense 
of the whole retinue of sins, great 
and small, to our fallen and enslaved humanity? 
What enormous expense of misery 
and wretchedness has been incurred, for 
instance, by the intemperate propagation of 
the human species, begotten in sin, shapen 
in iniquity, and brought forth with the 
deeply engraven hereditary marks of sin into 
a world of temptations, deceptions and 
snares! 

In the Boston Herald of Jan. 30, '93 were 
given the following statistics by Edward 
Atkinson, the well-known statistician. 

STANDARD OF COMPARISON. 



THE PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION OF LIQUORS. 

Spirits withdrawn, including 

fruit brandy-gallons, 89,554,919 

1 2 per cent, used in the arts,. 1 0,746,5 89 

Consumed as beverage, 

gallons, 78,808,330 

Valuation spirits-78,808,330 

gallons @ $4.50, $354,637,485 

Valuation beer-974,247,863 

gallons @ 50 cents, 487,123,931 

Domestic wines-25,000,000 

gallons @ $2.00, 50,000,000 

Imported beer, 3,051,898 

Imported wines, 40,000,000 

Total in 1891, $934,813,314 

Estimated increase spirits in 

1892, 35,000,000 

Actual increase beer, 21,070,963 

Increase domestic and imported 

wines, 10,000,000 



Total, 1892, $1,000,884,277 

Authority, F. N. Barrett. 
Consumption of liquors per capita 

U.S. population in 1892, $15.28 

Total expenditures of the U.S. 
Government 1892 per capita of 

population, $5.27 

Total cost of U.S. Government aside 
from war debt and pensions per 

capita of population, 2.53 

Spirits, beer, etc., per day per person, 4 + cts. 
All government expenditures 1892 
per day per person, 1 + cts. 

Truly none are wise who permit themselves 
to be deceived by sin in any of its 
forms; for the pleasures of sin are brief, ignoble 
and unsatisfying, and the dregs of the 
cup are a bitter recompense. 

R1631 : page 78 

THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST. 

--MARK 16:1-8.-- 



I. QUAR., LESSON XII., MAR. 25, HEB. 11:1-20. 

Golden Text— "I am the God of Abraham, and the 
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. God is not the God 
of the dead, but of the living."-Matt. 22:32. 

"Now is Christ risen from the dead."— 1 Cor. 15:20. 

The term "Easter" occurs but one place 
in the Bible (Acts 12:4), where it signifies 
the passover. There is no precedent in the 
Scriptures for the Easter festivals which 
have been celebrated with pomp and ceremony 
in the Roman and Greek Catholic 
churches, where, it is said, it was introduced 
to displace a pagan festival, the only change 
being in name. But, while avoiding the 
multiplying of the forms of godliness, whose 
tendency is to impoverish its spirit, it is 
quite in place for Christians to reverently 
and joyfully call to mind the Lord's resurrection 
on its anniversary. The birth, death 
and resurrection of our Lord are the three 
circumstances of his first advent which 
should be remembered by every child of 
God with reverent thanksgiving and praise. 
His birth was the dawn of hope for our 
race, as Simeon said, "Now. ..mine eyes 



have seen thy salvation;" his death was the 
seal of pardon and peace to every believer 
in his precious blood; and his resurrection 
was the assurance which God gave to all 

R1631 : page 79 

men of the efficacy of his precious blood 
and of their consequent privilege of sharing 
the ransom blessing of restitution by faith 
and obedience. 

The resurrection of Jesus is the guarantee 
of God's expressed purpose to restore to 
life and to all the blessings of his favor all 
of the human race who come unto God by 
him. And it is in view of this fact, that 
God declares himself the God of the living, 
and not of the dead, for they all live unto 
him (Luke 20:37,38)— in his purpose. And, 
because of this also, our Lord spoke of death 
as a sleep,— in view of the awakening in the 
morning of the resurrection. 

Death implies extinction; for if once condemned 
by God as unworthy of life, there 
being no chance for reform or change in 
death ("In death there is no remembrance 
of thee: in the grave who shall give thee 
thanks!") it follows that there could be no 
hope in death. But what man could not do 
for himself God has done for him through 
Christ,— He has redeemed man from the 
death sentence and provided for the reawakening 
of all. Therefore God does not 
think of us as dead (annihilated), but as 
sleeping until the Millennial morning. 

It is interesting to note with what carefulness 
the important facts of the death and 
resurrection of the Lord are noted in the 
Scriptures: that so our faith and hope might 
be firmly established; for, said the Apostle, 
"If Christ be not risen, your hope is vain." 
The precautions, too, were taken not by the 
Lord's friends, but by his enemies.— Matt. 27:62-66; 
John 19:34,35. 

For a full treatment of the subject of resurrection, 
see our issues of April 1 and 
October 15, 1893. 



R1630:page79 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT." 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--For many 
years I have been familiar with your name 
and with the title, MILLENNIAL DAWN, and 
have occasionally met those who have accepted 
your views of Bible interpretation; 
but I have never been inclined to look into 
the teachings you put forth until about a 
month ago, when some ladies, who were at 
one time members of a church (undenominational) 
over which I was pastor, became 
interested in Brother West's teachings, and 
wrote to me desiring to know whether I 
had read MILLENNIAL DAWN, and what I 
thought of the same, finally sending me 
VOL. I. I took it up to read, that I might 
know under what influence my friends had 
fallen. I became so much interested that I 
have spent all my spare time (often until 
midnight) reading, with my different translations 
of the Bible before me, comparing 
each of your references with the Book, etc. 
I have now finished VOL. III., and wish to 
express to you my appreciation of the truth 
you have brought to light. While I do not 
see eye to eye with you in every minute 
detail, I can sincerely say that I have never 
before seen the beauty and harmony of the 
Word brought out in such clear and satisfying 
order. Many of the thoughts you 
bring out have been shown me by the 
Spirit; but what I most appreciate in your 
book is the clear and orderly arrangement 
of those things of which I have had glimpses. 

Two great truths which you bring out 
are— in the way you handle them— entirely 
new to me; viz., First, Restitution in the 
Millennial age. I have clearly seen that 
"old School" teachings limited the ransom 
of Jesus Christ, but never until now have I 
seen restitution presented in what seemed to 
me a Scriptural and logical manner. I am 
filled with great joy, as I now contemplate 
this precious truth. God's plan is certainly 
much larger than theology (?). 

The second great truth greatly surprises 
me: that Christ has come is a most astonishing 
statement. I cannot yet fully take 
it in. For years I have fully believed, 
taught and preached his coming in person; 
but I have always thought it would be in 
the flesh; although I have believed that only 
the Bride would know. But now I admit 
the truth you advance: that his coming 
must be as a Spirit being. Is not that included 
in the divine order— first the natural, 
then the spiritual? My earnest cry has 



been, "Behold, the Bridegroom cometh!" 
I believed the time had come for that cry. 
Is it possible that, instead of that, I am to 
cry, "Behold the Bridegroom?" I am seeking 

R1631 : page 79 

light on this one point; for surely, if that 

be true, there is no time for God's messengers 

to tarry in the harvest work. 

Well, Brother, I thank God for all the 
truth he has given you to give out to us. I 
have been preaching the gospel to the best 

R1631 : page 80 

of my light for seventeen years (I am 
now almost an old man). For the past year 
I have not been in active gospel work; but, 
singularly, just as I have been brought to 
read your writings, I am asked to go forth 
again to give out the Word of God. For 
years I have been out of "Babylon," and 
of necessity my work must be among the 
humble and poor, and those who are hungry 
for the Word. I go where he calls. 
During the past ten years I have built two 
chapels and gathered two congregations; 
but now it seems to me there is time only 
to call out— not to build and gather. May 
he, the Lord of the Harvest, guide me, is 
my earnest prayer. 

May God bless thee, and use thee more 
and more to give out the truth. 

Yours in the Christ, JOS. C. YOUNG. 



page 80 

MY DEAR SIR:--Two months ago, at a 
small hotel in a small town of this State, I 
came across the third volume of your MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. I did not have time to 
read it, but was so much interested that I 
sent for the three volumes. I have just completed 
the third volume: it has been to me 
like a shower in a desert. I am thirsty and 
hungering for more. 

For ten years, while living on a homestead, 
I read my Bible in the Orthodox way, 
and prayed to and trusted in God; yet something 
kept me out of the denominations. I 
was not satisfied to subscribe to any creed. 
On coming to the city, I resolved to unite 
with some church and Sunday School, and 



become an active worker; but, after visiting 
all of the Protestant denominations, I found 
so much unchristlike behavior, that I could 
not join any of them. The past year I have 
awakened from the indifference into which 
I had settled, and have been in a small way 
trying to get at the truth; and now I feel as 
if I wanted to engage in some way in this 
harvest work. Please send me all the information 
you can. J. HAWLEY. 



R1631 : page 80 

MY DEAR SIR:-I have read with pleasure 
and delight the first volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, and would say, it just suits me. 
These sublime truths are in perfect accord 
with my conception of the word of the Lord, 
and thrill my whole being. It fills my soul, 
puts wings on my feet and energizes every 
power of my being, as I contemplate the 
coming glory of the Millennial morning! 

I am a local preacher in the M.E. Church, 
and you can imagine how much I am at 
home there. For more than twenty years 
I have been engaged in the temperance 
work as a lecturer, and have many opportunities 
of presenting my opinions on these 
subjects. From childhood I have hated the 
Romish church (as a system), and I equally 
abominate the popery of Protestantism. Indeed, 
our Protestant churches (it seems to 
me) are rapidly counter-marching Rome-ward. 
I long for kindred spirits: those who 
"keep the commandments of God and the 
faith of Jesus." 

Your Plan of the Ages has solved one 
dark problem: the heathen world. Your 
teaching on this subject seems in perfect 
accord with the Scriptures, and I share with 
you the joy of such a revelation of the divine 
Word. 

These lines, my brother, are not hastily 
written, for I have read your Plan of the 
Ages three times during the last four months. 
I can see the hand of God in the work in 
which you are engaged. Ever praying for 
your success in proclaiming the coming 
Kingdom of our ascended Lord, I remain, 
Yours in "the faith once delivered to the 
saints." RICHARD GROGAN. 



page 80 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--I thank our 
Father that he, through the instrumentality 
of his children, ever opened my eyes to the 
wonderful Plan of the Ages contained in 
the Scriptures of truth, and unlocked to me 
by MILLENNIAL DAWN. My aged mother 
and myself have been for years students of 
the Word, and lovers of the Lord's appearing, 
and our minds were prepared to receive 
the fuller light which the DAWNS shed forth. 
The Word becomes more and more a source 
of light and delight; and, as we see more 
deeply into that wonderful plan, we are 
amazed at the infinite love, wisdom, power 
and justice of our God; and yet, we ask, 
why this amazement? For it is just like God. 
The trouble was, we have been worshiping 
something that was not God. May God 
help each one of his children to be diligent 
in making the truth and his true character. 

If you have any extra copies of TOWER, 
January 15, 1 wish you would send one-half 
dozen, for I wish to send the sermon, 
"The Future— Social and Religious," to 
several of my friends. I think it will help 
to awaken them and to see for themselves 
that the morning dawns. 

Yours, earnestly watching for the morning, 
ANNA P. NICHOLSON. 



page 82 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1632 : page 82 

BINDING THE BUNDLES TIGHTER. 



[A Brother who was at one time a prominent 
Mason, but who has since discontinued 
his relationship with the Order, believing that 
he can spend time and money to better advantage 
as a member of the "Royal Priesthood," 
sends us the following from the Chicago 
Inter Ocean of March 7, and adds:— "Every 
Mason is now in honor bound to remain by 
the Ancient and Honorable Order.' Thank 
God for his opening, permitting my escape 
before this. Every Mason who now escapes 
from this 'bundle' must, in addition to the 
loss of many agreeable associations, submit to 
a painful singeing of his honor, so-called, and 
which will be worse with every day's delay."] 

The clipping reads as follows:— 

"MASONS ARE DOOMED. 

"MAYOR HOPKINS MAKES WAR ON SECRET SOCIETY MEN.-ALL 
ARE TO QUIT.-LIST OF THOSE ALREADY DISCHARGED FOR 
THIS CAUSE.-EMPLOYES WHO HAVE BEEN TWENTY YEARS IN 
SERVICE REQUESTED TO LEAVE. 

"In his zeal to fill all places in the City 
Hall with 'suitable Democratic substitutes' 
Mayor Hopkins has caused to be discharged a 
number of Masons of high degree. 

"The well-known enmity of the papists toward 
this society gives color to the statement 
made yesterday by a prominent Mason, that 
all who belong to that or any other Protestant 
order are doomed. 

[Then follows the first list of seven prominent 
Masons, with no doubt appropriate statements 
of their moral worth, and mental and 
physical qualifications fitting them for their 
respective offices.] 



"Beyond doubt Mayor Hopkins intends to 
cut out every member of the society now in 
the city's employ. Nothing has been done 
openly, but the quiet tip has gone around that 
every Mason may expect his discharge. 

"The mayor has no reason for discharging 
members of any secret society, except that 
they are of necessity Protestant." 

EXTRACT FROM AN EPISCOPALIAN RECTOR'S 
SERMON. 



"There is danger of offence, danger of apostasy. 
Let him that thinketh he standeth take 
heed lest he fall! Never was it more important 
that a Christian should be Christlike. 
Before God, I think that we are to follow our 
Lord through a dark valley, and to drink a 
bitter cup. There is a mighty movement 
toward the consummation of all unbelief and 
opposition to the Lord's Anointed: a movement 
long ago forewarned, yet none the less 
terrible as it sweeps over Christian lands. We 
see many wise, mighty and learned fascinated 
with its falsehood, and giving to it the weight 
of their influence and genius. But we wait— 
'how long, O Lord, how long!'— for the day 
when the lofty looks of man shall be humbled, 
and the haughtiness of men shall be made 
low, and the Lord alone shall be exalted. For 
'I know that my Redeemer liveth; and that I 
shall stand in the latter day upon the earth; 
whom I shall see for myself; and mine eyes 
shall behold, and not another.'" 

page 82 

THE DANO-NORWEGIAN DAWN, VOL. I. 



We regret to say that this book will not 
be ready this month, as formerly hoped and 
announced. We hope to be able to fill orders 
before May 1st. 

A COLPORTEUR GROUP. 



After our last Summer's Convention at Chicago 
had adjourned, and only about sixty of the 
friends remained, mostly colporteurs, Brother 
Witter took a Cabinet photograph of all in a 



group. 

He has supplied a copy free to all the colporteurs 
known to desire them and has donated 
a quantity to the Tract Fund. These we 
now offer to any who may desire them at 
fifty cents per copy. The receipts will go to 
forward the general work. 



R1632 : page 83 
