
During This Memorial Season, Will You Imitate the Zeal of Jehovah and Jesus?




 1. What do Jehovah’s Witnesses make a special effort to do during the Memorial season?
1 Jehovah accomplishes his purpose with zeal. Referring to some of the blessings of God’s Kingdom, Isaiah 9:7 says: “The zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this.” Similarly, during his earthly ministry, God’s Son demonstrated great zeal for true worship. (John 2:13-17; 4:34) Each year during the Memorial season, millions of publishers around the world make a special effort to imitate the zeal of Jehovah and Jesus by increasing their activity in the ministry. Will you be among them?
 2. What will zeal motivate us to do beginning on March 7?
2 Memorial Campaign: This year’s campaign to advertise the Memorial will begin on Saturday, March 7. Plan now to have a zealous share in the ministry. Congregations will be abuzz with excitement as they actively share in covering as much of their territory as possible. Make a concerted effort to invite your Bible students, return visits, workmates, relatives, and schoolmates by giving them an invitation or by using jw.org.
 3. How can we expand our ministry during March and April?
3 Auxiliary Pioneer: Zeal will also motivate us to expand our ministry. No doubt many will be able to auxiliary pioneer during March and April, since we will have the option of choosing the 30-hour requirement. During your family worship or personal study, give prayerful consideration to how you can do this. (Prov. 15:22) Your enthusiasm for this campaign can stimulate others to zealous activity. If you make personal adjustments in order to do more, you will be imitating the zeal of Jesus.—Mark 6:31-34.
 4. What rewards come from imitating the zeal of Jehovah and Jesus?
4 Our imitating the zeal of Jehovah and Jesus during this Memorial season will bring rich rewards. Many more in the territory will receive a witness. We will experience the joy and satisfaction that comes from serving Jehovah and giving to others. (Acts 20:35) Most important, we will please our zealous God and his Son.




