Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
Since the earthquakes in Peru, Brother Knorr told the Bethel family that all of the missionaries in Peru are safe and well. Immediately after it was learned how great the disaster was, the congregations in Lima gathered together clothing, food and money and they took approximately seven tons of supplies to the stricken area. Just as soon as the highway was opened, three cars and a truck loaded with material went through to Casma, where there are 20 publishers. All of the buildings were shaken down and there was a pile of rubble. Supplies were left with a special pioneer for distribution.
The caravan of four vehicles traveled on to Chimbote, where there is a population of 250,000. We have three congregations there of about 300 brothers. All of the homes were destroyed, and two Kingdom Halls were demolished. One Kingdom Hall had a cement floor, so the first thing the brothers did was to clear off the rubble and put up a mat wall, and Tuesday night they had their congregation book study there. The brothers bringing supplies arrived there Wednesday morning at 9 a.m. Shortly thereafter missionaries from Trujillo came from the north to Chimbote with more assistance.
There are several towns in the Andes that could not be reached for eight days after the earthquake. But our brothers loaded two vans with supplies and were the 15th and 16th cars to get to Huaraz. What joy was expressed! They said, “We did not expect you so soon.”
The New York city brothers responded quickly and generously contributed far more clothing than is needed. We have already made two shipments of clothing to Peru and the Society has also provided $20,000 for the branch to use in obtaining whatever is required on the part of our brothers. We are confident that our fellow workers in this stricken area will certainly bring much comfort to those who are distressed, by telling them the message of God’s kingdom.
We have also been told that brothers in Cameroun have been expelled from that country because they refuse to vote. So the missionaries there have been sent to other assignments. The Society received word June 6 from Madagascar that someone there is trying to expel 20 missionaries too. So troubles come to God’s people in more ways than one, but still the preaching of this good news of the Kingdom for a witness will continue.
No matter where God’s people are they look to Jehovah God as their overseer and teacher and they are confident that he will direct them in the service that he has assigned them to do in these “last days.” All of us should persevere in prayer and be of good courage, knowing that we come under the care of our Father in heaven who blesses all with the necessities of life as they continue to serve him.
Your brothers and fellow servants,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

