Presenting the Good News​—Together with Our Families
1 A great truth was uttered by Christ when he said, “A pupil is not above his teacher, but everyone that is perfectly instructed will be like his teacher.” (Luke 6:40) Have you thought about how this principle applies to the parent-child relationship? It really brings into focus some thought-provoking possibilities.
2 Your children, who are your pupils, if well instructed, will become like you, the teacher. If you sound down the truth into their minds and hearts, they will be motivated to serve Jehovah just as you are. They will imitate you in looking to the example of Jesus, the Great Teacher, and will want to be his disciples. In time they will share in all the features of the service, just as you do. Eccl. 12:1; Ps. 148:12, 13; 2 Tim. 3:14, 15.
3 Why not look at it this way? As a parent you send your children off to school to learn reading, writing and arithmetic, and you expect them to make these involved and complicated subjects their own, don’t you? Think of it. If they can learn such difficult things in their early years, should they not also be able to learn a presentation to use from house to house and then progressively be able to share in the back-call and Bible study work? Is it too much to expect of your children? Not really, although admittedly it requires teaching and training on your part if you are a parent.
4 Recently a circuit servant wrote the following to the Society: “There are many instances in this circuit where young publishers, under the age of 12, have started and conducted meaningful Bible studies in school even during study periods, with the teacher’s permission. In one congregation a young sister in her early teens started a Bible study in the Truth book with a classmate last week. During my visit the classmate was at both the Saturday-night meeting and the public talk on Sunday and then stayed for lunch and went with the young sister in the field service in the afternoon to observe. A young sister of ten conducts two home Bible studies and conducts them well. Possibly the parents could show more confidence in the ability of the young and train them for a balanced ministry rather than only to be magazine publishers. Some of the finest publishers in this circuit are young ones​—a pleasure to work with.”
5 How wonderful it is to see properly trained children, withstanding the pressures of our times and sharing regularly with their parents in the lifesaving service of God! What delight such families must bring to the Creator’s heart! And, we might add, they are a delight to all of us who observe them in action.

