Unprecedented Opportunities
1 Have you noticed how worsening world conditions have made it more favorable to discuss the truth with people these days? It is true that many do not listen to our message, but that only proves that the dividing work is getting accomplished. (Matt. 25:31-46) And we rejoice to see this, don’t we? But what happens when we meet those who are inclined toward righteousness? Do they not show that they are anxious to talk to us and that they want answers to their questions? Really, these are days of unprecedented opportunities for witnessing about Jehovah’s kingdom. How happy we can be that we live in such times!
2 Wisely our heavenly Father Jehovah has provided the house-to-house ministry as the most effective means of searching out deserving ones. The “Lamp” book points out on page 85: “This is a type of work that fits the capabilities of each one of us, because it involves talking to just one or two persons at a time, and, at the same time, it is the best way to be sure that no one hungering and thirsting for righteousness is overlooked.”​—Matt. 5:6.
3 However, some circuit and district servants in different parts of the country tell us that support for the house-to-house work is decreasing, and especially so over the weekends. Why is this, brothers? Are some of us losing appreciation for this facet of our ministry? Have we forgotten Paul’s words at Acts 20:20 regarding teaching from house to house? Are we overlooking the fact that the best way to reach people is by calling at their doors?​—Matt. 10:11-13.
4 It is true that the preaching work is done under angelic direction, and how busy the angels must be in directing the work today! (Matt. 24:31; Rev. 14:6, 7) But the question is, Are we individually having a full share in this work? Just think of the blessing we would miss if we did not take full advantage of the house-to-house ministry, especially when we know that this work is fully supported by Jehovah and his holy angels. (1 Cor. 3:9) Certain knowledge of this fact should infuse us with such courage and zeal that no obstacle, regardless of size, will be able to slow us down or stop us from pressing on with the work.
5 Most of us want to engage in the house-to-house work. We have the right motive with regard to Jehovah and sheeplike ones. Some may feel reluctant to engage in it, though, because of not being sure of what to say. If you feel this way about it, why not make an appointment with your book study servant or any other servant so you can enjoy this line privilege. If servants set the example and take the lead in the house-to-house work, a great blessing will result to the congregation. (Matt. 11:1) If advance appointments are made, perhaps for serving together that very weekend, much good can be progressively accomplished in the field of house-to-house training. If you cannot spend long periods of time, spend what you can, for surely this is acceptable to Jehovah.​—Luke 21:2-4.
6 Some of our brothers have morning meetings and have found Sunday afternoon an opportune time to engage in the house-to-house ministry. People are relaxed and often in a good frame of mind and easy to talk to on such occasions. Quite a few of our brothers have found evenings an excellent time to engage in the house-to-house work, and many opportunities have presented themselves for starting home Bible studies, which work helps us to make disciples.
7 Some publishers have suggested to the circuit and district servants that they are too tired at the end of the week to engage in the house-to-house ministry. It is true we live in a pressure-filled world. We all get tired on occasions, don’t we? But we know how much we can do and so we do what we can. The point is that if we make room for this service in our lives, if we realize that this is a never-to-be-repeated work, surely we will have the right mental attitude toward this avenue of service. In some respects too the field service is an antidote for fatigue. It is therapeutic. It puts us in a good frame of mind so that we actually come away from the field ministry refreshed mentally and often physically.
8 In Bible times our brothers Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Isaiah delivered messages to the nation of Israel. They were the prophets of Jehovah in their time. Some of these prophets like Jeremiah were told in advance that nobody would listen to their message. Jehovah said: “You must speak to them all these words, but they will not listen to you; and you must call to them, but they will not answer you.” (Jer. 7:27) Really, could any people to whom we might preach today from house to house be more unreceptive? Yet, despite the attitude of those Israelites, Jeremiah endured. What a fine example this is for us to endure in a satisfying work that offers unlimited opportunities for Kingdom witnessing in these days!
9 Today we are living in the “time of the end.” Deserving ones need to be searched out so that they will not perish in the “great tribulation.” (Matt. 10:11) These days are the last days for this old system and for a never-to-be-repeated work from house to house.
10 An experience that occurred recently here in Brooklyn helps us to be aware of the impact that our work from house to house has on people. An elderly gentleman told one of our brothers who was going from house to house: “I admire you people so much, both young and old. You are the only ones who have the courage to go from house to house with your religious message.” Yes, the house-to-house ministry identifies us as Jehovah’s true servants and gives honest-hearted ones the opportunity to see Christianity in action. Are you personally having a full share in this privilege of service?

