What a Loving Provider!
1 Isn’t it reassuring to reflect on the many provisions that Jehovah constantly makes for us? How numerous they are! For example, we regularly enjoy an abundance of appetizing spiritual food in The Watchtower and Awake! We have five upbuilding meetings each week and we have a splendid organization to coordinate our preaching efforts. Also we have the loving oversight and the helpful direction of our servants and family heads; and every year we have two enjoyable circuit assemblies in addition to a district, national or international assembly.
2 This year it is the “Men of Goodwill” District Assembly. The very name is exciting, isn’t it? By the time you receive this issue of Kingdom Ministry you may well have attended your district assembly. If not, bend every effort to get there and help others in the congregation to be in attendance. You will be glad that you did.
3 It is true that living conditions have really become much more difficult in recent years. This alone has had its effect on many of us. Secular work has become far more demanding and oppressive for some. Inflation is taking its toll. Some of our brothers are working longer hours each day just to make ends meet, and yet amidst these deteriorating conditions we all need to keep our balance, don’t we? What loving provisions Jehovah has made for us so we may endure! By providing the regular meetings and special assemblies he arranges for us to be assembled together to be built up spiritually.
4 Our loving Provider has also given us wonderful equipment to use in the field ministry during July. We will be presenting the “Mystery” book, even as we did during May. Its messages is forceful and timely. No doubt you had fine experiences with this publication during May and enjoyed presenting it. As a suggestion, why not review the supplement to the May Kingdom Ministry now. You will find this information motivating and it will refresh your mind with ideas on presenting the “Mystery” book with clarity and enthusiasm.
5 Sharing as we do in a most urgent work, our schedules are usually very full, and at times we may feel the need to get away and “rest up a bit,” as Jesus and his apostles did. (Mark 6:30, 31) If you plan to take a vacation in connection with attending one of the assemblies, or at some other time, we hope that you will have a fine time. Being away from our regularly scheduled work for a few days is good for our minds and bodies. It can do much to help restore vital physical and emotional energy, and there is no reason to criticize yourself if you do this sometime during the year.
6 Some are planning to vacation pioneer or work in isolated territories or with congregations having large territories not being regularly worked. You might enjoy that too. Perhaps you will choose to tie in your vacation with such plans. Two Bethel couples did this not long ago, working with a small congregation in West Virginia. They had a very fine time. The territory had not been worked for over a year. They were able to talk to just about everyone they met in the territory, placing over 600 pieces of literature in two weeks, and being built up spiritually by the experience.
7 Also it is good to keep in mind the many opportunities to do incidental witnessing during this season of the year, when traveling to and from assemblies, on vacations, etc. If we carry some of the publications with us, we may be able to plant seeds of truth that in time will produce fruitage. At the end of July as the reports are compiled we are sure that your efforts will have contributed toward a fine report, and may Jehovah bless you as we all work to that end.
[Blurb on page 1]
Look for oversight of Jehovah as Shepherd.
[Blurb on page 4]
Be sure to attend a district assembly.

