Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JULY 5
Theme: Reflecting God’s Love. (1 John 4:16-19) Song 81.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: “Jehovah, an Awe-Inspiring yet Loving God.” Talk by mature brother highlighting Jehovah’s love and other marvelous qualities, based on article in March 15, 1970, “Watchtower.”
15 min: “What a Loving Provider!” Questions and answers.
12 min: Making the Most of Our Opportunities. Talk and demonstration.
(3 min.) Chairman: Summer provides ideal time to have full share in field service. Why? There are more hours of daylight and we can extend witnessing into the evening, when most people are home from work and in a relaxed frame of mind. Many congregations need men to take lead. Why not call at time most favorable to get men interested in the truth. One brother who is an overseer and pioneer stated: ‘After supper the people are more relaxed. Women are not afraid to open the door, because their husbands are at home. In this way we are able to start studies with whole families and these can be held on Sunday or in the evening.’ He also remarked that the evening is ‘the best time for the ministry.’
(6 min.) Two book study servants discuss evening witnessing. One discusses local obstacles and attitudes. Other patiently refutes arguments, pointing out people more receptive, man of house at home, find persons who seldom if ever have had a full opportunity to hear the good news, have realization of thoroughly covering territory by making not-at-homes in evening, may start study with entire families. An hour in evening may be worth two or three at other times. Evening hours produce placements, back-calls and Bible studies. Other brother begins to get enthusiastic as discussion continues. He finally decides to talk up evening witnessing at next book study. The two discuss how to have a share in evening witnessing.
(3 min.) Chairman: Suggests working together in evenings where advisable. Any who cannot share in evening witnessing, yet want to spend more time in the field, may spend a full day in service from time to time. Organize according to local circumstances. Those taking care of midweek witnessing arrangements can encourage spending a full day in service. For example, if group spends two or three hours in house-to-house ministry in the mornings, why not spend another hour or two in the afternoons making not-at-homes, back-calls or conducting studies. Always enjoyable and mutually beneficial to get together with vacation and regular pioneers. Asks audience how many would like to try spending a full day in service if it were organized so that many could encourage one another. Suggests those handling midweek witnessing and book study servants arrange for groups to spend full day in service where possible.
 3 min: Accounts report. Briefly commend congregation for material support of Kingdom interests.
10 min: Concluding comments. Cover June report for congregation, “How Did We Do in May?” and slogan on page 4. Song 92.
WEEK STARTING JULY 12
Theme: Work Whole-souled in Jehovah’s Service. (Col. 3:23, 24) Song 64.
10 min: Book study servant calls on irregular meeting attender to encourage meeting attendance, using day’s text and Theocratic News. These two may introduce other parts on the meeting.
15 min: “Unprecedented Opportunities.” Talk and audience discussion.
25 min: Christianity, a Way of Life. A mature brother should handle this part, making it interesting and lively, drawing out the answers from as many different ones in the audience as possible. The Bible may be used to establish Scriptural answers to questions. All are free to use the “Aid” and “Make Sure” books in addition to other reference material. How and when did Christ’s followers come to be called Christians? (ad, p. 316; g67 7/22, p. 27) For what reasons is this name appropriate? (g67 7/22, p. 28) Why are true Christians today called Jehovah’s witnesses? (g67 7/22, p. 28; ms, pp. 81, 270) Show Scripturally that calling oneself a Christian does not make it so. (ms, pp. 83, 84, 98) Why was Christianity called “The Way”? Why was this name fitting, and what other names appropriately describe followers of Christ? (ad, p. 316; w64, pp. 615, 616) How was early Christianity viewed by the world of that time? (ad, p. 317; li, pp. 191, 192; qm, pp. 276-278) What similarities are there between the early Christian congregation and true Christian witnesses of Jehovah today? (qm, pp. 283-287) What differences are there between Jehovah’s Christian witnesses and so-called Christians today? (Consider conduct and doctrines, ms, pp. 78-83, 270-281) What does it mean to be a Christian? (ad, pp. 316, 317; w68, pp. 230, 231)
10 min: Concluding comments. Encourage brothers to keep busy in ministry during summer. Remind all to send in field reports if vacationing at end of month. Song 32.
WEEK STARTING JULY 19
Theme: Keep Watching How You Are Building. (1 Cor. 3:10) Song 70.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
 8 min: Branch Letter. Questions and answers.
10 min: “Why You Ought to Be Forgiving.” Talk by mature brother on material in July 1, 1970, “Watchtower,” pages 387-390. Accent building right relationship with God and with one another.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Together with Our Families.” Questions and answers. Have qualified young publisher demonstrate sermon with monthly offer.
12 min: Sharing Fully in the House-to-House Ministry. Talk using scriptures from “Make Sure,” pp. 277-280, local experiences highlighting importance, and practical discussion of local needs. Build up appreciation for privilege of having regular, weekly share in this service.
10 min: Concluding comments. Also handle appropriate Announcements and consider local experiences in placing the “Mystery” book. Song 73.
WEEK STARTING JULY 26
It would be well to give further emphasis to house-to-house ministry on this meeting by frankly discussing what hinders some from having a greater share in this work and outlining how these problems can be overcome. If there is no need to prepare a fifth meeting, because of attending an assembly, you may adjust the program according to local circumstances.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 2
Theme: Deep Appreciation for Jehovah’s Sacred Things. (Ps. 27:4) Song 82.
10 min: After considering text, family group discusses “Question Box,” taking part of those mentioned in it who wrote about serving where need is greater.
 8 min: Talk on month’s theme.
30 min: Highlights of district assembly. This may be scheduled for another week as appropriate, making necessary adjustments in the program. Include experiences had in connection with the assembly. Audience may be invited to share good things learned.
12 min: Concluding comments. Encourage all to share fully in August activity, placing the “Truth” book and starting studies. Song 119.

