From Our Readers
Difficult Children  It was with heartfelt thanks that I read the November 22, 1994, articles “Understanding Difficult Children.” My son has ADHD (Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder). For years I wondered what I was doing so wrong to have such a very difficult boy. I studied the Bible with him and cared for all his needs, but each day I dreaded waking him up in the morning and later picking him up from school. Hopefully the information will help all those in contact with children who have ADHD.
E. W., United States
I have a very difficult ten-​year-​old son. I have at times felt helpless, depressed, alone, and misunderstood. Thank you so much for giving me hope​—and many practical suggestions.
H. S., South Africa
I cried and cried reading the articles. My son has ADD (Attention Deficit Disorder). Life is so very hard for these children. Still, they are worthy and deserving of dignity and, most of all, love.
B. W., United States
We discovered six months ago that our son suffers from ADHD. At two years of age, he is a real tornado, cannot sit still at Christian meetings, pushes others, runs around, and is always hurting himself. Some have kept their distance from us, and even good friends cannot help but give hurtful comments at times. Thanks for describing the problems in such an understanding way.
R. F., Germany
I am 15 years old and have ADHD. It is very comforting to know that Jehovah understands us and can help us. I am on medication, and it helps a lot. I can concentrate better on my schoolwork, housework, and Bible study. I appreciated the articles because you showed others that this disorder is real and not some fad.
S. K., United States
These articles have helped both of us to put to rest our feelings of inadequacy as parents. Well-​meaning friends have suggested that my son, who suffers from ADHD, is spoiled or “just needs to be spanked.” The articles may help such ones to understand the fix that so many parents are in.
T. G., United States
Creating Jobs  Thank you for the article “Creating Jobs in Developing Countries.” (October 22, 1994) Right now I am attending school and plan to become a pioneer (full-​time evangelizer) when I graduate. The biggest problem will be finding work. Up till now I had wanted a sedentary job where I wouldn’t have to exert myself physically, but I felt ashamed of myself when I learned of how my Christian brothers in developing lands do any work they can. Now I will work at any job that allows me to pioneer.
Y. T., Japan
1914  I have just read your articles “1914​—Gunshots That Still Shake Our World.” (November 8, 1994) I would like to say that I have never read information that was so clear and simple on such a controversial topic. The schools in my country do not go deeply into the history of the world wars, but gaining an understanding of this subject is of great benefit in understanding world events.
W. S., Venezuela
Crossword Puzzles  I want to mention how much I enjoy your crossword puzzles, particularly the one in the December 8, 1994, issue. They incite me to do extra Bible research. The clues are written in such a way as to prompt me to look up the cited scripture​—even though I might already know the answer. Thank you for those wholesome and enjoyable puzzles!
D. S., United States

