Announcements
● Literature offer for January and February: You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, for contribution of $2.50. March: Any two of the following books for a contribution of $1.00: Choosing, Commentary on James, “Eternal Purpose,” Evolution, Holy Spirit, This Life and World Government. April and May: The Watchtower subscription for one year for a contribution of $3.50. Six-month subscriptions are $2.00 each.
● Presiding overseer should arrange to have new MEDICAL ALERT cards distributed at beginning of first Service Meeting in January. Brother handling announcements can give brief reminders concerning its use as expressed in letter dated July 20, 1980. Post letter on information board for a week or two and then return it to congregation file for future reference. Brothers are encouraged to fill out card promptly, having it properly signed, witnessed and dated.
● At circuit assemblies having the new program starting in February, district overseers will give the public talk “Why Submit to God’s Rulership Now?” Starting in February, circuit overseers will give a public talk with the theme “God’s Purpose for Earth and Man.”
● “Will You Escape This World’s Destiny?” is the title of the special public talk to be presented in all congregations on April 1. Congregations attending a circuit assembly or having the visit of the circuit overseer on that date will present the special talk on April 8. The talk should not be given before April 1.
● Regular pioneers on the list since September 1, 1983, and all special pioneers are to be given a free copy of the small edition of the new songbook, Sing Praises to Jehovah. Congregations providing free copies to pioneers may request credit on the monthly Remittance and Credit Request form.
● New Publications Available:
Happiness​—How to Find It—​Hungarian
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Finnish, Japanese
Watch Tower Publications Index, 1976-1980​—Spanish
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth​—Cebuano, Igbo, Iloko, Papiamento
Apply Yourself to Reading and Writing​—French
Good News for All Nations​—Japanese
Is There a God Who Cares?​—Konkani (Kanarese Script), Vietnamese
Kingdom News No. 32​—Chinese, Japanese, Korean

