Improving Our Teaching Ability​—By Effective Use of Illustrations
1 In our teaching work, how can we help people to grasp mentally the spiritual truths from God’s Word? How can individuals be helped to benefit from pointed counsel being studied? How can we help people to meditate deeply on spiritual things and be motivated in their minds and hearts? One way is this: Effective use of verbal illustrations​—using familiar examples to make matters more easily understood.
IMITATE JESUS
2 Jesus was the master Teacher. A close examination of his teaching methods reveals that often he used illustrations to rebuke opposers (Mark 12:12, 17), to counsel his disciples (Matt. 18:1-6; Luke 22:24-27; John 13:3-17) and to determine the attitude of those listening to him. (Matt. 13:10-15; John 6:48-69) However, it seems apparent that the chief aim of Jesus’ illustrations was to teach concerning the Kingdom. (Matt. 13:31-35) Some of Jesus’ illustrations were very short, just a sentence or two. Others were longer.
3 For example, when Peter asked Jesus how many times a brother should be forgiven, did Jesus answer immediately by counseling Peter that he should not keep account of the injury but be loving, merciful and forgiving? No. Rather, Jesus related a simple illustration about a slave who owed a large sum of money to a king. (Matt. 18:21-35) The lesson was made to stand out clearly by contrasting two courses of action. And the conclusion made a direct personal application. What was the effect of this illustration? Even today our hearts are touched when we read and understand its powerful message urging us to be forgiving.​—See United in Worship, page 134, paragraph 9.
PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS
4 But how does one acquire skill and experience in using illustrations? First, review the material in the Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook on “Fitting Illustrations,” pages 168-71. In paragraph 8 on page 169 the Guidebook says: “An illustration should be easily visualized, with not too many elements presented at one time. It should be pointed and concrete.” When assignments are prepared for the Theocratic Ministry School, thoughtful consideration can be given to developing illustrations that are appropriate to the material and to the audience.
5 The ability to use good illustrations comes from being alert to circumstances around us daily. For example, on a very hot day, how refreshing is a tall, cool glass of water! But of what spiritual aspects can this refreshment remind us? Jehovah’s mercy? the waters of truth that we bring to others? the precious association of our brothers? and so forth.
6 Much can be learned from observing how the Society’s publications use illustrations, and on occasion we may repeat some of these with good effect. For example, on pages 32 and 33 of the Live Forever book there is a simple illustration about a man on the wrong road who is examining a map. His need for humbly accepting proper direction is compared to the need of sincere people to accept Jehovah’s direction and align their lives with his Word. On page 36 of the Live Forever book the impossibility of a meat chopper being assembled by having its parts shaken in a washtub well illustrates how the existence of an orderly universe required an intelligent Creator. Remember, simple illustrations are best. Jesus used little things to explain big things, things easy to understand to explain deep spiritual truths.​—Matt. 13:44; 23:24; 24:32, 33.
7 A word of caution: If an illustration is complicated, in bad taste or just does not fit the situation, it should not be used. But if we work at it, we can develop the art of using effective illustrations. They can help us to teach the deep truths of God’s Word and motivate honest-hearted ones to serve Jehovah.

