Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 1
Song 68
 5 min: Appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry and local announcements. Offer brief suggestions for placing current magazines. Remind audience to bring Our Ministry and United in Worship books to next week’s Service Meeting.
25 min: “1984 ‘Kingdom Increase’ District Convention.’” Elder serving as the convention coordinator discusses insert with audience. Utilize question-and-answer method in highlighting key points that will directly affect local congregation. Read cited scriptures and be sure to have capable and well-prepared brother to read paragraphs 1, 6 and 8-11.
15 min: “Keep Guarding Our Christian Trust.” Talk, with some audience participation. Ask brothers why they personally feel (1) the truth and (2) the ministry are a fine trust.
Song 51 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 8
Song 89
 8 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With a Positive Approach.” Question-and-answer discussion. In connection with paragraphs 4 and 5 have a few experienced publishers, from their seats, comment on what they have done, or heard others do, to make their presentations more positive and thus eliminate negatives. These should be assigned in advance.
15 min: “New Book to Be Used for Congregation Study.” Question-and-answer coverage preferably by Congregation Book Study conductor with good teaching ability. Include brief discussion between two book study conductors who desire to encourage thorough advance preparation, including looking up the scriptures.​—See Our Ministry book, pages 74-6.
 7 min: Consider October Service Report from Our Kingdom Ministry. How did congregation do last month? Encourage magazine activity on second Saturday of the month. Bring Our Ministry book for next week’s Service Meeting.
Song 102 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 15
Song 55
 5 min: Local announcements.
10 min: Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry. Talk based on pages 77-81.
15 min: “Improving Our Teaching Ability​—By Effective Use of Illustrations.” Question-and-answer discussion. Paragraphs 4-6 can be covered in discussion between Theocratic Ministry School overseer and a capable publisher, drawing points from Study 34 in School Guidebook. They should apply points to teaching on Bible studies with Live Forever or United in Worship book.
15 min: “1984 Yearbook Highlights Worldwide Increase.” Enthusiastic brief introduction based on first paragraph, pointing to increases as basis for rejoicing. Discuss remainder of article with audience, using question-and-answer method. Commend brothers for zealous participation in Kingdom service and encourage all to read Yearbook personally or in family groups. Remind brothers to bring School brochure for next week’s Service Meeting.
Song 110 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 22
Song 67
 5 min: Local announcements.
30 min: Neutrality Toward Political Affairs. Consideration of material in the School brochure, pages 12-16, under the subject of “Flag Salute, Anthems and Voting.” Have a well-prepared, qualified elder handle this. It is important for us to have our Scriptural position on these issues clearly in mind. Consider the opening portion of this section of the brochure by means of a talk. Jesus’ example and his teachings set the pattern for all Christians, including youths. Consider the significance of John 6:15; 17:16 and Joh 18:36. Also, consider what the textbooks say about the neutral position of early Christians.
Allow sufficient time to discuss the material under the subheadings “The Flag Salute,” “National Anthems and School Songs,” and “Elective Offices and Positions.” Draw attention to the sound Scriptural basis for not saluting and not singing in connection with patriotic services. Help the brothers to reason on whether it is Scripturally proper to stand or not to stand for patriotic services on certain occasions. Reason with the brothers as to why it is appropriate that Witness youths keep free from school politics. Loyalty to God’s organization is shown by such conformity. Highlight such matters in the discussion. The material, after the opening talk, could be handled principally by questions and answers.
10 min: Encourage participation in magazine work on the fourth Saturday. Suggest talking points with two 30- 60-second presentations.
Song 105 and concluding prayer.

