New Book to Be Used for Congregation Study
1 During the week of February 12 we will start to use the new book United in Worship of the Only True God at our Congregation Book Studies. It will provide the basis for very stimulating and practical discussions.
2 As is true of most of our books, there are answers to the majority of the study questions right in the paragraphs. But in this book there are additional questions in smaller type at the end of certain paragraphs, to be answered with the help of cited scriptures. It is recommended that the one who reads the paragraphs for the group also read these questions. If they are read at a moderate pace, this will afford opportunity for those in attendance to consider how they might answer them. Then, in harmony with the instructions at the bottom of the page, the conductor will ask those questions, one at a time, inviting comments from the group. Some in attendance who have quick minds or many years of experience in the truth may quickly volunteer to comment on these points. But it would be a fine thing if the conductor would also give loving encouragement to others to share.
3 Excellent Scripture citations are included with the study material. Do not skip over them. To the extent that time permits, have them read and invite comments on how they apply to the material under discussion. Sometimes several comments may be desired. As pointed out in the first chapter of the book, learning to reason on questions effectively in the light of the Scriptures can contribute to one’s development of God-oriented thinking ability and discernment. (Prov. 5:1, 2; Phil. 1:9-11) These are important abilities for us as Christians.
THOROUGH PREPARATION NEEDED
4 This book has been so designed that we can cover a full chapter each week, but the conductor will need to plan carefully the pace of coverage. In chapters where many scriptures are cited, he should select in advance the ones to be read, and then he may simply invite brief comments on others. The opening paragraphs of a chapter usually do not require as much time as the later ones where more of the “meat” is found. Pages where questions for discussion are included at the end of a paragraph may need more time than others. If comments are kept brief on simpler paragraphs, you will not be rushed in the discussion of portions that require more thought.
5 At the end of each chapter are review questions. These should be of help to conductors. But be careful that comments are not superficial. Encourage participants to put into their own words some of the specific points discussed during the study.
6 We urge all to prepare for the book study in advance, taking time to look up the scriptures. This will enable everyone to contribute and get the most out of the study. May our discussions based on this book, with its emphasis on points taken from the Bible itself, draw us closer together in united worship. Above all, may they build up our appreciation for Jehovah as the only true God, the Universal Sovereign, and the loving Father of all his children.

