Presenting the Good News​—With a Positive Approach
1 A positive mental attitude contributes greatly to a happy and productive ministry. When we preach the good news, whether from house to house, on the streets or elsewhere, we should do so expecting to meet with success. We should approach each person, assuming that he is sheeplike at heart or will at least listen to the Kingdom message. When Jesus sent out his disciples, he offered this counsel: “Wherever you enter into a house say first, ‘May this house have peace.’” (Luke 10:5, 6) They were not to prejudge as to whether “a friend of peace” was in the house or not. A positive approach! How may we display such a positive attitude in our field ministry?
SPEAK WITH CONVICTION
2 One way is to speak the truth with conviction. We are preaching, not just another religion, but the truth that leads to life! We know what the future holds. We know the reasons for man’s present dilemma and what honest-hearted ones must do to learn the solution. This conviction will help us speak like the apostles, whose boldness even their enemies had to acknowledge. Note Acts 4:13, which says: “When they beheld the outspokenness of Peter and John, . . . they began to recognize about them that they used to be with Jesus.”
3 Some publishers may feel they are not qualified to preach the good news. They may think they never will become effective and experienced publishers. They may regard making return visits or conducting Bible studies as something beyond their abilities. However, such negative thinking is counterproductive. Notice how Jehovah corrected Jeremiah’s thinking and encouraged him. (Jer. 1:7) So take a positive approach towards the preaching work, imitate the prophets and the apostles, and you, too, can become more effective in proclaiming the good news.
4 Our manner of expressing ourselves has much to do with reaching the hearts of those who listen. Negative expressions prompt negative replies and so they do not reach a person’s heart or motivate him. Better results will likely be achieved with more positive statements such as: “I am sure you see the value of learning more about the Bible.” Or: “I would like to leave this publication with you. It is an excellent Bible study aid and will certainly be of value to you and your family.”
STRESS POSITIVE INFORMATION
5 In witnessing, we often comment on the world’s problems. But it is usually best to switch quickly to God’s solution and to a description of the blessings that will replace the troubles we see today. For example, the title of the book being offered this month is You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. A positive title! The scriptures for the Topic for Conversation also present a positive view, namely: “Everlasting life is possible” and “We can believe the Bible.” With such statements our presentation of the good news will take on an optimistic tone. If time permits, we could read paragraph 14 on page 14 as we offer the Live Forever book this month. It will add to our positive approach. Similarly, when we offer the magazines, we should look for positive statements that will help the person at the door to see that our message is truly good news.
6 Presenting the good news with a positive approach will also result in personal benefits. It will increase our joy in the field ministry. We will view each person as a potential Bible student, someone who needs the truth. We will not be discouraged when people are unresponsive or when they speak in an unkindly manner. What a blessing it is to have an accurate knowledge of the truth that can set one free. We certainly want to present it in a positive way.

