Announcements
● Literature offer for November: Survival Into a New Earth, for a contribution of $1.00. December: The New World Translation along with any older 192-page book available, for contribution of $3.50, $4.00 or $4.50, depending on which Bible is offered. (See “Looking Ahead to the December Campaign With the Bible” on page 3 of September Our Kingdom Ministry.) The brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! may be offered for a contribution of 30¢, especially to those with reading difficulties or where there are children. January and February: Watchtower subscription for contribution of $4.00. When subscription offer is refused we will offer Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever or Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century with two magazines for a contribution of 70¢.
● 1985 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses: Publishers and pioneers, please order your Yearbooks through your congregation. Congregations should begin collecting requests for these Yearbooks now. Then on November 1, 1984, or as soon as possible thereafter, send this order to the Society using the regular Literature Order form (S-14). The Yearbooks will be available in English as well as Dutch, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese and Spanish. Until the Yearbooks are available and shipments are made, these will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices. Congregations should order only the number of Yearbooks for which there are requests. Payment should not accompany the congregation order. The Yearbooks are controlled stock items and will be charged to the literature account at $1.50 each, which is the rate for publishers and the public. (See September Our Kingdom Ministry, page 4.) Regular and special pioneers on the list before July 1, 1984, may receive a free copy for which the congregation may request credit on the Remittance and Credit Request form (S-20). Pioneers may obtain additional copies at 75¢ each. (Note to presiding overseer: Please have announcement made to the congregation when the Yearbooks are received so that all who ordered can obtain their copies.)
● New Publications Available:
Aid to Bible Understanding, Volume 5 (Jer-Le)​—German
Is the Bible Really the Word of God?​—Tahitian
Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry​—Chinese, Iloko, Tagalog
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth​—Croatian, Icelandic, Indonesian
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Albanian, Dinka, Gilbertese, Idoma
From Kurukshetra to Armageddon​—And Your Survival—​French
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Judges, Ruth (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—English
My Book of Bible Stories (four cassettes in album; congregation and public: $8.00; pioneers: $6.00)​—Greek
● Available Again in U.S.A.:
“This Good News of the Kingdom”​—Cambodian

