Feature Survival Book in November
1 Millions of people today are concerned about survival, and with good reason. Food shortages, pollution, violence and many other life-threatening conditions have caused men to be fearful of what the future holds. And yet, most people who are concerned about survival know little or nothing about an even greater danger. Jesus called it a “tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning.”  (Matt. 24:21) Could there be a more urgent question facing humankind than that of SURVIVAL?
2 What could be more timely in answering that most urgent question than our new book, Survival Into a New Earth? After announcing its release at the “Kingdom Increase” District Conventions this past summer, the speaker said: “Survival has become a major concern in our times. But what confronts mankind is far more awesome than a nuclear war. It is an accounting with the Creator himself. Astounding Bible prophecies show clearly that there will be survivors. . . . This book has been published to help you to be among them.”
HELP FILL AN URGENT NEED
3 But more than publishing a book on survival is involved in filling the most urgent need of people. They must hear about it, obtain it, read and understand it, and then act on the vital information it contains. It was with this in mind that the convention speaker said: “The situation calls for urgent action on the part of all who are to survive. . . . This is a publication that is designed for our use in the field ministry, as well as for our own study.” Yes, brothers, ‘how will they hear without someone to preach?’​—Rom. 10:14.
4 Can you imagine anything more thrilling, more satisfying, than saving a life? But what if you could save your own life while rescuing another person? This would be even more rewarding.​—1 Tim. 4:16.
5 How many lives will be saved as a result of people learning the truth with the aid of this new book? The answer depends to a great extent on the effort we put forth in distributing it and the effectiveness of our presentations. We are featuring it as our literature offer during November for a contribution of $1. The effort that is put forth in sharing this new book with our neighbors, relatives, workmates, classmates or others may depend on a number of things, such as health, age, strength and family responsibilities. To a greater degree, it will depend on our love for others, along with the sense of urgency we feel about their survival.​—2 Tim. 4:2a.
6 The effectiveness of our ministry often hinges on how well informed we are about the book being presented. By now we have had opportunity to read it through. Have we given thought to talking points, quotations or illustrations that would enhance our presentation? The chart on page 27 showing 1914 to be a marked year, along with quotations on page 29 indicating how historians view that year, would appeal to persons concerned about survival. Anticipation for what is required to get the “mark” needed for survival could be raised by discussing the picture on page 95.​—Compare Ezekiel 9:4, 6.
7 The chapter titles will stir the interest of thinking persons. Titles such as “What Will Become of Planet Earth?”, “How Long Will the Present System Last?”, “Act Wisely in the Face of Calamity” and “The Countdown Nears Its Zero Hour!” are among the interest-catching subjects dealt with in the book. Try putting the book into the householder’s hands and ask him which chapter titles interest him most. Those who have tried this with our other publications often found that they got good results.
DO NOT BE DETERRED
8 We all applauded the final comments of the convention speaker when he said: “While there is yet time, may we all seize the opportunity to aid many more to become part of this growing throng of happy Witnesses. . . . When he destroys this wicked world, then, by God’s undeserved kindness, may we be among the survivors into his glorious ‘new earth’!” Let us then seize the opportunity to aid many more by having a full share in distributing the Survival book during November.

