Help New Ones to Share in Kingdom Increase
1 At this time of Kingdom increase we rejoice to see many new ones responding to the good news. As their knowledge and appreciation grow, they start attending meetings and soon want to share what they are learning with others as regular Kingdom publishers. This presents a challenge and an additional responsibility for those of us who already are experienced in field service. New ones need to be encouraged and trained to become effective in the ministry.
2 In the United States during the first nine months of the 1984 service year 22,187 were baptized and a total of 10,625 more were added at the 117 “Kingdom Increase” District Conventions held during June, July and August. Are all these new ones being given personal assistance to help them become effective ministers?
TRAIN THEM FOR FIELD SERVICE
3 Helping new ones to become effective in the ministry is a matter of serious concern. So build on their initial enthusiasm and zeal and help them to become effective in the field. We do not want their initial enthusiasm and zeal to diminish, and this will not happen if we provide the training they need.
4 Training for the field service should start early. Encourage students to share what they have learned with relatives, neighbors, acquaintances and others they know. Let them know that only a few of those they speak to are likely to respond favorably to the good news. (Matt. 7:13, 14) But at the same time, help them to appreciate the joy that comes to the invisible as well as visible parts of God’s organization when even one person listens.​—Luke 15:10.
YOUR PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY
5 Are you presently studying the Bible with someone? Is the person qualified to accompany you in the field service? Once he becomes an approved associate, encourage him to be regular in service each week. Before going out, take a few minutes to prepare. Rehearse the presentations you will use, if working with the magazines; or help him to make a meaningful contribution in a discussion of the regular literature offer. At first, he may wish simply to read one of the scriptures or make a brief comment during the discussion. But, little by little, as you give encouragement and training, he will gain confidence and learn to handle calls on his own.
6 Even after a new one has become regular in service, he still needs your help. Continue to manifest genuine interest in his spiritual progress. That progress includes developing the ability to teach others while he himself is still learning. Be generous and sincere in commending him for his progress. Let him see that you personally have experienced much joy in helping him make spiritual advancement.​—1 Tim. 4:15, 16.
HELP OTHERS ALSO
7 There may be others in the congregation who, although not newly associated, have not received sufficient personal assistance so as to become effective teachers. Because of a lack of training, they may be missing much of the joy that comes from sharing the good news with others. Be alert to help them, too, especially those of you who are elders, pioneers or others who have more experience in the field.
8 Let us make the most of Kingdom increase by working not just to augment the number of publishers but also to develop their effectiveness in making more disciples. This is Jehovah’s way of ‘speeding up’ the gathering for salvation.​—Isa. 60:22.

