Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 4
Song 129
 5 min: Announcements and local announcements.
20 min: “Feature Survival Book in November.” Talk by service overseer or other qualified elder. Help the publishers to present the Survival book effectively by highlighting talking points. Some may simply want to read the statement from “The Publishers” on page 2. Chapters 1 through 7 are especially designed for the public. Excerpts from the opening paragraphs of any of these chapters that blend with the Topic for Conversation could be read to a householder. Pictures such as those on pages 4 and 5, 33 or 41 could be featured. Paragraph 7 of chapter 1 could be used when we meet those who do not accept the Bible as authoritative. Offer the book not only in house-to-house work but also on return visits and to those studying.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With the November Magazines.” Discuss by use of questions. Have three short demonstrations by well-prepared publishers using the presentations in paragraphs 3-5. Go through the magazines with audience and discuss other talking points. Encourage support for magazine work on second Saturday, November 10.
Song 126 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 11
Song 164
 8 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report for October.
20 min: “Help New Ones to Share in Kingdom Increase.” Discuss by use of questions. After discussion of paragraph 5, have a brief demonstration of effective Witness helping new one prepare before going out in field service. Preparation should be for house-to-house witnessing using current Topic for Conversation.
17 min: “Training Our Children to Serve Jehovah.” Discussion between two family heads, preferably one with grade-school children and the other with teenagers. After discussing the points in the first two paragraphs, one father mentions a situation with children that requires special help from parents, such as flag ceremony at school (or some other current problem in your area). Invites audience to watch as he demonstrates how he assisted his grade-school children to cope with this matter. (Use information from Great Teacher and/​or Bible Stories books.) As demonstration concludes, teenage child of other father comes on stage and asks father a question about observing national thanksgiving day this month. Father invites child to sit down and read last two paragraphs on page 21 of School brochure. Child gets point. Father points out that Society’s Index for 1966-70 refers us to fine article in November 8, 1969, Awake! with detailed information on the holiday. Suggests child read article and later let whole family know what he learns. Family heads conclude discussion, emphasizing need for all parents to take necessary steps to assist children with problems by using publications provided.
Song 183 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 18
Song 99
12 min: Local announcements. Discuss fourth Saturday magazine work, November 24. Review points from paragraph 5 of Presenting the Good News on how to feature the November 22 Awake! Discuss some talking points in December 1 Watchtower.
15 min: Question Box. Two brothers on platform discuss article. Tie in suggestions and counsel that would apply locally regarding Kingdom Hall security.
18 min: Arrange in accord with local needs, or give service talk on subject “Do Not Shrink Back.” (w84 10/1 p. 29)
Song 190 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 25
Song 157
10 min: Local announcements. Discuss December literature offer briefly. Encourage support for field service on first Sunday of month.
20 min: “Help Your Young Ones to Be Close to God.” Talk based on The Watchtower. (w84 8/1 pp. 5-7) Include experiences from article “A ‘Special Territory.’” (w84 7/15 p. 7) Encourage young publishers to view their classmates and teachers as their “special territory.” Entertain experiences from young publishers on what they have done in school to preach the good news of the Kingdom.
15 min: Youths​—Do Not Be Deceived. Talk and demonstration. As pointed out at “Kingdom Increase” District Conventions, young ones are special target of Satan. He picks on less experienced, seducing them as he did Eve. Deceives youth by enticements, allurements, temptations. Promotes idea youth are missing out on something. Cultivates selfish desire to ‘do own thing,’ decide for self what is good, bad. We must beware of his “crafty acts.” (Eph. 6:11, Int) He makes ways of world, such as sexual immorality, smoking, drug abuse, association with nonbelievers and worldly entertainment, look attractive. Makes such appear harmless, as fruit on tree appeared to Eve. Jehovah makes provisions to protect youths from being deceived: Youth and Great Teacher books, School brochure, Awake! feature “Young People Ask,” meetings, assemblies, parents and elders. At this point introduce scene where teenage boy wanting to discuss a problem approaches an elder. His father will not let him participate in organized sports in school. He wants to know if it is really all that bad. Elder, in kind and understanding way, suggests that they speak to the father and set a time when they can review the information in chapter 16 of the Youth book. He shows boy the chapter and suggests he read it over beforehand. All agree. Conclude with comments on how much elders, parents and organization love our faithful young ministers. Our interest is in protecting them from Satan’s designs. (2 Cor. 11:3) Encourage youth and parents to use and be guided by the counsel from the discreet slave.
Song 221 and concluding prayer.

