Presenting the Good News​—With the November Magazines
1 Ponder these questions: Why has our generation seen such an increase in violence? Why does widespread prejudice exist in an “age of enlightenment”? By what means will prejudice be totally eliminated? Why is it becoming increasingly difficult for men and nations to agree on anything? What priceless inheritance is available to all, and how can we make sure it is not lost? Do you have an open mind? What are the advantages of having an open mind and the disadvantages of a closed mind? These are a few of the questions that will be answered in the November issues of The Watchtower and Awake!
2 Just thinking on the questions propounded should convince us that the November magazines contain information vitally needed by everyone who longs for a better world. The articles are informative and sure to give honest-hearted ones much to think about. So what can we say in order to convince the people in our territory that we have something for them that is essential for their future happiness?
3 In presenting the November 8, 1984, Awake!, after giving your name, you might say, “Some have noticed that prejudice is still a major problem in our society, despite the well-meaning efforts of governments and individuals. Many have had a problem with this in one way or another. This issue of Awake! presents a balanced view of the subject and shares some real-life experiences of those who were helped by the Bible to overcome their prejudices.” Or, if a young person comes to the door, you may prefer to feature the article “Is There Anything I Can Watch on TV?” in the series “Young People Ask . . . ”
4 The cover of the November 15, 1984, Watchtower highlights the question: “Our Critical Times​—Is There a Cure?” In presenting this issue, you could say, “I am sure you will agree that any reasonable person would like to live in a world of peace and security. And yet, why is it that people and nations seem to find it increasingly difficult to agree on anything? This issue of The Watchtower shows how the Bible predicted this situation and, better still, it reveals God’s sure remedy.”
5 “An Open or a Closed Mind​—Which Do You Have?” is the first in a three-part series of articles in the November 22, 1984, Awake! To stimulate the householder’s interest, you might state the following: “We live in an age when many people pride themselves on being open-minded, willing to accept differing points of view. And yet, evidence shows that just about everyone has his mind closed to one or more subjects at one time or another. What are the advantages of having an open mind? I think you will enjoy the comprehensive discussion of this subject in this issue of Awake!”
6 Of course, with any of the magazines referred to, you may prefer to feature an article other than what has been suggested above. The important thing to remember is to keep the presentation simple and get directly to the point. Too much time spent on a long introduction may result in the door being closed before you are able to talk about the article you planned to present. This would also be true if you are making your presentation through a closed door, a situation becoming increasingly common in areas where people are fearful of opening doors to strangers.
7 For over 100 years now Jehovah’s people have received ‘Scriptural comfort’ through the magazines published by the Society. (Rom. 15:4) With this time of the end rapidly drawing to a close, do we not want to increase our efforts to get the magazines into the hands of as many people as possible? Surely we do! We want to reflect Jehovah’s thinking, for “he does not desire any to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.” (2 Pet. 3:9) Nowhere else on earth do we find publications like The Watchtower and Awake! that are exclusively devoted to proclaiming the good news of the Kingdom and to honoring Jehovah’s great name. Let us use them to the full.

