Question Box
● How can we give attention to Kingdom Hall security?
In view of these critical times we need to use sound judgment in regard to Kingdom Hall security. Just as we take precautions in seeing that our homes are safe and secure, we should likewise do with our Kingdom Halls. It is the responsibility of the elders to see that each Kingdom Hall has adequate security. This need is evident as we see more vandalism and theft being reported at halls in various places.
Basic to good security would be the careful closing and locking of all doors, gates and windows after each use of the Kingdom Hall. Responsible, reliable brothers should be in charge of such security arrangements each time the hall is used. This should include times when the hall is used for some purpose other than regular congregation meetings, such as a wedding or when cleaning.
If a Kingdom Hall has a parking area, it is suggested that such be well lighted at appropriate times. This will reduce vandalism to automobiles and possible injury or harm to brothers and sisters when leaving the hall. Some congregations have found it advisable to have brothers alternating as attendants outside the hall during meetings in order to check on parked cars to prevent theft and vandalism.
Some congregations find it necessary to lock doors during meetings. In those extreme cases where this is deemed necessary, reliable attendants should be at the door at all times to monitor those entering the hall. The body of elders should determine what measures are appropriate in accord with local laws governing public meeting places. If such an arrangement is instituted, the congregation should be made aware of this beforehand so they will know the Kingdom Hall entrance will be kept locked.
We want the brothers and newly interested ones to feel secure when attending meetings at the Kingdom Hall and we want to protect the property from vandalism and theft. So the elders in each congregation should consider the circumstances that prevail locally and then act in harmony with such in order to protect property and help to ensure the safety of those at the meetings.

