Training Our Children to Serve Jehovah
1 As you look around the Kingdom Hall, take special note of the young brothers and sisters who make such a fine contribution to the spirit of the congregation. Are we not grateful that they have remembered their Grand Creator in the days of their youth? (Eccl. 12:1) Likely such exemplary young men and women are the result of much training and effort, and we need only to inquire of their parents to confirm this. What, though, is involved in training up a boy or a girl in the right way?​—Prov. 22:6.
2 Of course, each family head should arrange for a regular family study that includes the children. This is part of providing in a spiritual way for ‘those who are our own.’ (1 Tim. 5:8) Effort should be made to involve even the very young ones with an occasional simple question on a point they can grasp. A parent may report up to one hour each week when studying with his or her undedicated children. (See om p. 104 par. 1.) But obviously more is needed to “train up” our children than a weekly Bible study. There is the day-by-day inculcating of Bible principles and the building of appreciation for Jehovah and his Son. This requires much time and effort on the part of both God-fearing parents. Though this time is not reported as field service, it surely counts toward gaining God’s approval and everlasting life.​—Deut. 6:6, 7; Eph. 6:4.
PROVIDING SPECIAL HELP
3 Although it is necessary to teach our children the “primary doctrine,” there are times when children need specialized help due to circumstances that arise in their lives. (Compare Hebrews 6:1, 2.) When difficult situations, problems and tests confront them in school, in the neighborhood or even in the congregation, parents must give their children spiritual direction and training in addition to the family Bible study. At times the study itself can be tailored to fit a particular problem at hand. For example, what if a young child is experiencing pressure to engage in the flag-salute ceremony at school? There is excellent material parents can use in chapter 34 of Listening to the Great Teacher, as well as story 77 in My Book of Bible Stories or the information on pages 12-16 of the School brochure. Or it may be very tempting for young children to share in birthday or holiday parties at school. Why not discuss with them chapter 30 in the Great Teacher book or pages 17-21 of the School brochure? These publications are specially useful in teaching and for drawing out what is in the heart of our young ones.​—Prov. 20:5; w81 11/1 p. 14; g81 4/8 p. 10.
4 Older children and teenagers are often drawn to school sports and other extracurricular activities. If this becomes a problem, you may wish to use the fine material in chapter 16 of Your Youth​—Getting the Best out of It. There is also helpful information on pages 22 and 23 of the brochure School and Jehovah’s Witnesses. The loose moral atmosphere prevalent today also presents our children with tests involving alcohol, drugs and immoral sex. Have you parents taken the initiative to discuss chapters 14, 15 and 18 of the Youth book with your children? These topics are also covered in the School brochure.
5 Surely all of us want our children to serve Jehovah. They need to develop a relationship with Jehovah that will see them through these critical days and on into God’s new system of things. Jehovah’s organization has lovingly provided us with valuable aids to accomplish this. Make full use of the School brochure, the Great Teacher, Bible Stories and Youth books to provide your child with the training he or she needs. Then may it be your experience that “even when he grows old he will not turn aside from it.”​—Prov. 22:6.

