Benefiting Even More
1 Have you thought about the recent adjustments in the congregational book study and Watchtower study? These meetings have been slightly modified, putting us all in position to benefit even more.
2 Since December, in our book study we have been following a schedule set out in Our Kingdom Service. The schedule for January is in this issue. It is hoped that this has helped you. How? In the past we did not know exactly how far to study ahead in preparing for the book study. As a result there could have been a bit of laxness in preparation as a person got toward the final pages of the material that might be covered in the meeting. Did you ever observe that? But now we know precisely what pages to study, so we can give our full attention to all the material; we can be thoroughly prepared.
3 Furthermore, each designated lesson is a logical section. Thus there is more unity and coherence as a complete section of related material is considered during a study. We will not find that we have to stop at some awkward point, and the next week begin in the middle of a line of reasoning.
USE YOUR BIBLE
4 To some extent the number of Bible texts in a portion of material has had a bearing on the length of the assignment for the week. Do you appreciate what this means? As we prepare we can look up the citations, planning to work some of the texts into our comments. And the conductor will be able to include cited verses in the discussion. Consequently we will be using the Bible more.
5 As to the Watchtower study, have you noted that in the past few months the lessons have often been shorter than in years gone by, actually about 20 percent shorter? This is intentional. Now, while still completing the study in an hour, we will have more time to savor fine points in the lesson and to make comments of application. There will be less of a feeling of rushing as we consider choice Scriptural material. And, as with the book study, we will be able to look up cited verses and incorporate them in our answers. Hence the meetings will be much more a study of God’s Word, which is so beneficial.—2 Tim. 3:16, 17.
6 Certainly those who have the joy of conducting these meetings can take advantage of the adjustments to help their brothers to know and use the Bible more. And all of us can look upon these changes as a means to make the meetings more interesting and worth while for all in attendance.

