Endure in Work That Is Good
1 Those worshiping Jehovah exclusively have always needed endurance. This wicked system under Satan’s control has been relentless in its opposition. If not suffering outright persecution, we have needed endurance just to persevere in right works while waiting. The year’s text has meaning for each of us: “You have need of endurance, in order that . . . you may receive the fulfillment of the promise.” (Heb. 10:36) Volumes could be written about the uncompromising endurance of true Christians.
2 In modern times, the Watchtower magazine has played an important role as an aid to Christian endurance. It has faithfully provided strengthening Bible instruction. (Prov. 4:18) Hundreds of thousands of sincere people the world over have expressed appreciation for its help. Because of Jehovah’s backing and the determination of his people, it has maintained unbroken publication since 1879.
USING “THE WATCHTOWER” TO HELP OTHERS
3 January will mark the beginning of the thirty-ninth annual Watchtower campaign. This year arrangements have been made to feature the subscription offer during the months of January, April and July instead of from January through April. The subscription offer on a contribution of $1.50 will include the three new booklets released last year. We will emphasize starting studies wherever possible. It will be quite appropriate to offer subscriptions for both magazines for $3.00 where there is interest. Also, magazine work presents many opportunities to offer the subscriptions, especially to individuals who accept the magazines regularly.
4 Keep in mind that the real purpose behind our work is to stimulate interest in the Bible. It is God’s Word that people must come to respect and understand. The Watchtower will help them to do that. To assist you to focus attention on the Bible, the opening article in each January issue will feature a discussion on a Bible text that you may find helpful in starting conversations.
5 You might want to use a presentation like this: “Wouldn’t you like to see more people live by the Bible? We are interested in cultivating greater faith in it as God’s Word. The uncertainty so many feel about the future is enough to convince us that there is a need for that. Wisdom from God, written long ago in the Bible, provides reliable guidance to lead us to a happy future.” (Read Proverbs 3:5, 6; refer to opening article, January 1 Watchtower.) If there is opportunity to start a study, continue the discussion, referring to page 3 of the booklet “A Secure Future—How You Can Find It.”
6 Without endurance no one can survive the coming tribulation. An understanding of the Bible and a determination to be guided by it are critical needs. Jehovah will reward those who maintain “endurance in work that is good.” (Rom. 2:7) Keeping ourselves busy in the work of teaching and helping others will aid all toward endurance.—Jas. 1:4.

