Getting More from Public Talks
1 Back in January 1945 public talks in person became a regular part of our weekly meetings. They have since contributed significantly toward our expanding program of Bible education. The outlines provided have covered a wide range of topics, including doctrinal subjects. More recent outlines deal with everyday problems, exploring the proper application of Bible principles. More than one hundred outlines are available. Additionally, congregations may arrange other talks periodically to fill local needs.
2 If we “pay more than the usual attention, “there is much we can learn that will aid us. (Heb. 2:1) It is helpful for listeners to follow the reading of texts in the Bible. Taking brief notes can provide a handy reference for review later. Also, to grasp new points we can compare our knowledge of the subject with what we are learning from the speaker. It is good to think about specific situations where Bible counsel or principles can be applied in our life.
USING WHAT WE LEARN
3 We recently had public talks that reviewed material in the Good News and Holy Spirit books. Were you alert to note specific points mentioned by the speaker? And have you since been able to put these to good use? Here are some examples:
4 Doctrinal subjects: One of the talks drew attention to pages 148, 149 of the Good News book, which highlights the fulfillment of the “sign” Jesus gave. (Matt. 24:3–25:46; Luke 21:7-36) It also considered page 145, which outlines 38 prophecies proving Jesus to be the Messiah. Another covered the material on page 83 that you might use to convince a skeptical person that the Flood actually occurred. If you were listening closely to the discussion of pages 12-15 of the Holy Spirit book, you probably gained additional proof on why there is no basis to believe that the holy spirit is part of a triune God.
5 Shepherding: Some of the talks presented Scriptural thoughts that the elders can use in their shepherding work. The discussion on chapter 15 in the Good News book might provide basis for some encouragement that could help one avoid a variety of pitfalls. Or, a brother depressed with a personal problem might be refreshed to hear you relate details you remembered from the talk describing the paradise discussed in chapter 16. The material in the talk based on pages 132-137 of the Holy Spirit book can be used to explain how God’s spirit acts as an “intercessor,” which might be just what is needed to help a person who feels his prayers are hindered.
6 Answering questions: Public talks provide you with answers to questions that come up in Bible discussions. Do you recall how the speaker, when reviewing pages 127-132 of the Holy Spirit book, explained how an individual knows he has been spirit begotten? Have persons asked how Moses obtained details about the record of creation and events transpiring in Eden? Very likely that was answered by the speaker in his comments on page 16 of the Good News book.
7 These are just a few examples to show how public talks can help us tap a storehouse of information. If you cultivate an interest and pay close attention, you can acquire a wealth of Bible knowledge that you can use for the benefit of yourself and others. Each time you attend the public talk in your congregation, remember the proverb: “A wise person will listen and take in more instruction.”—Prov. 1:5.

