Presenting the Good News—To Those Who Have Lost Faith in Religion
1 In recent years, more and more people have expressed a lack of confidence in religion. Questions have been raised about the existence of God and the value of any form of religious worship. What could we say in a tactful way that might help these people to listen to our message?
2 In many cases, the individual has simply been disillusioned when he found himself surrounded by hypocrisy and falsehood. Having little Bible knowledge, he was unable to defend his faith. He may be surprised to know it if you were formerly part of a religion like that but lost your faith in it. Mentioning this might give you an opportunity to tell him about what you have found as an alternative.
3 You may be able to explain that the failure of organized religion to give him a satisfying hope should not be a cause for him to abandon worship of God. The Bible shows there is true religion and there is false religion; Jesus said that he would tell many professing Christians to “get away from me.” Only those on the ‘cramped road . . . doing the will of my Father’ would have his favor. (Matt. 7:14, 21-23) It is wise to abandon false religion, in fact, we are commanded to do so.—Rev. 18:4.
4 Simple logic indicates that there must be a powerful Being responsible for the marvelous universe. We are part of what exists, so it is only reasonable that we try to understand the role we play and what we must do to live in harmony with everything else. That, very simply, is what the true religion will teach us. An attempt to ignore that will simply leave us confused and without any reliable hope.
5 His faith in the Bible may have been undermined, making him reluctant to accept it. Yet, he may be able to see that there are certain laws, rules of ethics and inclinations of conscience that have been proved sound, harmonizing with the makeup of man and the laws of nature. These are invariably in full accord with principles found in the Bible. Most lawmakers admit that Bible instruction surpasses human wisdom. Its pages reveal the only satisfactory explanation as to the origin of man, his purpose on this earth and the remedy for the problems that distress him.
6 There is a genuine religion that can be easily identified by the good that it produces. It teaches people to love one another. (John 13:35) Personalities are changed, people stripping off what is bad and unclean. (Col. 3:5-10) Those formerly violent are taught how to live in peace. (Isa. 2:2-4) Families are drawn together in a warm, enduring relationship. (Eph. 5:22-33) There are more than two million people earth wide who are enjoying these benefits.
7 You may encounter irreligious persons who hold views bordering on atheism, which they readily expound to others at great length. Do not waste time in useless talk where there is no appreciation for what is good. (Matt. 7:6) On the other hand, if someone shows he is open-minded and desires to learn, do what you can to help him to appreciate the pure worship that has moved you to call at his home.—Rom. 10:13-15.

