Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 2
15 min: Song 39 Local announcements. Short talk reviewing the importance of handling subscriptions accurately and promptly. January marks the beginning of another Watchtower campaign. To ensure proper handling of subscriptions, all are asked: (1) Submit subscription slips in duplicate, doing so at the first meeting after they are obtained. (2) Congregation should send in all subscriptions each week. Always send the remittance form with the subscription slips. (3) When doing so, mark the envelope MAGAZINES. Addresses must be accurate and complete. For every magazine mailed out that is undeliverable, the Post Office charges the Society 25 cents. At the rate such magazines have been returned in the past, this expense could exceed $45,000 a year. Your cooperation will be much appreciated. Also discuss article “Replying to Critics.”
15 min: Discuss article “Endure in Work That Is Good.” Highlight yeartext. Build up enthusiasm for subscription campaign, including one or two brief demonstrations of presentations.
15 min: Using Booklets to Start Studies. The three booklets Is There a God Who Cares?, A Secure Future—How You Can Find It and There Is Much More to Life! will be used again in conjunction with the Watchtower subscription offer, with emphasis on starting studies. We have received suggestions from experienced brothers that you may find helpful: Success in starting studies begins with building up your own desire to help other people. Preparing what you are going to say is also an important factor. An informal approach designed to initiate a friendly conversation usually gets good results. Familiarize yourself with the contents of the booklets, selecting interesting points in the one you want to feature. Here are some ways that have been used to start studies using Is There a God Who Cares?: A sister built her presentation around this introduction: “I have been a Bible reader for many years and have been delighted with the way this booklet has dealt with a question that many people have asked about: ‘Why has God permitted wickedness?’” (Refer to page 18, paragraph 23.) Another asks the question posed in the title, then refers to the Scriptural answer in 1 Peter 5:6, 7 at the end of page 31. Another used just the illustration on pages 6 and 7, showing that man, not God, is responsible for human suffering. All favored use of the Bible with texts marked for handy reference. As time permits, include one or two brief presentations. If local response favors using a different booklet, discuss that instead, offering suggestions for presentation.
15 min: Scriptural Discussion: Generosity (ad 642; 12/8/76 Awake! pp. 27, 28). A talk showing how generosity is connected with the fruitage of Jehovah’s spirit and how in practical terms we can display it. Show how the generous giving of ourselves in the activity for January is a fine display of our Christian generosity. Song 108.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 9
12 min: Song 72. Review highlights of Branch Letter, Theocratic News and Announcements. Include local announcements.
18 min: Getting to Know Our Youths. Elder (preferably a father) has variety of youths come to platform one at a time; warmly draws each one out on some of these questions, which they have been given beforehand: What do you like most about the meetings? Why? Have you found the Youth book helpful? In what way? What was the biggest problem you have faced? How did you handle it? Would you enjoy adults talking more with you? About what? What do you think adults in the congregation could do to help you? Is there something that you have especially enjoyed reading in theocratic literature? What do you do when a youth at school wants you to join in something bad? Help young ones see we are interested in them and their feelings.
15 min: Upbuilding talk on article “Social Events Need Christian Moderation” from Watchtower of May 1, 1969. (Also, 7/74 Kingdom Ministry) Develop in kindly way, not criticizing or making rules. Help all to appreciate that moderation in any social event makes things more pleasant by avoiding distressing excesses or causes for stumbling. (Rom. 14:21; Titus 2:12) Mention where the article is published so it can be referred to when social events are being planned.
15 min: “Is Your Home Available?” Discuss article reviewing any need of this type locally. Mention main points discussed in Question Box. Encourage all to bring “Make Sure” and 1977 Yearbook next week. Song 55.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 16
20 min: Song 10. Announcements. Discussion with some questions on 1977 Yearbook, pages 1-32. Tie in comments about need for Kingdom-preaching work. Direct attention to interesting points in this section of Yearbook, drawing out audience response. Encourage all to read Yearbook.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News—To Those Who Have Lost Faith in Religion.” Question-and-answer coverage. As time permits, let audience explain what they have used, or refer to good points that could be used from Is There a God Who Cares?
18 min: Using “Make Sure” with benefit. Describe its features: List of subjects, subheadings that outline a subject and extensive index. Using a subject that many have encountered in field, briefly run through outline in “Make Sure,” stressing how useful it can be. One or two brief demonstrations on topics that arise locally (perhaps Sabbath, Immortality or Holidays). These should be kept simple, perhaps drawing one or two key texts from “Make Sure.” If we have “Make Sure” with us and use it in service it may aid us to carry out 1 Peter 3:15 more effectively.
 7 min: Comment on any good report about the progress of the Watchtower campaign or relate a good experience in starting studies. Song 66.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 23
Meetings That Incite to Love and Fine Works.—Heb. 10:23-25.
12 min: Song 5. Local announcements. Explain how meetings play vital role in our worship. Each one of us has been personally instructed, trained by them. A primary means to keep us strong, alert, active in the work. All share responsibility in making them lively, instructive, beneficial. Include item from 1977 Yearbook showing benefit of meetings. (Page 43, pars. 2, 3)
17 min: “Benefiting Even More.” Discuss with audience.
15 min: “Getting More from Public Talks.” Questions and answers. Have publisher, prepared in advance, demonstrate how something learned in a recent public talk was used beneficially.
16 min: What All of Us Can Do. Get comments from the audience on the following: (1) Why is it important that we fulfill our assignments? (2) How does rehearsal add to the effectiveness of parts involving more than one? (3) What benefits come from having different ones, including children, participate? (4) What can we do individually to encourage and assist others to share? (5) What are some common distractions during meetings and what can we do about them? (6) What will help us pay closer attention? (7) Why should we comment in our own words? Song 36.

