From Our Readers
Kidneys  I want to tell you how moved I was by the article “Your Kidneys—A Filter for Life.” (August 8, 1997) My doctor has informed me that I have a kidney problem. Because of the article, I feel less alone in my sickness now.
V. M., United States
I have a kidney disease for which I was hospitalized for four months. Reading your article helped me realize how ignorant I was of my body. Now I can better explain my condition to others.
S. H., Japan
This article arrived at a time when my wife was told that she had kidney cancer. While the diagnosis was a shock to us, we were able to understand clearly the various functions of the kidney when this was explained to us by the surgeon. My wife had a nephrectomy and is now recuperating from the surgery.
G. S., India
Sculptor’s Story  It warmed my heart to read “Something Better Than World Acclaim,” the experience of Celo Pertot. (August 22, 1997) Before becoming a Christian, I was pursuing a career in music and theater. The night before my baptism, I received a call from the writers of a popular television series. When I told them that I was no longer an entertainer, they said, “Are you crazy?” Like Celo Pertot, I feel that Jehovah has blessed my decision in a grand way.
R. F., United States
Russian Theologian  Thank you so much for printing the article “Jehovah’s Witnesses in Russia.” (August 22, 1997) I have much respect and admiration for Sergei Ivanenko for having the courage and desire to print the truth about Jehovah’s Witnesses.
S. M., United States
Hate  The series “Why So Much Hate? Why So Little Love?” (September 8, 1997) had one of the best covers you have ever printed. The articles helped me to see more clearly why people distrust strangers and people from different cultures.
J. M., United States
RSD—Painful Disorder  I feel it is my duty to write to you after reading the article “RSD—A Puzzling, Painful Disorder.” (September 8, 1997) In January, I learned that I have RSD. I tried to find some information on it. I was therefore in tears when I saw this article. It was practical, and it answered many of my questions.
W. B., England
I have been suffering from RSD for four years. Thank you for taking the trouble to do thorough research on this subject. It really showed neighborly love on your part.
G. S., Germany
My husband suffers from RSD, and we were finding it very hard to explain the disease to other people. Now that it has been discussed so thoroughly in the article, this has become a lot easier for us. We have also passed this material on to doctors and rehabilitation offices. Reading the account of Karen Orf’s struggle with RSD was like reading my husband’s life! Like Karen, we look forward to the new world, where there will be no more pain.
K. P., Australia
I thank Karen for her story. She is in my thoughts and prayers, and I hope she continues to progress. RSD affects my back and legs down to the soles of my feet. Sitting at meetings and walking in the field ministry cause me great discomfort and pain. However, with Jehovah’s support, this has not deterred me.
C. K., England

