Metamorphosis—Is Seeing Believing?
BY AWAKE! CORRESPONDENT IN THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
THE witch doctor was dead. But to many in the crowd gathered outside his home, he had merely been transformed. For at the moment of his death, a huge python could be seen slithering out the door of his house! To some, this was just a coincidence. But to others, it was convincing proof that the witch doctor had been changed into a python—metamorphosed!
In many parts of Africa, the idea that a human can change or be changed into an animal is deep-rooted. Sorcerers are often believed to have the power to assume the shape of leopards and pythons. Fear that a sorcerer can transform others into animals is likewise widespread. In western Africa it is held that witches can send out the spirits of humans through birds and other animals in order to inflict harm. In central Africa some will not kill an elephant or a serpent, out of fear that a dead relative may have been changed into one of these animals.
While beliefs like these may seem strange to some readers, many Africans feel that such metamorphoses have been verified by eyewitnesses. They argue that the numerous stories recounted by rational people could hardly be chance happenings.
It is also a fact that similar beliefs can be found throughout the world. In Japan, for example, the belief exists that humans can become possessed by foxes, dogs, and badgers. European folklore likewise contains tales of men who are transformed at night into murderous werewolves. In other parts of the world, there are tales of tigers, boars, crocodiles, and even cats that can switch between human and animal form.
Supported by the Scriptures?
Some even claim that the Scriptures themselves endorse belief in supernatural metamorphosis. Four Bible accounts are often cited as proof. In the first, Jesus expelled demons from two men, and after they were expelled, the demons entered a herd of swine. (Matthew 8:28-33) In the second, recorded at Numbers 22:26-35, Balaam’s ass spoke to him. In the third, perhaps the most well-known of these accounts, a serpent spoke to Eve in the garden of Eden.—Genesis 3:1-5.
A close look at these accounts, however, reveals that they are definitely not examples of metamorphosis. Take the case of the demon-possessed swine. The Bible does not say that these swine were people who had been transformed into animals. No, the account says that before their possession the “herd of many swine was at pasture.” (Matthew 8:30) Satan’s demons, not the spirits of humans, entered the swine.
What about Balaam’s ass and the serpent in Eden? In the former case, the Bible specifically says that “Jehovah opened the mouth of the ass” so that it could speak. (Numbers 22:28) It was no metamorphosed human. And as for the serpent in Eden, the Bible identifies the wicked spirit named Satan the Devil as “the original serpent.” (Revelation 12:9) It was Satan who spoke through the serpent and “seduced Eve by its cunning.” (2 Corinthians 11:3) Yes, both Balaam’s ass and the serpent were animals—before, while, and after they spoke.
A fourth account is often cited regarding the haughty king of Babylon Nebuchadnezzar. The Bible says that God humbled Nebuchadnezzar. His “very heart was made like that of a beast, and with the wild asses his dwelling was. Vegetation they would give him to eat just like bulls, and with the dew of the heavens his own body got to be wet, until he knew that the Most High God is Ruler in the kingdom of mankind.” (Daniel 5:21) During his seven years of insanity, Nebuchadnezzar looked and behaved like a beast. According to Daniel 4:33, “his very hair grew long just like eagles’ feathers and his nails like birds’ claws.” Even so, the king never really sprouted feathers or claws. He remained human!
The idea of supernatural metamorphosis goes directly against Bible teachings. For one thing, the Bible shows that man does not have a separate soul that could inhabit an animal. Rather, man himself is “a living soul”! (Genesis 2:7) Metamorphosis also works against the natural order of things that was put in place by Jehovah God. Animals were made to reproduce “according to their kinds.” (Genesis 1:24, 25) Because of the genetic boundaries God has set in place, it is not possible for different kinds, or major groupings, of animals to mate and reproduce. An even greater gulf exists between animals and man, who was made ‘in God’s image.’ (Genesis 1:26) Certainly, God would not make a mockery of his own laws by granting men the power to transform themselves into unreasoning animals.
True, metamorphosis can be observed in nature. Caterpillars become butterflies, and tadpoles become frogs. Close observation shows, however, that these examples of metamorphosis do not involve a change of “kinds” but are simply stages of development within the same “kind.” When the adult stage has been reached, they will reproduce “according to their kinds.”
Seeing Is Not Always Believing
How, then, are we to account for the eyewitnesses who claim that they have witnessed supernatural metamorphosis? Clearly, this is just another example of “the operation of Satan with every powerful work and lying signs and portents and with every unrighteous deception for those who are perishing.”—2 Thessalonians 2:9, 10.
Like all bullies, the demons want people to believe that they have more power than they actually possess. They perform convincing “signs” that are nothing more than the trickery of thieves and con men.
We are reminded of the card sharks that haunt many African marketplaces. They shamelessly entice some housewives into losing their hard-earned money in rigged card games. They will show a woman three playing cards—two red and one black—and tell her that she can double her money simply by picking out the black card. She is hesitant to play—until she sees someone else seemingly win at this easy game. Little does she realize that the so-called winner is collaborating in the scam. She places her bet, keeping her eye on the black card as the cards are turned over and shuffled around. But to her shame and horror, the card she picks proves to be red. She has spent her family’s food money—a victim of her own greed and of a clever trickster’s sleight of hand! Too late, she has learned that seeing is not always believing.
In a similar way, Satan and his demons delight in deceiving people into thinking that humans can change into animals. Satan is a master of deception. After all, it was he who told the first lie, saying to Eve: “You positively will not die. . . . You are bound to be like God.” (Genesis 3:4, 5) This lie has spawned a variety of teachings that keep people in fear, such as the immortality of the soul, hellfire, and metamorphosis. Thus, in Africa people will pay an exorbitant price to be “vaccinated” because they think this can protect them from being turned into an animal. In reality, such ones are enslaved to the “teachings of demons” and are hindered from doing the will of God.—1 Timothy 4:1; James 4:7.
The True Transformation
Perhaps you have always believed in or possibly even feared metamorphosis. If so, give heed to the Bible’s words at Romans 12:2. There in the original text, a form of the Greek word me·ta·mor·phoʹo is used. We read: “Be transformed [me·ta·mor·phouʹsthe] by making your mind over.” This refers to a metamorphosis that can happen—a complete change in personality!
Those who want to please God must make such a change, for the Bible urges: “Strip off the old personality with its practices, and clothe yourselves with the new personality, which through accurate knowledge is being made new according to the image of the One who created it.”—Colossians 3:9, 10.
How can you be transformed? By taking in accurate knowledge from the Bible. That knowledge may lead to your giving up cherished ideas and notions. But, as Jesus said, “you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” (John 8:32) Yes, you can be set free from the falsehoods and fears of metamorphosis.
[Picture on page 15]
What our eyes “see” is not always the reality
[Picture Credit Line on page 13]
Witch doctor: Courtesy Africana Museum, Johannesburg

