From Our Readers
Child Molesting
Thank you for the issue dealing with child molesting. (January 22, 1985) I am sure it will help many parents to protect their children in this rotten system of things. My parents never gave me any counsel on sex. On a certain occasion I was sexually abused by a schoolmate who was much older than I was. Even today at 28 years of age I still have psychological problems related to it. How I wish I had had the information from your articles then.
R. S., Brazil
Insensitive Articles?
I would like you to know how I feel about your article on female circumcision plus other similar articles that have appeared in the past. I wish to avoid the hurt I feel when reading horribly explicit articles. Must we read these things, such as the article just mentioned or the account of torture in the concentration camps? (“From Death to Life in Dachau,” February 8, 1985) Is this not contrary to the counsel at Philippians 4:8, that we should continue considering things that are righteous, chaste, lovable, praiseworthy?
B. D., Canada
We do not wish to offend the sensitivity of any of our readers. We acknowledge that some articles are not necessarily pleasant reading, but there are some realities in the world that many people have had to face, are now facing, or will come to face. We feel that it is our obligation to present information on such subjects for their benefit. In none of such articles have we put in gratuitous, explicit details to appeal to the sensational, the violent, the lurid, or the prurient. We have endeavored to present a dignified, helpful treatment of such subjects, and always with a firm stand for what is right. We also endeavor to give encouraging and upbuilding counsel. In our article on female circumcision, we provided sufficient information so that those who needed to know would understand what was being discussed and so that all would be repelled from engaging in the practice.
We have the example in God’s inspired Word, the Bible, which is very open and specific when necessary. See Genesis chapters 19, 34, 38, 39; Leviticus 15:16-33; 18:19-24; Judges chapter 19; 2 Samuel chapter 13; Jeremiah 5:7-9; Ezekiel chapter 23. None of these descriptions have the purpose of titillating a prurient interest or offending the sensitivities of anyone, but they serve a necessary, useful, and upbuilding purpose.​—ED.
I am writing to express my appreciation for your article “From Death to Life in Dachau.” I met a man who was very bitter about his own experiences in Dachau and also about the fact that there are those in Canada who claim that the holocaust was a hoax. He took that issue and read it. He agreed that what she had written was true, except that she left out a lot of the horror. He expressed great bitterness against his tormentors, so I pointed out Else’s advice: “Do not hate them. You will not hurt them. You will only harm yourself!” Lately this man has become less bitter. Her account has helped many to find hope and encouragement once again.
D. R., Canada
I was especially moved when I read the article “From Death to Life in Dachau.” My heart went out to her. I am glad that everything worked out well for her, thanks to Else! One can hardly wait for the day when God puts an end to all the wickedness on earth for which people wrongly blame him. Thank you for an interesting magazine.
S. V. A., Zimbabwe

