The UN​—God’s Way to Peace?
“I am convinced that the United Nations provides the best road to the future for those who have confidence in our capacity to shape our own fate on this planet.”
THAT conviction was expressed by former Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim in his book The Challenge of Peace. While admitting the UN’s shortcomings, he also explained: “One should realize that the United Nations is, after all, the world in microcosm. Its weaknesses must consequently be ascribed primarily to the contradictions that characterize the world community itself.” He adds: “I should point out that it [the UN] is no more than a mirror of the world it serves. That world is a conglomerate of extremely varied, often intractable, passionate, and antagonistic nations.” But not all commentators see the UN in such a favorable light.
In their book A Dangerous Place​—The United Nations as a Weapon in World Politics, Professors Yeselson and Gaglione argue that from its earliest days the UN has been a forum for expressing belligerence, and that it is a tinderbox of antagonisms and political manipulations that can only fan the flames of international conflict. And what about the world in which it operates? “A perverse yet simple truth is that world politics is very much like a jungle. National behavior is fundamentally grounded in self-interest and survival. Obsession with the latter imparts to the nation-state system not only the law of the jungle but its morality as well.” As a consequence, “war has become a permanent feature of international relations.”
What a contrast with the high hopes they had when the Charter of the United Nations was signed in 1945! Its preamble stated: “WE THE PEOPLES OF THE UNITED NATIONS DETERMINED to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind . . . HAVE RESOLVED TO COMBINE OUR EFFORTS TO ACCOMPLISH THESE AIMS.”
Forty years later it sounds a little hollow. Instead of combining, the nations divide. Even now war is the daily fare of millions in one part of the earth or another! Every day people suffer and die as war victims​—despite the existence of the UN.
Who Is Really Behind the UN?
Although having differing viewpoints, the two books previously quoted converge in an unusual detail. Waldheim says that the UN ‘is a mirror of the world it serves,’ and Yeselson and Gaglione compare that political world to a jungle. Thus the UN must inexorably reflect the same law of the political jungle that its members inhabit.
With this in mind, it is of great interest to note symbolisms used in the Bible. The Bible speaks of a “wild beast” and also its “image,” described as “a scarlet-colored wild beast.” (Revelation 13:1, 2, 14; 17:3, 8, 11) The first wild beast represents the entire worldwide political organization that has evolved over the past 4,000 years and that has culminated in the political diversity seen in the world today.a Then what must the “image” of that beast represent?
According to the sources quoted above, which organization mirrors the present political system? Obviously, the UN with its 159 member nations, these constituting almost universal representation. (See page 11.) And the Bible symbols of wild beasts harmonize well with the ‘political jungle’ image. It is sad but true that many politicians have implemented and are still implementing their political philosophies like wild beasts​—savagely killing off millions of people, combatants and civilians, in their wars and political purges. Torture and death squads have been and still are tools of political coercion. And most of these same governments and philosophies have their respectable representation at the UN.
In view of the foregoing, is it reasonable to believe that the UN could be God’s way to peace, especially when, by the simplest definition, “God is love”? (1 John 4:8) But if the UN is not God’s answer to the problem, who is really behind the UN?
The Bible leaves no doubt as to the origin of the “wild beast” political system and its UN “image.” In Revelation 13:2 we read: “And the dragon gave to the beast its power and its throne and great authority.” Who does “the dragon” represent? The same Bible writer clarifies that “the dragon” is “the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth.” But in what way is Satan misleading the world?​—Revelation 12:9.
By every possible political scheme and philosophy, including the UN, Satan, the original liar, is diverting mankind’s attention away from the only true pathway to peace and security​—the rule of God’s Kingdom over this earth. (John 8:44) For nearly two thousand years, professed Christians have prayed, “Let your kingdom come.” Yet most have had no clear concept of what is meant by God’s Kingdom. What does it mean to you? Now when that Kingdom is so near it is vital to get a proper understanding of it.​—Matthew 6:9, 10.
Awake! correspondents know from personal contact that many sincere and dedicated people are working to further the aims of the UN. These sincere people also see the organization’s weaknesses, but like Kurt Waldheim and others, they believe that it is man’s only hope for lasting peace and security. They are not aware of any better solution. Yet there is an alternative that they have perhaps overlooked​—God’s Kingdom rule.​—Revelation 11:15.
The Only True Way to Peace
The Bible shows that the Kingdom of God refers to heavenly rulership, or government of the earth from the spirit realm. (Daniel 2:44; Revelation 21:1-4) This Kingdom government by Christ is already functioning worldwide and is preparing a supranational people for everlasting life under its rulership. This completely united body of people from all nations and of all languages is known as Jehovah’s Witnesses. They are the truly “united nations” who have already ‘beaten their swords into plowshares.’ They have also broken the shackles of racism and of parochial nationalism, which has been called “the most powerful and destructive force in international politics.” Those very shackles still bind and impede the UN.​—Isaiah 2:2-4.
Through personal study of the Bible, Jehovah’s Witnesses know that only God’s Kingdom can bring true and lasting peace to this earth and that the time is very near for God’s Kingdom to take action. (Luke 21:31-33; Revelation 16:14, 16) ‘What action?’ you may ask. The destruction of those who are willfully ruining the earth. (Revelation 11:18) This includes the crushing of all divisive political elements. (Daniel 2:44) Thus Jehovah’s Witnesses reject as inadequate Satan’s counterfeit solution​—the UN. But why is it inadequate?
The 17th-century Dutch philosopher Spinoza defined peace as “not an absence of war” but something much more all-embracing. He said: “It is a virtue, a state of mind, a disposition for benevolence, confidence, justice.” That can only be achieved by educating people in love and harmony rather than in hatred and division. As the Bible writer James recorded: “The fruit of righteousness has its seed sown under peaceful conditions for those who are making peace.” (James 3:18) By their worldwide educational work Jehovah’s Witnesses are teaching God’s ways of peace, for his Word states: “All your sons will be persons taught by Jehovah, and the peace of your sons will be abundant.”​—Isaiah 54:13.
If you would like to know more about God’s Kingdom government, feel free to contact Jehovah’s Witnesses in your area. They will be glad to help you get to know God’s way to peace.
[Footnotes]
For further explanation of these Bible symbols, see the book “Then Is Finished the Mystery of God,” chapters 22 and 23, published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
[Box on page 11]
Major Problems Affecting the UN
A partial list of current major world problems that concern manyof the UN member nations.
1. Nuclear arms race and the U.S.A.-U.S.S.R. confrontation
2. North-South world economic imbalance; foreign-debt crisis indeveloping countries
3. Hunger and poverty in Africa, gradual desertification of thecontinent
4. Drugs, international traffic
5. International terrorism
6. South Africa’s apartheid policy and relations with neighborstates
7. Namibia’s independence from South Africa
8. Israel and the Palestinian question
9. Turmoil in Lebanon
10. Iran-Iraq conflict
11. Southeast Asia, Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea
12. Central America, guerrilla warfare in El Salvador andNicaragua
13. Afghanistan, intervention by Soviet Union
14. World refugee problem, with more than ten million peopleaffected
15. Human-rights abuses
This listing is based on the speeches presented at the 39th session of the UN General Assembly in 1984 by 150 representatives, including 16 heads of state or government. (See UN Chronicle, Volume XXI, Number 8/1984.)
[Box on page 11]
How UN Membership Has Grown
1945 51 nations: Central and South America 19; Europe 14; Asia 2;   Middle East 7; Africa 3; Pacific 3; North America 3
1950 60 nations: Central and South America 19; Europe 16; Asia 7;   Middle East 9; Africa 3; Pacific 3; North America 3
1960 100 nations: Central and South America 19; Europe 27;   Asia 13; Middle East 10; Africa 25; Pacific 3; North America 3
1970 127 nations: Central and South America 23; Europe 28;   Asia 16; Middle East 12; Africa 41; Pacific 4; North America 3
1980 154 nations: Central and South America 29; Europe 30;   Asia 19; Middle East 16; Africa 50; Pacific 7; North America 3
1985 159 nations: Central and South America 32; Europe 30;   Asia 20; Middle East 16; Africa 50; Pacific 8; North America 3
[Picture on page 9]
The flags of 159 member nations are on display in front of the UN
[Picture on page 10]
Who have already ‘beaten their swords into plowshares’?

