From Our Readers
Lupus  My first thought after reading the article “How I Live With Lupus” (May 8, 1990) was “Thank you, Jehovah!” I do not have lupus, but for two years I have struggled with Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, which has some similar symptoms. No doubt, this article answers the prayers of many, many people, not only with lupus but with other chronic illnesses.
After 20 years in full-time service, the last 4 traveling with my husband, a circuit overseer, it has been a big adjustment for me to gear down to a slower pace that I can function with. The account of Robin’s experience crystallized my own anxieties and frustrations, yet gave such practical advice for meeting these challenges. I just can’t thank you enough for printing this. I will keep a copy at my bedside to read over and over again.
T. E., United States
Fraud in Science  I applaud your courageous stand against the religion of evolution. (January 22, 1990) I am very weary of the condescending attitudes of scientists who label people incompetent and ignorant if they do not accept the “faith.”
S. L., United States
Disasters  I was really upset with the article on the hurricane and earthquake disasters. (February 22, 1990) You pointed to one incident of looting as an example of the difference between “the world” and Jehovah’s Witnesses. I feel it the height of bad taste to portray only Witnesses in a flattering light.
J. K., United States
The article served to demonstrate how Christians today show true love for one another during trialsome times, as they did in the first century. (2 Corinthians 8:1-4) Although some negative incidents were reported, the article also stated that “such callous acts were overshadowed by many acts of human kindness and compassion” performed by non-Witnesses.​—ED.
Puberty  I was so overjoyed when I received the February 8, 1990, issue dealing with the changes experienced in puberty. I am a single parent, and for the last few months, I’ve been very troubled about how to explain these changes to my son. I was too embarrassed even to use certain words with him! So I just had to write and thank you for providing this information.
C. B., United States
Debt  Just last night we sat down and made a plan for paying off our debts. We estimated it would take one year. Today, we found the February 8, 1990, issue in our mail, with the article on getting out of debt. This gave us much encouragement to stick to our plan. It also had good counsel regarding our future spending habits.
S. S. and K. S., United States
Dinosaurs  My name is Ronald, and I am ten years old. I am very interested in dinosaurs and hoped for a report on them for a long time. At last there came an article on dinosaurs (February 8, 1990), and I want to say thank you very much.
R. M., Austria
I am a student at a local university. Two days before receiving this issue, I had considered writing you about the position the Witnesses take on the earth’s age. My questions have been answered, and I plan to share this wonderful information with my professor.
M. H., United States

