From Our Readers
Religion and War  I want to express my appreciation for the October 22, 1994, series “When Religion Takes Sides in War.” Although I lived through the time of the slaughter of Serbs in Croatia, I was too small to remember it. This complex and tragic situation is thus very close to my heart. I appreciated the way you illuminated the role of religion and its relentless efforts in exacerbating division and hatred among these national groups.
M. K., United States
I was touched by the article “We Did Not Support Hitler’s War.” It was so well told I almost cried. I am 15 years old, and I feel encouraged to know that whatever small persecution I may face at school or in the preaching work, I can deal with it.
A. M., United States
I couldn’t help but shed a few tears over the trials faced by the Wohlfahrt family. Their trials make my little discouragements seem so unimportant. The article encouraged me to continue pressing on, knowing that as Christians, we may face similar opposition as this system comes to its end.
M. S., United States
Relief Efforts  I was worried about Jehovah’s Witnesses in Rwanda. Having read the article “Caring for Victims of Rwanda’s Tragedy” (December 22, 1994), I now know something about what they are going through. The article said that there were many there who died. What helped me to feel a little better about this was having the hope of meeting them in Paradise. In the meantime, I’ll pray for my fellow believers in Rwanda.
J. D., Japan
The Elusive Wolf  Thanks for the many informative and often amusing articles you publish about Jehovah’s creation. The article “An Elusive Creature​—Hated and Loved” about Canis lupus (September 8, 1994) was most interesting. But in the picture on the first page of the article, the animal appears to be too small to be a wolf.
S. W., Germany
We appreciate the observation of this sharp-​eyed reader. It turns out that the silhouetted figure was actually based on a photo of a coyote, not a wolf. We apologize for the mistake.​—ED.
Satanism  I find the stereotypes and generalizations made about heavy-​metal music throughout your series “The Lure of Satanism” (September 22, 1994) to be appalling. While it is true that there are bands that fit this stereotype, your article fails to mention other positive messages in heavy-​metal music.
C. C., United States
It may be true that not all heavy-​metal music directly promotes Satanism. Nevertheless, the outrageous appearance and behavior of even mainstream heavy-​metal bands is well-​known. So is the long-​standing association this genre of music has had with drugs and violence. In view of these facts, we felt obliged to warn readers about getting involved with any form of this music.​—ED.
Everything you wrote was accurate. Our eldest daughter was raised as a Christian. But then she became increasingly rebellious. We found out she was associating with kids who listened to heavy-​metal music. She would hide heavy-​metal tapes and listen to the songs at night with headphones. Some of the lyrics were satanic chants! We later discovered satanic symbols hidden about her room. Eventually she moved out of our home and continues to be dead spiritually. And it all began with heavy-​metal music.
D. B., United States

