Have You Seen a Thylacine?
BY AWAKE! CORRESPONDENT IN AUSTRALIA
‘HAVE I seen a what?’ you may ask. ‘I don’t even know what a thylacine is.’
Actually, “thylacine” is the shortened form of the full zoological name Thylacinus cynocephalus and is the name of a fascinating animal from down under, the Tasmanian tiger, or Tasmanian wolf.
Thylacinus cynocephalus literally means “pouched dog with a wolf’s head,” but the animal was given a variety of much simpler names by early European settlers of Tasmania, Australia’s small island state. Names such as zebra opossum, hyena, zebra wolf, and dog-​headed opossum were common. The Aborigines, who were in Tasmania long before the white man arrived only about 200 years ago, called the thylacine by the name corinna.
The Tasmanian tiger is now considered extinct, but stuffed specimens can be found in museums. The last known living thylacine died in 1936 in a zoo in Hobart, Tasmania’s capital. There are, however, those who claim there are still some living thylacines hiding out in the Tasmanian wilderness, and reports of sightings continue.
Although not really of the tiger family, the name Tasmanian tiger doubtless arose both because the animal is striped and because it is a meat eater. Distinctive, dark-​brown, almost black, stripes run across its back and down its long, rigid tail. A further fascinating fact is that the thylacine is a marsupial​—that is, the female has a pouch. The young are born tiny, immature, and sightless but then find their way to their mother’s pouch, where they are suckled until fully grown and strong enough to leave. The tiny newborn stays in mother thylacine’s pouch for about three months before venturing out. Once out of the pouch, though, it is not long before junior thylacine begins following mother in her quest for food.
It is claimed that the thylacine is the largest meat-​eating marsupial known in recent times. Unlike marsupials such as the kangaroo, the female thylacine has a rearward-​facing pouch. She can carry and suckle four young at a time.
How Widespread?
Though Aboriginal rock-​paintings, fossils, and dried, mummified specimens of the thylacine have been found in many parts of Australia, the main habitat of the thylacine seems to have been Tasmania. Even there it may never have been plentiful. Humans have mainly been responsible for its extinction. The Tasmanian tiger was itself a predator, yet it was no match for the cunning and greedy hunters that some white settlers proved to be. Being curious and largely unafraid of man, the thylacine was easy prey to the gun and the snare.
Many farmers claimed that the Tasmanian tiger was a sheep killer, so attractive bounties were offered by large pastoral interests as well as by the Tasmanian government. Live specimens that were trapped were readily acquired by overseas zoos. Although the thylacine population was no doubt affected by a serious unknown disease that ravaged much of Tasmania’s wildlife many years ago, by far the greatest decimation of its numbers was by man.
Unique Hunting Methods
The thylacine usually hunted alone but sometimes in pairs. Its method was to target an animal, such as a small kangaroo, then just trot after it, running it down. Once the prey slowed, exhausted, the thylacine would leap in and kill it with its powerful jaws. Another unique feature of this unusual animal was the opening gape of its jaws, an astonishing 120 degrees!
Their habit of eating only certain parts of the carcass​—usually just the internal organs—​led some to regard them as wanton killers. But to offset this seeming waste, another smaller, meat-​eating marsupial, the scavenging Tasmanian devil (which is still in existence) would follow up the tiger and soon clean up all the leftovers​—bones, fur, and all.
Apparently the thylacine was no threat to man. There is no evidence that they ever hunted humans. One old-​timer recalls that late one evening, many years ago, he was sitting in front of his campfire, reading, when through the flames he suddenly saw a Tasmanian tiger crouched low, stalking and edging menacingly toward him. Fearing an attack, he quietly reached for his rifle, took careful aim through the flames, and fired. The thylacine did an ungraceful backward somersault but was apparently not badly injured, for it jumped up and disappeared into the darkness. The man then went to inspect for any blood, in order to see how badly he had wounded the tiger. Just in front of the fire, he found a large opossum with the bullet in it. That was what the thylacine had been stalking!
What About Reported Sightings?
There have been scores of reported sightings of the thylacine since the last one in captivity died in 1936, but so far little has been produced to convince zoologists that any are still alive. It seems that nothing short of an actual photograph or a live capture will convince officials that thylacines still exist.
Many older people living in Tasmania’s country areas say they would not report a Tasmanian tiger if they saw one. They are troubled over the fact that early in their lifetime, other humans were responsible for the apparent extinction of this unique animal. If any thylacines do still exist, such people want them left in peace.
So if they were asked, “Have you seen a thylacine lately?” their answer​—truthful or not—​would be, “No!”
[Picture Credit Line on page 26]
Tom McHugh/​Photo Researchers

