Eagerly Preach the Good News
1 “I am longing to see you . . . There is eagerness on my part to declare the good news also to you.” This is how the apostle Paul expressed himself at the beginning of his letter to the brothers in Rome. Why was Paul eager to visit them? He said: “In order that I might acquire some fruitage also among you . . . For I am not ashamed of the good news; it is, in fact, God’s power for salvation.”​—Rom. 1:11-16.
2 Paul reflected this same eagerness in speaking to the older men of Ephesus. He reminded them: “From the first day that I stepped into the district of Asia . . . , I did not hold back . . . from teaching you publicly and from house to house. But I thoroughly bore witness both to Jews and to Greeks.” (Acts 20:18-21) In all his assigned territory, Paul was intent on spreading the good news of salvation and gaining Kingdom fruitage. What a fine spirit to imitate!
3 We might ask ourselves: ‘Do I show that same eagerness in declaring the good news in my community? Rather than viewing the preaching work as just a duty, am I eager to share the good news with as many people as possible? Have I prayerfully considered my personal circumstances? Have I explored all the possibilities that exist in our territory, such as preaching from door to door, on the street, in business districts, by telephone, and informally?’
4 Share Eagerly During April: The month of April is a good time to intensify our personal share in the preaching work. The reduced hour requirement should make it possible for more to auxiliary pioneer. Perhaps your circumstances will allow you to serve as an auxiliary pioneer during April and May. Or you may be able to enroll as a regular pioneer, in view of the adjusted hour requirement. If you are a congregation publisher, can you spend more time than usual in the service this month and next, lending support to those who are able to pioneer? That would make Jehovah’s heart glad!
5 Kingdom publishers should, like Paul, continue to manifest an eagerness by reaching out in the preaching work. Doing all we can in the ministry will bring us real joy. Paul had this joy in his sacred service. We do well to imitate his excellent example.​—Rom. 11:13; 1 Cor. 4:16.

