Pioneering​—Wise Use of Our Time!
1 ‘I’m already overloaded! Would it really be wise for me to take on pioneering at this time?’ So thought a sister as she listened to a pioneer-elder present a circuit assembly part entitled “Pressing Ahead With the Pioneer Ministry.” A young brother in the same audience thought, ‘How does he make room for pioneering? I’m not an elder, but my life is already packed with activity!’
2 As the elder continued to discuss the blessings of pioneering, he interviewed several pioneers from the circuit who told of the adjustments that they had made in order to pioneer and how Jehovah richly blessed their efforts. One was disabled, one had an unbelieving mate, and one had given up a worldly career but was able to live within his means. Hearing how these pioneers were succeeding with Jehovah’s help, the brother and the sister in the audience began to reexamine their own thinking and circumstances. We invite you to do that too, especially since the reduced hour requirements for pioneers are now within the range of many more publishers of the good news.
3 We know that Jehovah is the Creator and Universal Sovereign and that we owe our lives to him. (Dan. 4:17; Acts 17:28) It is clear to us that Jehovah is using just one organization. We are privileged to serve loyally with it, supporting “the faithful and discreet slave” in giving the Kingdom witness before the end comes. (Matt. 24:45; 25:40; 1 Pet. 2:9) Living far along in “the last days,” we realize that the time in which to preach is running out. (2 Tim. 3:1) Meanwhile, we need to support our families materially. (1 Tim. 5:8) A person’s income does not seem to stretch as far as it did in the past. Perhaps our health is not what it used to be. And to be honest, we want to have a little time and some resources to spend on ourselves. (Eccl. 3:12, 13) So we may wonder if responding to the invitation to pioneer is really wise.
4 It is up to each one of us to examine our own circumstances carefully and to decide whether we can pioneer. (Rom. 14:12; Gal. 6:5) It is encouraging to note the increasing numbers who have responded to the call to pioneer. Despite the pressures and problems of these last days, the service report published in the 1999 Yearbook shows that close to 700,000 of Jehovah’s people worldwide are pressing ahead in the pioneer ministry. Whether serving under difficult economic conditions, lacking transportation, experiencing health problems, or encountering other difficulties and hardships, these brothers and sisters are not tiring out in doing what is fine, and this is commendable. (Gal. 6:9) They have accepted Jehovah’s offer to put him to the test. (Mal. 3:10) They feel that pioneering is a very wise use of their limited time and resources and that Jehovah has truly blessed them for making the necessary adjustments to enter and remain in the pioneer work.
5 Pioneers Are Being Blessed: A sister in Cameroon who has a very young daughter explains: “Since her birth, my daughter has always accompanied me in the ministry. Even before she learned to walk, I carried her on my back, securely attached with a length of cloth. One morning in the ministry, I stopped at a roadside stand. My child left my side, taking with her several magazines from my bag. She toddled over to the next stand. Although she could not say much, she attracted the attention of a woman and presented a magazine. The woman was simply amazed to see such a young child sharing in this activity. She readily accepted the magazine as well as a home Bible study!”
6 In response to the call for more auxiliary pioneers, an elder and family head in Zambia who has a full-time secular job decided to auxiliary pioneer despite his tight schedule. He wanted to set an example for the congregation and for his family. On some occasions, he would park his car by the roadside and play The Secret of Family Happiness on audiocassette and invite passersby to come over and listen to what was being read aloud. In that way, he was able to place 16 Family Happiness books and 13 Knowledge books, and he started two Bible studies.
7 A fine pioneer spirit was also noted in the neighboring country of Zimbabwe. During April 1998, one congregation with 117 publishers reported 70 auxiliary and 9 regular pioneers. Another congregation with 94 publishers had 58 auxiliary pioneers reporting. Still another, with 126 publishers, reported that 58 decided to auxiliary pioneer along with the 4 regular pioneers. Last service year proved to be an outstanding one in Zimbabwe. Even though the brothers there were very busy with family matters, congregation activities, and branch construction, they concentrated on spending their time wisely in the ministry.
8 Pioneers realize that getting started in the pioneer work and persevering in it are not dependent on their own strength. They are the first to admit that whatever they are able to do is possible because they are “dependent on the strength that God supplies.” (1 Pet. 4:11) Their faith enables them to carry on their ministry from day to day. Rather than seeking their own convenience and comforts, successful pioneers realize that to press ahead, “a great deal of struggling” may be required, but they receive many blessings as a result.​—1 Thess. 2:2.
9 Paul’s Example Bears Imitating: The Bible records the apostle Paul’s accomplishments in the ministry and the fine help he gave so many people. Yet, if anyone was overloaded, Paul was. He endured persecution and physical hardships in order to preach the good news and to strengthen the congregations. He also had to put up with a severe health problem. (2 Cor. 11:21-29; 12:7-10) He was determined to spend his time wisely. He acknowledged that he did all his work with Jehovah’s help. (Phil. 4:13) None of those whom Paul assisted would have reason to conclude that his time and efforts in Jehovah’s service were wasted or could have been better spent. Why, we are still benefiting today from Paul’s wise use of his time! How we appreciate his inspired counsel to help us sort out our priorities and stick with the truth in these difficult times!
10 Now as never before, ‘the time left to preach the good news is reduced.’ (1 Cor. 7:29; Matt. 24:14) Therefore, it is appropriate to ask ourselves, ‘If my life were to end unexpectedly tomorrow, could I tell Jehovah today that I have used my time wisely?’ (Jas. 4:14) Why not talk to Jehovah in prayer now, assuring him of your desire to use your time wisely as one of his Witnesses? (Ps. 90:12) Pray for Jehovah’s help to simplify your life. Even though you might have ruled it out before, could it be that you now find that pioneering can be fitted into your life?
11 Make the Most of Your Circumstances: Understandably, because of circumstances not all who so desire can schedule 70 hours a month to serve as regular pioneers. However, many publishers do arrange to devote 50 hours a month in the ministry as auxiliary pioneers as often as possible or continuously. If your circumstances are such that you presently cannot auxiliary or regular pioneer, take heart. Continue to pray that your circumstances will change. In the meantime, if adjustments are simply not possible, take comfort in knowing that Jehovah is well pleased with whatever you are able to do whole-souled in his service. (Matt. 13:23) He notes that you are standing firmly on his side and that you are striving hard to be a faithful publisher who never allows a month to go by without seizing opportunities to give a witness. Perhaps you can progress by sharpening your witnessing skills, working to excel as a preacher and teacher of the good news.​—1 Tim. 4:16.
12 With “the great and fear-inspiring day of Jehovah” so near, we need to use the remaining time wisely if we are to finish the work we have been commissioned to do. (Joel 2:31) Satan knows that his time is short, and as never before, he is trying everything in his power to complicate our lives and make it difficult for us to concentrate on the truly important things. (Phil. 1:10; Rev. 12:12) Never underestimate God’s interest in you. Jehovah can help you simplify your life and reach your full potential in the ministry. (Ps. 145:16) Happily, many are finding, in reexamining their circumstances, that they can join the ranks of the auxiliary or regular pioneers. Indeed, pioneers find deep satisfaction in using their time wisely. Will you be one of them?

