Service Meetings for April
Week Starting April 5
Song 55
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Review “May We Offer the Creator Book?” Invite all interested ones to attend the special public talk on April 18. The talk is entitled “True Friendship With God and Neighbor.”
15 min: “Eagerly Preach the Good News.” Introduce the article in less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion. Conclude with encouragement based on the School Guidebook, pages 191-2, paragraphs 12-13.
20 min: “How Family Members Cooperate for a Full Share​—In the Ministry.” Discussion by a family group. Consider reasons why the family should view field service as a regular weekly routine in which all participate. Review encouragement given in September 1, 1993, Watchtower, pages 17-19, paragraphs 9-12. Invite parents in the audience to relate how they successfully organize weekly service activity for their family.
Song 67 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 12
Song 112
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Intensifying the Witness as the End Nears.” Questions and answers. Interview one or two publishers who at one time could never have imagined that they would be sharing in the preaching work but who are now doing so regularly because they have come to appreciate the urgent need to spread the Kingdom message. As time permits, include brief experiences from the 1997 Yearbook, pages 42-8, showing how publishers have intensified their witnessing efforts by going where the people are.
Song 93 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 19
Song 79
 5 min: Local announcements.
10 min: “Do You Have a Standing Order?” A talk, preferably by the elder or ministerial servant who handles the magazines. Let the congregation know how many magazines are received each month and the average number that are reported as placed. We should not let magazines go to waste. Offer suggestions showing how older copies can be distributed.​—See July 1993 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 1.
30 min: “Pioneering​—Wise Use of Our Time!” Questions and answers. Assign three different individuals to relate the experiences presented in paragraphs 5-7. Conclude by inviting all who can to consider applying for auxiliary or regular pioneer service. Applications are available from any member of the Congregation Service Committee. Mention that it is not too late to submit an application to auxiliary pioneer in May.
Song 165 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 26
Song 70
10 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in field service reports for April. Announce the names of those who will auxiliary pioneer in May, and encourage others to apply. Give some helpful suggestions for presenting the current magazines.​—See October 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8.
17 min: “What Should I Do?” After a brief review of the article with the audience, look in on a teenager talking to his or her parent about plans for the future after graduation from high school. They review together the July 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 4. Parent gives advice in harmony with encouragement provided in The Watchtower of February 1, 1996, page 14, and December 1, 1996, pages 17-19. Now that the pioneer hour requirements are reduced, teenager considers the possibility of pioneering while completing a secular education.
18 min: Interview Auxiliary Pioneers. Service overseer interviews some publishers who are auxiliary pioneering this month as well as others who have done so in the past. Invite them to relate some of the blessings they have enjoyed, what they have accomplished, and why they look forward to auxiliary pioneering again at least one or two months each year.
Song 69 and concluding prayer.

