“What Should I Do?”
1 As a youth approaching adulthood, you might ask, ‘What should I do with my life?’ Christian youths want to expand their service to Jehovah in the ministry. But how can you do this while taking on the responsibilities of adulthood, which include providing for your own material needs? Finding the answer may not be easy.
2 Some youths become anxious when they look at the world’s economic situation and the forecasts for the future. They wonder: ‘Should I pursue additional secular education? Should I enter the full-time service right away?’ In order to make the right decision, a person needs to answer this question honestly, ‘What is my foremost interest in life?’ He must examine his motives.
3 What have you cultivated as your prime concern during your youth? Are you mainly interested in seeking financial advantage, or do you really want to use your life to advance Kingdom interests? A university degree does not guarantee success in the job market. As an alternative, many have acquired marketable job skills by means of apprenticeship programs, some vocational or technical school education, or short-term college courses that require a minimum of time and involvement.
4 Take Jehovah at His Word: An all-important fact to consider is the assurance from Jehovah God that he will provide for those who put Kingdom interests first in life. (Matt. 6:33) This is not an idle promise. Many brothers attending the Ministerial Training School earned college degrees prior to learning the truth. But what were they doing for secular work? Very few were pursuing the career for which they had been educated. Many were working in service-oriented fields, caring very well for their financial needs while pioneering. By expanding their activity in the ministry, they are receiving blessings far beyond anything monetary.
5 In deciding what you should do after graduation from high school, weigh all the factors and examine your motives carefully. For a balanced view of your choices, consider such information as appeared in Awake! of March 8, 1998, pages 19-21. Speak with your parents, the elders, your circuit overseer, and successful pioneers in your area. That will help you make a wise decision about what you should do with your life.​—Eccl. 12:1, 13.

