Earth’s Bright Future Under God’s Kingdom
THE Bible says that “faith is the assured expectation of things hoped for.” (Hebrews 11:1) As we saw in the previous article, more than 500 years before the birth of Christ, God caused to be written in the book of Daniel a prophetic foreview of the rise and fall of world powers from Daniel’s day down to our own. The accuracy of these prophecies assures us, gives us strong reason for faith, that the rest of Daniel’s prophecies will also be fulfilled, and very soon God’s Kingdom under Christ Jesus will replace human governments.
What a change that will mean for humanity! Looking forward to that time, God himself says: “Look! I am making all things new.” (Revelation 21:5) A consideration of some of the inspired prophecies that paint a picture for us of that happy time will help us to see just how “new” things will be, how completely different from what we see today under human rulership. Indeed, what the Bible says about the future of our earth and of life on it is nothing short of amazing. Consider:
Crime and violence will end. “For evildoers themselves will be cut off, . . . the wicked one will be no more.” Those living “will actually sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and there will be no one making them tremble; for the very mouth of Jehovah of armies has spoken it.”​—Psalm 37:9, 10; Micah 4:4.
Racial and national divisions, and the wars that they prompt, will have disappeared. “Nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.”​—Isaiah 2:4.
Housing shortages, homelessness, and unemployment will be things of the past. Isaiah foretold: “They will certainly build houses and have occupancy; and they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. . . . And the work of their own hands my chosen ones will use to the full.”​—Isaiah 65:21, 22.
Horrible famines, such as those that have recently plagued parts of Africa, will be replaced by an abundance of food for all. “There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.” “The earth itself will certainly give its produce; God, our God, will bless us.”​—Psalm 72:16; 67:6, 7.
In addition, there will be health and life with which to enjoy these blessings. Even during Jesus’ earthly ministry, it was truthfully said that “the blind are receiving sight, the lame are walking, the lepers are being cleansed and the deaf are hearing.” However, a far greater promise will apply: “He [God] will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”​—Luke 7:22; Revelation 21:4.
What a magnificent change! What relief all of this will bring to distressed mankind! We encourage you to submit yourself even now to God’s Kingdom, so that you too may reap the benefits that will come from this epochal change in world rulership.
[Picture on page 7]
People living now may look forward to marvelous blessings​—the end of war, crime, poverty, sickness, and even death. Would you enjoy such a future?

