Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MARCH 31
Memorial, April 4. No Service Meeting or Theocratic Ministry School scheduled this week.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 7
Song 48
 8 min: Announcements and local announcements; accounts report. Encourage all to share in magazine work this Saturday.
15 min: “Serving Jehovah With Constancy.” Talk. When considering paragraph 3, indicate how many are enrolled as auxiliary pioneers locally during April. Have demonstration of literature offer for April.
15 min: “Train New Ones to Qualify as Publishers.” Question-and-answer coverage, preferably by secretary. Highlight responsibility involved after becoming an approved associate.
 7 min: Talk highlighting importance of inviting all interested people to special talk entitled “Good News in a Violent World.” Demonstrate how publisher could invite Bible student. Encourage all to put forth special effort to attend.
Song 148 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 14
Song 204
10 min: Local announcements; consider new feature entitled “Jesus’ Life and Ministry,” beginning with the April 1, 1985, Watchtower. This can be used effectively in the field ministry and in studying with our children.
23 min: “Society Kingdom Hall Fund.” Presiding overseer or secretary to give enthusiastic ten-minute talk on first eight paragraphs of insert and then conduct question-and-answer consideration of paragraphs 9 to 16.
12 min: “Use Teaching Ability in the House-to-House Ministry.” Questions and answers. Encourage all to share in the field service this weekend.
Song 6 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 21
Song 56
13 min: Local announcements and consideration of “Offer Regular and Reduced-Size Live Forever Book in May and June.” Direct attention to Theocratic News as time permits. Also highlight importance of participating in magazine work this Saturday.
12 min: “Presenting the Good News​—In High-Crime Areas.” Question-and-answer consideration of material. Apply to local needs.
20 min: “Society Kingdom Hall Fund.” Presiding overseer or secretary conducts question-and-answer session on paragraphs 17 to 26 of insert. In brief concluding talk, highlight points expressed in box on page 6 of insert. Encourage all to give prayerful consideration to information presented in insert.
Song 103 and concluding prayer.

