Offer Regular and Reduced-Size “Live Forever” Book in May and June
1 During May and June our literature offer will be the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. From the time of its release at the “Kingdom Truth” conventions in 1982, this excellent Bible study aid has already brought spiritual encouragement and hope of life to millions of people around the earth. It is now available in 57 languages, and we can be confident that millions more will have opportunity to learn of Jehovah’s righteous New Order by means of this loving and timely provision.
2 Some months ago a reduced-size Spanish edition of the Live Forever book was released. This was done especially for the benefit of people living in economically disadvantaged countries, since it could be offered for a contribution of only half the cost. It has been received enthusiastically everywhere, not only by the public but also by our brothers.
3 Now, an English reduced-size edition is available, and we will be using it in the regular literature offer during May and June. Congregations should have already placed their orders with the Society for this $1.25 edition. Any who have not yet ordered should do so at once.
VARIOUS USES
4 Some of the brothers who have used the reduced-size book in the house-to-house ministry have offered it first. But they have had the regular edition with them to offer to persons who may have difficulty reading small print. Others have preferred working with the regular edition. Because the smaller edition is only $1.25, you may want to offer several copies to families with children or for use as gifts.
5 The reduced-size book is particularly appreciated by publishers who may find it difficult to carry several of the larger publications. The smaller book will fit into a coat pocket or purse for informal witnessing opportunities, as at work or at school. It may be sent more economically through the mail as a gift to someone living in another area. Now that the Live Forever book is being used in the Theocratic Ministry School, some may find this new edition more convenient for carrying to the congregation meetings.
6 But whether you use the regular or the reduced-size book, be prepared to place You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth whenever you have opportunity. Jehovah’s angels are still gathering out those whom he will protect through the impending great tribulation. (Rev. 14:6, 7) By our zealous participation in distributing this excellent Bible study aid, we may be able to help still others to find the way of salvation and, in doing so, gain Jehovah’s favor for ourselves.​—1 Tim. 4:16.

