Presenting the Good News​—In High-Crime Areas
1 Crime and violence are increasing at an alarming rate. This is in fulfillment of Paul’s words recorded at 2 Timothy 3:1: “But know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here.” In some places it is unsafe to walk the streets alone, even in broad daylight. In order to share fully in the preaching and disciple-making work in high-crime areas, caution and good judgment are needed. (Matt. 10:16) We must demonstrate “practical wisdom” and ‘soundness of mind.’​—Prov. 3:21; 1 Pet. 4:7.
AVOID DIFFICULTIES WHERE POSSIBLE
2 Avoid questionable situations as much as possible while in the field ministry. The Bible says: “The shrewd one considers his steps.” (Prov. 14:15) It also counsels: “Before the quarrel has burst forth, take your leave.” (Prov. 17:14) To consider your steps shrewdly will involve avoiding places where danger is likely. For instance, when working in the evenings, wherever possible use well-lighted, well-traveled streets, rather than poorly lit and infrequently traveled ones. Also, avoid bands of youths loitering on street corners, perhaps crossing to the other side of the street before coming to them. It is not shrewd to wear costly looking clothing or jewelry if you are in a high-crime area.
3 When working in the field ministry where it is not wise to be alone, it is suggested that you arrange for another publisher to accompany you. (om p. 104) When witnessing in apartment buildings, it may be advantageous to have several publishers working on the same floor, with brothers taking the lead when available. Use discernment before accepting invitations to enter homes or apartments.
WHAT TO DO IF CONFRONTED
4 If you are confronted, how should you react? Do not panic. Immediately identify yourself as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and endeavor to remain calm. Demonstrate mildness and pray to Jehovah for direction and protection. (Prov. 15:1; Gal. 5:22, 23) Another Bible principle to remember during such a time is, as stated by Jesus Christ, that a person’s “life does not result from the things he possesses.” (Luke 12:15) With the increase of crime, there is an ever greater possibility of being confronted at gunpoint or knifepoint by a person demanding your money. Will you fight to save your money? Your life is of far more value than material possessions.
5 A brother was held up one night by several young men. He immediately gave them his wallet and watch. In addition they asked him for his gold chain. The brother calmly answered that he did not wear a gold chain or an amulet because he was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Upon hearing this, the men quickly returned his possessions and asked for his forgiveness. True are the words of Proverbs 18:10: “The name of Jehovah is a strong tower. Into it the righteous runs and is given protection.”
6 There are still many honest-hearted persons who have a love for righteousness and who are looking for the truth. Some of these persons live in areas where there is a high crime rate. They need to be contacted in the ministry and directed to Jehovah’s organization. If we have high-crime areas in our territory assignment, we will want to put forth an earnest effort to reach the honest-hearted ones living there, while also demonstrating good judgment, looking to Jehovah for guidance and protection.

