Serving Jehovah With Constancy
1 How happy we are that Jehovah never wavers in his loving-kindness! With him there is not even “a variation of the turning of the shadow.” (Jas. 1:17) He is always alert to provide what is good for those who love him. But are we constant in our devotion to him? Surely we should do our utmost to imitate Jehovah’s example.​—Eph. 5:1, 2.
2 Daniel is one of many fine Bible examples of constancy in serving Jehovah. Undeviatingly he approached Jehovah for direction and consistently carried out His will. Even when he knew that a law had been framed forbidding prayer to anyone other than the king, he continued praying to Jehovah in open view just as “he had been regularly doing prior to this.” His sentence: Death at the mouth of lions! But God sent his angel and “shut the mouth of the lions.” Darius, the king, had correctly reasoned, “Your God whom you are serving with constancy . . . will rescue you.” (Dan. 6:6-10, 16, 22) So Daniel remained steadfast in obedience to Jehovah’s requirements, and Jehovah rescued him.
3 If we show the same constant devotion in obedience to Jehovah’s laws, we too can confidently expect to receive his blessing and approval. Is it not a joy to see the zeal for God’s work demonstrated by his people today? The zeal in Kingdom service has produced new peaks in hours, return visits, and Bible studies. How heartwarming it is also to see the large number of publishers volunteering for auxiliary and regular pioneer service! We rejoice to see this concern for the spiritual welfare of sheeplike ones out in the field. Those who are so earnestly involved are enjoying Jehovah’s approval and blessing.
4 Like Daniel, we too have enemies who would try to break down our faith and turn us aside from our constant worship of Jehovah. The Devil, the spirit of the world, and our own fleshly weaknesses bring pressure to make us vacillate in our service. How can we be strengthened to stand firm? Those who have charted a steady course in the truth for many years tell us that keeping close to Jehovah helps them most in resisting these pressures. And how do they do that? Like Daniel, they are constant in prayer, seeking Jehovah’s guidance and direction. To make sure that they have his spirit, they regularly attend meetings, where Jehovah’s Word is discussed. All of this, along with regular periods of personal study, helps them to endure tests and to incite others to “love and fine works.”​—Heb. 10:24.
5 By using these same avenues for gaining God’s spirit to keep them on course, faithful, devoted brothers and sisters everywhere are equipped to share with others what they learn. These steadfast ones often say that telling others of their hope is the best way to keep their own eyes on the prize ahead. And just as Daniel was strengthened by his association with other young men who were respectful of God’s laws, association with others in Kingdom service can strengthen us to remain solid in the faith and be favored by Jehovah.​—Dan. 1:6, 17.
6 During April let us endeavor to set a fine example in serving Jehovah with constancy. Our zealous endeavors in working from house to house, making return visits, conducting home Bible studies, and taking advantage of other opportunities to share the good news will receive Jehovah’s blessing. And as we give proper attention to the spiritual needs of those new ones already associating with us, we can help them also to serve Jehovah with constancy.

