Train New Ones to Qualify as Publishers
1 The month of April brings many opportunities for upbuilding association and activity, and especially in connection with the celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal on April 4. Have in mind that last year in the United States 1,611,310 people attended the Memorial! How stimulating it would be to have all these people present at the Memorial this month, along with the thousands who have become interested in the truth during this past year.
2 On Sunday, April 14, there will be a special public talk on the subject “Good News in a Violent World.” We want our Bible students to attend this special meeting and hear information that may reach their heart and motivate them to exercise faith. April is an excellent time to focus more attention on those with whom we have been studying.​—Rom. 10:13-15.
3 Have you been training your Bible students for the ministry while studying with them? This should be done progressively. Some publishers have found it helpful to review lessons by having the student present the material just as he might use it in the house-to-house ministry. Have you discussed with your Bible student what is done in field service and why? If the student has come to an accurate knowledge of the truth, if his heart has been appreciatively touched by what he has learned, and if he has brought his life into harmony with Christian principles, you can invite him to accompany you in the field ministry.
MEETING THE REQUIREMENTS
4 When could a new person be invited to join us in the field service and thereby identify himself publicly with the congregation? It would be helpful to review pages 98 and 99 in the Our Ministry book. Has the student expressed his desire to share in the preaching work? If so, does he meet the Scriptural and organizational requirements? No doubt you can see the benefit of being reasonably sure that the person does qualify before inviting him to participate with us in the public preaching work.​—2 Tim. 2:15.
5 Arrangements should be made for one newly sharing in the ministry to go along with an experienced publisher, usually the one who studies with him. This allows for training. As the student becomes more at ease, he can have a larger share in the witnessing work. (Gal. 6:6) When a person turns in a field service report for the first time, the secretary of the congregation will follow through with the arrangement outlined on page 105 of the Our Ministry book. The secretary or another member of the Congregation Service Committee will discuss the matter with the publisher conducting the study, and then further arrangements should be made to meet with the individual that is studying. If the student qualifies as an approved associate, a Congregation’s Publisher Record card is made out.
HOME TRAINING
6 Training youths for Jehovah’s service starts at home and requires much help and encouragement from the parents. This training should begin from infancy. (2 Tim. 3:14, 15) Families are encouraged to study and read together with a view to maintaining a strong desire to share the truth with others regularly. Many families make it a practice to discuss the daily Scripture text and comments found in the Yearbook. The children should be encouraged to comment on the material. (Compare Ecclesiastes 12:9-11.) Try to make it a point each day to speak with your family about Scriptural truths. Then they too will desire to share in the disciple-making work.​—Isa. 54:13.
7 When a child desires to express himself in Kingdom service and is exemplary in his conduct, the parent may approach one of the elders on the Congregation Service Committee and discuss whether the child is qualified to be counted as a publisher. (See om book, page 100, paragraph 1.) Such progress is certainly reason for rejoicing!​—Prov. 23:15.
8 There is little time left for this old system. Therefore, we are all encouraged to have a full share in the harvest work and to train new ones to qualify for this lifesaving activity.​—Matt. 9:37, 38; Rev. 22:17.

