Use Teaching Ability in the House-to-House Ministry
1 Jesus was known as a preacher of the good news. (Luke 8:1) But more frequently he was addressed and referred to as a teacher. (Matt. 8:19; 9:11) The inspired account reports that “the crowds were astounded at his way of teaching,” and “he went round about to the villages in a circuit, teaching.”​—Matt. 7:28; Mark 6:6.
2 Likewise, the apostles were teachers. According to Paul’s custom, he ‘reasoned with the people from the Scriptures, explaining and proving by references’ what he was teaching them. (Acts 17:2, 3) He bore thorough witness concerning the Kingdom of God, using persuasion concerning Jesus. (Acts 28:23) What can we do to improve our teaching ability in the house-to-house ministry?
BE ADAPTABLE
3 As we call from house to house, we meet people with greatly differing backgrounds and interests. Some profess a belief in the Bible, some do not. We must adapt our message to the individual householder. What did Jesus do when he spoke with a man “versed in the Law”? The man asked Jesus: “Teacher, by doing what shall I inherit everlasting life?” Jesus asked: “What is written in the Law? How do you read?” (Luke 10:25-28) He recognized that the man was “versed in the Law” and his reply acknowledged that.
4 When Paul preached at the Areopagus, he appreciated that he was speaking to Gentiles who had little or no knowledge of the Hebrew Scriptures or of Jesus Christ. So he explained things accordingly. (Acts 17:22-34) Similarly, we must take into consideration the person with whom we talk. If we speak with a youth, we should explain things on a level that he will understand. If we speak to a Bible reader, we need to adjust to the situation, just as Jesus did with the man “versed in the Law.” Because each person we speak to is different, each presentation we make will likely be somewhat varied. What else can we do to be effective teachers in the house-to-house ministry?
REASON WITH PEOPLE
5 To reason means to present the message in such a manner as to help the householder to understand and to arrive at the same conclusion that we do. This requires explaining points thoroughly, so that the householder not only will listen but will see the reasonableness of our presentation. How can we explain points effectively?
6 The question why calls for reasons. Each householder is fully justified in asking why we call on him, why our message is so urgent, and why he should believe it. Therefore, ask yourself these same questions when you prepare for the house-to-house ministry. For example, our current Topic for Conversation is “Are We Facing Armageddon?” We could ask ourselves: Why are we talking to the people about this subject? Why is God bringing this war? Why are we so sure this is going to happen? Why do I believe in the book of Revelation? And if we are going to use additional scriptures, why are we going to read them?
7 Once we know the answers to these questions, we will want to explain things in such a way that the householder will gain understanding. Remember, Paul used “references” to explain the Scriptures.​—Acts 17:3.
8 Illustrations and appropriate questions are very helpful. They make people think on truths and help develop heart appreciation. As we read the Scriptures, give proper emphasis to key words. This helps people to think on what is read. In this regard, the School Guidebook offers many specific suggestions in studies 10, 15, 25, 31, and 34. Take time to consider those suggestions, and put them into practice as you share in the house-to-house ministry.
9 Having the responsibility for teaching people all the things Jesus commanded us should motivate us to consider seriously the need to ‘pay constant attention to our teaching.’ (1 Tim. 4:16) Learning how to teach requires time and effort on our part. Paul told Timothy that those who “work hard in speaking and teaching” are “reckoned worthy of double honor.” (1 Tim. 5:17) Do not hesitate to request the assistance of the elders and other qualified publishers. Constantly pray that Jehovah will bless us as we continue to ‘apply ourselves to teaching.’​—1 Tim. 4:13.

