
Young People Ask
Is It Wrong to Be Popular?

Fill in the word that completes the following statement:
It is ․․․․․ good to be popular.
A. always

B. sometimes

C. never






THE correct answer is “B.” Why? Because to be popular simply means to be liked by a lot of people—and that’s not always wrong! The Bible foretold that Christians would be “a light of the nations” and that people would be drawn to them. (Isaiah 42:6; Acts 13:47) In that sense, it can be said that Christians are popular.



Did you know?
 Jesus was popular. Even as a young person, he gained “favor with God and men.” (Luke 2:52) And the Bible says that when Jesus became an adult, “great crowds followed him from Galilee and Decapolis and Jerusalem and Judea and from the other side of the Jordan.”—Matthew 4:25.



Why was that proper?
 Because Jesus wasn’t seeking glory or pursuing popularity, and he wasn’t desperate for others’ approval. Jesus simply did what was right—a stance that sometimes brought him favorable attention. (John 8:29, 30) At the same time, Jesus realized that any approval he won from the often-fickle public would be temporary. He acknowledged that in time people would put him to death!—Luke 9:22.



The Bottom Line:
 Popularity is like wealth. Having it isn’t always wrong. The problem lies in what people do to obtain—or maintain—it.



Warning!
 Many young people will do anything to be popular. Some are people pleasers who follow the crowd. Others are bullies who try to force people to admire them—even if only out of fear.a
On the following pages, we will consider those two treacherous paths to popularity. Then we’ll look at a better route.



More articles from the “Young People Ask” series can be found at the Web site www.watchtower.org/ype

The Bible speaks of bullies called “the Nephilim,” who are also referred to as “men of fame.” Their primary interest was in promoting their own glory.—Genesis 6:4.

PATHS TO POPULARITY
THE PEOPLE PLEASER
I need others’ approval.

To get it, I must imitate their behavior.


“I tried to change my demeanor so I’d fit in with others. At first, it seemed to work. But later I came to realize that you should never change who you are just to be accepted.”—Nicole.

Bible principle: “Don’t do something just because everyone else is doing it. . . . You must not let those people persuade you to do wrong things.”—Exodus 23:2, Holy Bible—Easy to Read Version.
THE BULLY
I’m already well liked, and I want to keep things that way.

I will do whatever it takes to stay on top—even if it means trampling on others.


“Kids are often mean, and because bullies are more popular, a shy kid will believe that whatever they say is right.”—Raquel.

Bible principle: “Just as you want men to do to you, do the same way to them.”—Luke 6:31.
A BETTER ROUTE
              Know your standards. The Bible says that mature people have been “trained to distinguish both right and wrong.”—Hebrews 5:14.
By applying the three points to the left, you may lose some popularity—but you will be likable to the right kind of people!


              Stick to your beliefs. Be like Joshua, who confidently said: “Choose for yourselves today whom you will serve . . . But as for me and my household, we shall serve Jehovah.”—Joshua 24:15.

              Be confident about the path you have chosen. The apostle Paul reminded Timothy: “God gave us not a spirit of cowardice, but that of power.”—2 Timothy 1:7.




WHAT YOUR PEERS SAY
Melissa—Sure, you can try to be just like every other kid walking down the school hallway. But that’s so boring! Being a Christian makes you stand out in a good way. It doesn’t make you weird. It makes you likable.

Ashley—I used to feel unpopular at school, but then I’d go to a Christian meeting and be with friends who loved me for who I was. At that point, any interest I had in winning the approval of my schoolmates would fade away.

Phillip—The key to being accepted by others is to take a personal interest in them. Recently I’ve been trying to do small things for my friends, and this has drawn me closer to them.



