3THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE £> TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street -	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
officers
J. F. Rutherford, President____W. E. Van Amburoh, Secretary
"And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah 54:13,
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and Without the right to life
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death In order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun, that the Lord's next great act is the destiuction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS Journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of Its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
■United States, $1 00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreion, |150; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only
Foreign Offices
British....	.	34 Craven Terrace, London, W 2, England
Canadian .	. 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian	7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, NSW, Australia
South African . ..	.	Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
AH sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers' Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label witbin one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Sintered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N T, under the Act of March 3, 1879
“LOVERS OF RIGHTEOUSNESS”
This name designates the testimony period which will occupy the entire month of February. Those of Jehovah’s anointed remnant and their companions, foreshadowed by David and Jonathan, being lovers of righteousness of God, will rejoice to make special efforts during this period to devote more time and energy to the Watchtower Campaign, as announced below and which includes the month of February More time and effort in the field, or a new start mto the field, as a kingdom publisher, will require special planning on your part. If you desire to become a publisher, get m touch with our local organization or direct with this office, and make arrangements The completion of the period should be followed by a prompt report of your activities and results.
"WATCHTOWER” CAMPAIGN
Four full months of 1939, January to April inclusive, have been set aside for the biggest, if not most important, yet of the campaigns to publish Jehovah’s kingdom. It is designated the “Watchtower” campaign because of the special offer made, agreeable to arrangements of the Society, to wit, a full year’s subscrip
tion for the magazine The Watchtower together with the book Enemies or any other one desired of the bound book series and a copy of the new booklet Face the Facts, on a contribution of but $1.00. This will be the offer in every language in which The Watchtower appears; hence this four-month campaign will be both international and world-wide. Every reader of The Watchtower who appreciates its real value and the dire need of all people of good will today for its spiritual food will without urging desire to take part in this campaign If not already in touch with the Society’s service organization, write this office and make arrangements for the campaign. A monthly report m the regular way will be expected of each publisher. Consult the Informant for all details hereon.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of February 5: “Deliverance Guaranteed,” fl 1-24 inclusive,
The Watchtower January 1, 1939.
Week of February 12: “Deliverance Guaranteed,” fl 25-47 inclusive,
The Watchtower January 1, 1939.
AND HERALD OF CHRIST’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX	January 1, 1939	No. 1
DELIVERANCE GUARANTEED
“They shall not prevail against thee.”—Jer. 1:19.
TEHOVAH’S power is not limited, and his arm I is not shortened. He will fully bring to pass his J every purpose. The giving of his word of promise is a full and complete guarantee that what he has said shall be done. To know Jehovah and to believe his Word gives courage to the people that serve him. A comparatively small number of persons know of and appreciate these truths, because only a few know God and rely upon his Word. Those who do know Jehovah and who are in a covenant to do his will now have a grave responsibility resting upon them, the proper performance of which affords them an inestimable privilege and is accompanied by suffering. They need courage, and Jehovah provides that which is needed for them.
2	For centuries many nations of the earth have claimed to be Christian nations. They have possessed the Bible and pretended to teach it and to rely upon it. During the earlier part of that period doubtless many among the ruling factors of the nations did believe and rely upon Jehovah’s Word. Their modern-day successors in authority have chosen exactly the opposite course; they refuse to give honor and praise to Jehovah’s name, and the mass of the people blindly follow in that same way of unrighteousness. The net result is that all the nations called “Christendom” have forgotten God, and his judgment against those nations is written and soon will be executed. Ancient Jerusalem and the people of that land were in a covenant to do God’s will, and that people had sinned by giving their praise and worship to Jehovah’s enemies. Jerusalem was the type of present-day “Christendom”, and what came to pass upon Jerusalem and the people of that land is certain to befall “Christendom”. Jehovah commissioned his servant Jeremiah and sent him to give warning to Jerusalem and to all the people thereabout, making known to them that God had written his judgment against them and would shortly execute the same, and that any who would live must forsake Jerusalem and serve God’s appointed King. In fulfillment of that prophetic picture Jehovah has taken out from the
world “a people for his name”, whom he has made in these days his witnesses. (Acts-15:14) To that company of witnesses now on the earth God gives a commission, and they are caused to fulfill the picture made by Jeremiah. They, as the true followers of Christ Jesus, are sent forth to give the warning to “Christendom” and to all the people thereabout that the final judgment of Jehovah against them has been written and will be executed within a short time, and this warning is given to the people in order that those of good will toward God may flee to the only place of safety.
3	The terms of the commission which Jehovah gave to Jereiniah are exactly the same as of the commission God has given to his witnesses now on the earth. In that commission Jehovah, amongst other things, employed these words, to wit: “And I will utter my judgments against them touching all their wickedness, who have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, and worshipped the works of their own hands. Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee; be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them. For, behold, I have made thee this day a defenced city, and an iron pillar and brazen walls against the whole land, against the kings of Judah, against the princes thereof, against the priests thereof, and against the people of the land.”—Jer. 1:1G-18.
4	The mission upon which Jeremiah was sent was fraught with great danger, as the above words clearly indicate. Likewise the mission of Jehovah’s witnesses is now fraught with great danger because of the malicious animosity toward them of the ruling factors of “Christendom”. Jeremiah was warned that he must not fear or be dismayed because of the opposition to him. Likewise Jehovah’s witnesses are now warned that they must not fear or be dismayed or frightened because of the threats made against them and the assaults and persecution brought upon them. As God had surrounded Jeremiah with protection, so he now says to his faithful witnesses
4
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
on the earth: “I have made thee this day a defenced city [organization].” God told Jeremiah that the ruling powers, particularly the religious element, aided by the politicians and commercial crowd and their devotees, would bitterly oppose him; so likewise Jehovah’s witnesses now know that the religionists, the politicians and the traffickers are allied together in a conspiracy against God and his kingdom and that they bitterly oppose Jehovah’s faithful witnesses. Furthermore Jehovah said to Jeremiah: “And they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee.”
8 The words of the text, “But they shall not prevail against thee,” are the words chosen for the year text for 1939. Judging from past experience, and trusting wholly in the Word of God, his people know that strenuous times are here and that in the near future the witnesses of the Lord may be required to endure many hardships while carrying out their Godgiven commission. Those who trust in God and Christ now see the Devil and all his forces attempting to destroy all those that love and serve Jehovah. The Devil and his invisible angels have
gathered all the nations of “Christendom” together against God’s faithful people. Visible to human eyes are the leaders of religion and their allies, particularly the dictators of the world, who are cruelly and maliciously bent on destroying all who proclaim the name of Jehovah, his King and his kingdom. By faith God’s people also see Christ Jesus and his invisible hosts surrounding the faithful ones on earth with a full and complete protection. The faithful witnesses of the Lord completely rely upon God and Christ, and they know that victory for the Lord is certain and that their own complete deliverance is guaranteed by the Lord, because the Lord has said to them concerning the enemy: “They shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee.” Everyone who believes and relies upon that promise will be courageous.
CORROBORATIVE PROOF
’Jehovah is under no obligation to give corroborative proof of his faithfulness, but he does so for the comfort of his people in this time of stress and that their hope may be sure to them; and such hope is “an anchor of the soul, both sure and sted-fast”. The people of God now on the earth are facing the most critical condition of all time. Now they need to be very courageous, and such courage comes only by knowing and relying upon the Lord, and they know that they are being fully backed up and supported by the Most High. The Lord has placed within the reach of everyone consecrated to him the means of obtaining the necessary knowledge, and, when receiving such knowledge, they must rely upon that which comes from Jehovah. For many centuries God dealt with his chosen people of old, using them to make types and prophetic dramas of coming events, and he caused record thereof to be made for the benefit of his consecrated people now on the earth. (1 Cor. 10:11; Rom. 15:4) In the present time God brings to pass events in fulfillment of those prophetic dramas, and he reveals to his people the meaning of that which was long
ago made and recorded, and a knowledge and understanding thereof is now of special benefit and encouragement to the faithful. On many occasions God fought the battles for his covenant people and delivered them from the enemy, and, seeing that such things are recorded for the benefit of those now on earth, we do well to recount some of them and keep always in mind what God has done and what he has promised to do, that we may be strong in faith and that our courage may not fail. Therefore there is here set out a brief statement of some of these pictures long ago made by the Lord.
ENSAMPLES
T At Genesis 14:1-20 is the record of a war of conquest by four combined kings coining from the land of Nimrod, or Shinar, and which was prose
January 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
5
cuted against Sodom, and during which war Lot, the kinsman of Abraham, was captured and carried away. Abraham with his servants pursued the enemy, and recovered and fully delivered Lot and all that Lot had. There Abraham pictured God, while Lot pictured the “great multitude” now coming forth and which company must be involved in the great battle that is near; and in that fight the Greater Abraham will gain the victory for his royal house and their “companions” and will fully deliver the “great multitude”. (Rev. 7:9-17) To Abraham, the king-priest Melchizedek said: “Blessed be the Most High God, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand.” This is an assurance to Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions that God will fight their battles and gain the victory for them at Armageddon.
8 God sent his angels to Sodom and to the house of Lot to bear a message to Lot. A mob of Sodomites attempted to commit an assault upon the angels (who appeared as men). Lot defended the angels, and the mob said to Lot: “Now will we deal worse with thee than with them.” (Gen. 19:1-29) For the protection of Lot and his household against that mob the Lord, operating through his angels, smote the members of the mob with blindness and thereafter led Lot and his household to safety out of the city immediately before destroying Sodom. Here again is a picture of God’s protection and deliverance of those who are devoted to him and who are associated with his service. The two angels appearing there as men seemed to picture the members of the royal house, including the members of Jehovah’s witnesses now on the earth, and whom Jehovah by Christ Jesus sends to the modern-day Sodom, that is, “Christendom,” to act in behalf of the “great multitude”, which was pictured by Lot and his household. That such was a prophetic picture is testified to by the apostle. (2 Pet. 2:6-9) Also it shows God’s protection and deliverance of those who love and serve him and that he always cares for his own; and this is made known now for the encouragement of his people on the earth.
• Pharaoh, the Devil’s visible representative in Egypt (the world), put into operation a scheme to destroy Moses at the time of his birth. (Ex. 1:8-22) The Lord God caused that scheme to fail, by miraculously delivering Moses. When Moses grew to manhood he was compelled to flee the land of Egypt for a time in order to prevent his destruction by Satan’s representative. Then Jehovah sent Moses back into Egypt to serve notice upon Pharaoh and to deliver God’s chosen people. The climax came when Pharaoh and all of his army, horses and chariots, pursued the Israelites to destroy them, who were being led by Moses. At the Red sea Jehovah exercised his power on behalf of and gave the vic
tory to Moses and the Israelites. The miracle there wrought caused the Israelites to fear Jehovah and to believe him and to serve him and to obey his servant Moses. That great victory over the enemy and the deliverance of the Israelites by drowning Pharaoh’s army in the sea brought forth songs of praise to the name of Jehovah. (Ex. 15:1-22) The words of that victory song sung by Moses and the children of Israel foretell the song of victory and praise that will be sung by the “remnant” and the “great multitude”, and which song now by faith they are singing unto Jehovah. With full confidence in the Lord they sing now: “Jehovah is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation. . . . Jehovah is a man of war: Jehovah is his name. Who is like unto thee, 0 Jehovah, among the gods? Who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?” (Ex. 15:2,3,11, A.R.V.) That song further foretells the great victory of the Lord over the combined elements of the Devil’s organization that now seek the destruction of God’s people, and it was recorded for the comfort of those who are now facing the enemy; and concerning the victory upon the enemy Jehovah says: “Fear and dread shall fall upon them; by the greatness of thine arm they shall be as still as a stone; . . . till the people pass over, which thou hast purchased.”—Ex. 15:16.
10	This is a further guarantee to the “remnant” and to the “great multitude” that God, through Christ his Executioner, will deliver them at Armageddon. It is true that some of the remnant and some of the Jonadabs, who are faithful, may be slain at Armageddon^ but the Scriptures give assurance of a quick resurrection.
11	Out from Egypt the Israelites began their long trek to the land of Canaan under the leadership of Moses, and in due time they pitched camp at Rephi-dim. There the Amalekites attempted to destroy the Israelites. At God’s direction by Moses the Israelites took the offensive. They did not hole up in the rocks or behind breastworks, but in obedience to Moses’ command they went out and fought the enemy. The Lord, in that battle led by Joshua, who represented Christ, assaulted the enemy, gained a great victory and delivered the Israelites. It was the victory of Jehovah for his people. (Ex. 17:8-16) That it was Jehovah’s battle and that he gave the victory is shown by the fact that Joshua prevailed only when the hands of Moses were held up. Thus is shown that Jehovah God will uphold the Greater Joshua at the battle of Armageddon and will completely rout the enemy. Now Satan’s forces go forth attempting to destroy God’s people, and those who trust wholly in Jehovah and his Vindicator, Christ Jesus, must take the offensive and go forth into
6
THE WATCHTOWER.
the battle trusting the Lord, who gives assurance of their deliverance.
18 Jehovah then and there declared that Amalek should perish: “I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.” In due time that final destruction came. Amalek was the one who fought against the Israelites; and said the Lord: “But his latter end shall be that he perish for ever.” (Num. 24:20) That latter end came in the time of Mordecai and Esther, when God delivered his people from the hands of their oppressors. Religionists have taken the lead in fighting against God’s people; and in his due time, at the beginning of Armageddon, the end of those religionists shall be that they shall perish for ever. This is pictured in the drama recorded in the book of Esther, chapters three to nine. The Amalekite, Haman, conspired to bring about the destruction of Mordecai and Esther and all of God’s chosen people in the land of Persia. The result was that Haman was hanged on the gallows that he had built for Mordecai, and in the battle that followed the Amalekites were completely wiped out. That prophetic drama disclosed Christ Jesus and his host of angels destroying all the enemies and delivering those who faithfully serve Jehovah. This is another picture made as a guarantee of deliverance of God’s people. All those who have sought refuge in the Lord and his organization should now carefully study the book of Esther and the explanation thereof, which is found in the book Preservation, pages 9-168.
18 As the Israelites journeyed forward toward the land of promise the Devil sought their destruction by means of his religionists. The Midianites practiced the devil religion of Baal-peor. The spiritual adviser of the Midianites was the unfaithful prophet Balaam. The Lord brought destruction upon the Midianites and upon Balaam. Thus the Lord gave assurance to his faithful servants that they shall be delivered from the religionists and their allies that now seek their destruction. — Num. 25:6-18; 31:1-17; Rev. 2:14.
14 As the Israelites continued to journey on to the land of Canaan God’s enemies fought against them. Arad the Canaanite, Sihon the king of the Amorites, and Og the king of Bashan, one after the other, assaulted the Israelites, and the enemy was overthrown and destroyed by Jehovah, and in each instance Jehovah fought the battle for his covenant people. (Num. 21:1-3, 21-35) Thereafter when the Israelites were assembled on the plains of Moab Moses recounted to them how Jehovah had fought their battles for them and delivered them from their enemies. (Deut. 2:26-37; 3:1-13) Concerning those battles Moses said to the Israelites: “And the Lord said unto me, Fear him not; for I will deliver him, and
Brooklyn, N. Y.
all his people, and his land, into thy hand; and thou shalt do unto him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heshbon. So the Lord our God delivered into our hands Og also, the king of Bashan, and all his people; and we smote him until none was left to him remaining.” “And I commanded Joshua at that time, saying, Thine eyes have seen all that the Lord your God hath done unto these two kings; so shall the Lord do unto all the kingdoms whither thou passest. Ye shall not fear them; for the Lord your God he shall fight for you.”—Deut. 3: 2,3, 21, 22.
18 Jehovah’s time came for his covenant people to enter the land of Canaan, which at that time was held in possession by the enemies of the Lord. Putting Joshua in the lead as visible commander, God led the host of Israel across the flood waters of the Jordan and in the very face of Jericho, and caused the walls of Jericho to fall down flat. Thereafter the enemies of the stronghold of Ai made war upon God’s covenant people who, under the leadership of Joshua, fought against Ai, and God gave the victory to the Israelites. (Joshua 1-8) The Gib-eonites voluntarily put themselves under the protection of Joshua, and then the five kings of the Amorites conspired together to destroy Gibeon because they had sought protection by associating themselves with Joshua. (Joshua, chapters 9 and 10) The Gibeonites pictured the “great multitude” fleeing to Christ Jesus for protection. At God’s command Joshua courageously led his army against the conspirators. “And the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear them not; for I have delivered them into thine hand; there shall not a man of them stand before thee.”—Joshua 10:8.
16 That was one of the great battles foretelling God’s purpose to destroy his enemies at Armageddon, the record of which is made for the encouragement of those people of Jehovah who now serve him as Armageddon approaches. The great battle of Gibeon was fought by the Lord then as he will fight for his people at Armageddon: “And it came to pass, as they [the enemy] fled from before Israel, and were in the going down to Beth-horon, that the Lord cast down great stones from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they died; they were more which died with hailstones than they whom the children of Israel slew with the sword.”—Josh. 10:11.
11 Thereafter the remaining kings of northern Canaan all formed a combine to destroy Joshua and his army. “And the Lord said unto Joshua, Be not afraid because of them; for to morrow about this time will I deliver them up all slain before Israel; thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariots with fire. So Joshua came, and all the people of war with them, against them by
January 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER.
7
the waters of Merom suddenly; and they fell upon them. And the Lord delivered them into the hand of Israel, who smote them, and chased them unto great Zidon, and unto Misrephoth-maim, and unto the valley of Mizpeh eastward; and they smote them, until they left them none remaining.”—Josh. 11: 6-8.
18	The combined enemy was bent on the destruction of the Israelites, even as the religionists and their allies are now in the conspiracy to destroy the people of God on earth, and which the presentday enemy does because God’s consecrated people uncompromisingly and unqualifiedly advocate the kingdom of God under Christ. It is written concerning that combined enemy that came against the Israelites, and which words apply to God’s people: “There was not a city that made peace with the children of Israel, save the Hivites, the inhabitants of Gibeon; all other they took in battle. For it was of the Lord to harden their hearts, that they should come against Israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and that they might have no favour, but that he might destroy them, as the Lord commanded Moses.”—Josh. 11:19, 20.
18	The record of that victory was made especially for the comfort and encouragement of God’s people now on the earth. There Joshua pictured Christ Jesus, and those Israelites who followed and obeyed his command foreshadowed those who today believe on Jehovah and Christ and who earnestly and faithfully follow Christ Jesus and joyfully obey his commandments. Those who really love Jehovah and his King and kingdom now will not fear the enemy, but will boldly go forward in obedience to the Lord’s command.
FAITH
80	It appears that one of the major difficulties of God’s covenant people is lack of faith in Jehovah. Particularly is this shown in the experiences of the Israelites. Whenever they departed from the Lord and turned to religion, affliction came upon them. When they repented and cried unto God, he showed mercy toward them and fought their battles and delivered them. The king of Mesopotamia for several years oppressed the Israelites by Jehovah’s permission, because the Israelites had turned to the Devil religion. Then they repented and cried unto Jehovah, who in mercy and for his name’s sake heard their cry and sent them a deliverer. Jehovah then fought the battles of Israel and gave them the victory, using Othniel and Ehud as his chosen instruments to accomplish his will.—Judg. 3:7-31.
81	Thereafter Jabin, king of Canaan, and his captain, Sisera, were permitted to oppress the Israelites because that people had become unfaithful to God and had turned to the Devil religion. Again the Israelites repented and cried unto Jehovah, who
heard them and who used the prophetess Deborah and Barak to lead the battle against the enemy, which Jehovah fought, and overthrew and destroyed the enemy at the first battle of Megiddo. (Judg. 4:1-24) In that battle Jehovah used the stars of heaven and the swift waters of the river Kishon to destroy the enemy. (Judg. 5:1,19-21) That was an example of Jehovah’s unlimited power disclosed and foretelling what He will do to his enemies at the final battle of Armageddon, and the record thereof is made that the covenant people of God may now have their faith made strong. Trusting wholly in the Lord and continuing to perform their duty unto God, without fear of creatures, they shall receive Jehovah’s protection, and share with the Lord in the victory.—Ps. 83: 8-10.
82	Again the faith of the Israelites weakened and they turned to the Devil religion, and God delivered them into the hands of Midian for seven years. Again the Israelites repented and cried unto God, and God reminded them that he had been their deliverer, but that the Israelites had become of little faith. To the Israelites he said: “And I said unto you, I am the Lord your God; fear not the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell; but ye have not obeyed my voice.” (Judg. 6:10) Then Jehovah raised up Gideon, who, under the Lord’s command, led the faithful Israelites against the enemy, and routed and destroyed them. (Judg. 6:1-40; 7:1-25; 8:1-35) There was made another prophetic picture of what Jehovah will do for his faithful servants at the battle of Armageddon.—Ps. 83:11,12; Isa. 10:26; Jer. 1:19.
83	The Israelites became weak in faith, again fell away to the Devil religion, and Jehovah delivered them into the hands of the Philistines for forty years. That oppressed people cried unto God. Then he raised up Samson and used him to break the power of the Philistines and to deliver the Israelites. That was another evidence of God’s mercy and unlimited power exercised in behalf of those who serve him faithfully.—Judges 13-16.
84	God anointed the shepherd lad David to be king over Israel. David beheld the giant Goliath frightening the Israelites into inactivity and defying the Almighty God. David’s zeal was stirred to incandescent heat and, trusting wholly in the power of the Almighty God, he boldly engaged the giant in combat and slew him and put the Philistines to flight. That is an example of what Christ, the Greater David, will do to the enemy who are now persecuting God’s covenant people. (1 Samuel, chapters 17 and 18) David exhibited the faith of God’s people which they must now have and exercise. When David was installed as king of Israel, the Philistines attempted to destroy him. Twice the
8
THE WATCHTOWER
enemy joined battle with David, at Mount Perazim and at Gibeon, and David completely routed the enemy. (1 Chron. 14:8-17) It was God who gained the victory for his faithful servant David, and it is God’s sure promise that at Armageddon he will again fight for his people as he fought for them at Mount Perazim and Gibeon. (Isa. 28:21) David was a type of Christ, God’s Anointed, who will completely destroy the enemy at Armageddon.
85	Later another prophetic picture was made and recorded, showing Jehovah’s protection and deliverance of his faithful servants. The people of Moab, Ammon and Mount Seir formed a conspiracy to destroy God’s covenant people, and, in their effort to carry out that conspiracy, marched on Jerusalem. Jehoshaphat, in command of God’s covenant people, was instructed by the Lord what he must do. The enemy far outnumbered the Israelites and were fully equipped for war. God assured Jehoshaphat and the Israelites and others with him that they had no occasion to fear the enemy, for the reason that the battle is God’s; that the duty of the Israelites was to boldly march out and meet the enemy, singing, as they went, the praises of Jehovah. Then God fought their battle and the enemy was completely destroyed; and that was another example of God’s unlimited power exercised in behalf of those who love and obey him. Thus Jehovah foretold again what will come to pass at the battle of Armageddon in behalf of his people. Do you believe it? Then deport yourself accordingly.—2 Chron. 20:1-29.
*• The Assyrian king Sennacherib marched against Jerusalem, bullying the Israelites and defying the Almighty God. Thus he pictured the combined opponents of God’s kingdom that now, in defiance of Almighty God and Christ his King, march out to destroy Jehovah’s witnesses. Hezekiah, the king of Israel, prayed unto Jehovah for protection and deliverance, and in answer to that prayer Jehovah said: “Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shields, nor cast a bank against it. . . . For I will defend this city to save it for mine own sake, and for my servant David’s sake. Then the angel of the Lord went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.” (Isa. 37:33-36) This is further proof that Jehovah will deliver his faithful covenant people and completely destroy the enemy. That was a test of the faith of Hezekiah and the other Israelites, and God rewarded their faith. A similar test has come to God’s people now on the earth.
Brooklyx, N. Y.
2T Faithless Israelites turned again to the Devil religion and were carried away in captivity. Later God brought the faithful remnant thereof back into the place he had assigned to them, and there he prospered them. Then the wicked forces of Gog of the land of Magog gathered together to destroy the faithful Israelites. Here again Jehovah furnishes a picture of the host of wicked angels, invisible to human eyes but who bear rule over the earth, together with their religious allies on earth, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy Fascists and their insane radicals, who have formed themselves into a conspiracy and are marching to destroy the servants of God now on earth, including both the remnant and those who will form the great multitude. These covenant people of God are now restored to their proper place as servants of the Most High and his King. The combined enemy is fatally bent on the destruction of the servants of the Lord. In the prophetic picture Jehovah maneuvered the combined enemy and permitted them to come up against his people. In this was pictured “the last days”, the time of great peril, the time which now is at hand. Jehovah defeated the enemy, and will again defeat them. Shall Jehovah’s covenant people now on earth fear or be dismayed because of the enemy marching against them? What Jehovah said concerning Gog and the land of Magog now applies with stronger force concerning the present-day enemy and His own people, to wit: “And thou shalt come up against my people of Israel [God’s covenant people now on the earth], as a cloud to cover the land; it shall be in the latter days, and I will bring thee against my land, that the heathen may know me, when I shall be sanctified in thee, 0 Gog, before their eyes. Thus saith the Lord God, Art thou he of whom I have spoken in old time by my servants the prophets of Israel, which prophesied in those days many years that I would bring thee against them? And it shall come to pass at the same time, when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, saith the Lord God, that my fury shall come up in my face. For in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath, have I spoken, Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel.” “And I will call for a sword against him throughout all my mountains, saith the Lord God: every man’s sword shall be against his brother. And I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone. Thus will I magnify myself, and sanctify myself; and I will be known in the eyes of many nations; and they shall know that I am the Lord.”—Ezek. 38:16-19, 21-23.
January 1, 1939
^He WATCHTOWER,
9
” Jehovah is the Almighty God of all power, and he will show his strength in behalf of those who are devoted to him; therefore they need not fear: “For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him.” —2 Chron. 16:9.
** The three faithful Hebrews, Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego, were under the power of Nebuchadnezzar. Because they refused to yield to Satanic religion, determining to remain faithful and true to the Most High, King Nebuchadnezzar caused them to be cast into a red-hot fiery furnace. The flames did not scorch them, because they were protected by the Lord; but the flames destroyed the men who threw them into the fire. Because of their faith and faithfulness the Lord God protected his and delivered them. Another faithful Hebrew, Daniel, was betrayed to the king by those men who sought his destruction. Fearless of the enemy and trusting wholly in God, Daniel refused to yield to their influence and to practice the Devil religion. Because of his faithfulness to God, the king caused him to be cast into a den of lions; but God’s unlimited power was exercised in behalf of his servant Daniel, and the wild beasts did not touch him, but did destroy those who formed a conspiracy against the faithful servant of Jehovah. The foregoing are some of the instances which the Lord has caused to be recorded as a further assurance to his people now on the earth.
HIS NAME
•’Why did Jehovah so often show his mercy to the backsliding Israelites and so frequently restore them to him and fight their battles for them and deliver them from the enemy? Such Jehovah did for his own name’s sake. (Isa. 43:25; 48:9-11; Ezek. 20:8,9) “Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God, I do not this for your sakes, 0 house of Israel, but for mine holy name’s sake, which ye have profaned among the heathen, whither ye went.” (Ezek. 36:22) From the time of Satan’s rebellion till now the great name of Jehovah is the important issue, and his purpose is to fully vindicate his name. Why did Jehovah God so often fight the battles of Israel and deliver them ? For his own name’s sake. Jehovah God will prove to all creation and compel all to know that he is the Almighty, whose name is Jehovah. He has purposed it, and he will do it.
" Why did Jehovah cause so many prophetic pictures to be made in times of old and a record thereof to be made and preserved in his Word? The answer is written: “For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope.” (Rom. 15:4) God has taken out from the nations “a people for his name”, and his time has come when those people thus taken out shall bear witness to his name. (Isa. 43:9-12) Graciously Jehovah has provided for the aid and encouragement of his people who maintain their integrity toward him, and this he does that they may have no reason to become discouraged and fainthearted. This is the time for boldness in the Lord, the time to be very courageous. God is opening to his people the meaning of his prophecies recorded of old. The time for his victory and vindication has come. Zion, of which Christ Jesus is the chief and head of God’s anointed, is “the apple of his eye”, and none can with impunity touch God’s anointed. (Deut. 32:10; Zech. 2:8; Ps. 105:15) God’s time has come to exalt his name, and Zion is his instrument to bear testimony to his name. Therefore Jehovah says: “For Zion’s sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem’s sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burneth. And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory: and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name.” —Isa. 62:1, 2.
” Associated with and under the protection of Zion are those who will form the great multitude, now called “Jonadabs” (2 Ki. 10:15-23), and God has declared that to such faithful ones he will give protection. As Jehovah used his power in behalf of his covenant people of old, so now in these last days he will use his power in behalf of his anointed and those who have sought protection in his organization under Christ. Into the hand of Christ Jesus God has committed all power and has commanded him to exercise that power in behalf of those who love and faithfully serve him. Do you believe that Christ Jesus is the Vindicator of Jehovah’s name and that the day of vindication is at hand? Do you believe that the conflicts in times past, when God showed his power to his covenant people, were pictures of what is now at hand and will come to pass ? Then, if so, “according to your faith be it unto you.” (Matt. 9:29) Let your eyes of understanding, now being opened by the Lord Jesus, be set entirely upon the Lord, and know that he will accomplish Jehovah’s purpose and, therefore, that it is our privilege and duty to stand firm and fear no creature. The battle is not ours, but is Jehovah’s.
VICTORY
ss Jehovah sent Jeremiah to prophesy against Jerusalem of its impending disaster. Jeremiah pictured Jehovah’s anointed ones now on the earth.
10
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Likewise Jehovah has sent his anointed witnesses now to proclaim to “Christendom” its impending disaster. The words which Jehovah spoke to Jeremiah now apply with greater force to Jehovah’s witnesses on earth. Within himself Jeremiah had no strength, and so stated; but, being encouraged by the Lord, he had full faith and confidence in Jehovah. Likewise the witnesses of Jehovah now on earth have no strength in themselves, but the Lord is their strength and song. To “Christendom”, which has become grossly adulterous, arrogant and blasphemous, and whose religious leaders assume to represent God and Christ, but in fact have entirely forsaken Jehovah and “burned incense” to the Devil, the Lord’s words are now applicable, to wit: “And I will utter my judgments against them touching all their wickedness, who have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, and worshipped the works of their own hands.” (Jer. 1:16) Men of the world insist that attention should not be publicly called to the derelictions of others. The argument generally advanced by them is, “Let us dwell in peace and not speak of trouble.” Those who obey Jehovah God cannot follow that rule, because Jehovah now says to his witnesses: “Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee; be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them.” (Jer. 1:17) In obedience to this commandment Jehovah’s witnesses must go forward and tell the truth. It is not their message, but God’s message, which he commands must be delivered.
84	God’s “strange work” must now be done until it is finished, and those who have made-a covenant to do his will and who then fail or refuse to perform their assigned part in his “strange work” cannot have Jehovah’s approval and blessing. (Isa. 28:21) To engage in the witness or “strange work” now necessarily brings reproach upon all who faithfully perform their duty, and such reproach is the privilege of suffering with Christ. (Phil. 1:29) Instead of shirking such duty, the faithful now greatly rejoice in being permitted to have a part in the sufferings of Christ. “Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body’s sake, which is the church.”—Col. 1: 24.
88	Those who have and exercise full faith and confidence in Jehovah and in Christ Jesus will not fear any creatures, but with boldness will proclaim the message as commanded. The remnant, accompanied by their companions, know that they must go out to meet the enemy. No longer are God’s people on the defensive, but must take the aggressive and offensive and be very courageous in performance
of their duty because they know that Jehovah and Christ are bacldng them up. To them Jehovah now says: “For, behold, I have made thee this day a defenced city [organization], and an iron pillar and brazen walls [an irresistible and impregnable fortress] against the whole land, against the kings [political, dictatorial rulers] of Judah [who profess to praise God, having a form of godliness, but denying entirely His power], against the princes thereof [the commercial traffickers who support the dictators], against the priests thereof [the religious leaders who exhibit their gaudy garments that they may receive the plaudits of men and exalt themselves against God and his kingdom], and against the people [who support and give their allegiance to the anti-God-totalitarian-religious-Fascist combine] of the land.” (Jer. 1:18) Not only are those elements against Jehovah’s witnesses, but they act in defiance of Jehovah.
88	The day of Armageddon is near. The combined enemy is gathered together and moving forward to carry into operation their wicked conspiracy. Behold the Fascist dictators now in the saddle and on the march, and together wTith their commercial war lords, who manufacture munitions and guns and traffic in human blood. Riding on the back thereof and forming a part of the wicked anti-God crowd, are the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, arrogantly strutting their stuff. Does that combination speak peace to the people of God who are following and obeying “the Prince of Peace”? They do not. Our natural eyes behold only the forces and power of men, but by faith in God’s Word we see that joined together with the Fascist-religious-Godless element is a host of wicked angels and the entire wicked army is fully under the command of the Devil himself and all are bent on rule or ruin. Without full faith and confidence in the Lord the army of the enemy would strike deadly terror into the hearts of men; yet the faithful remnant and their companions do not fear. Concerning that wicked horde Jehovah speaks, and to his faithful people on earth he says: “They shall fight against thee.” We are therefore fully forewarned that the ruling powers of “Christendom”, which is antitypical Jerusalem, are maliciously making war on those who faithfully serve Jehovah God and his King. Shall any faithful servant of God now fear or be dismayed? No! Because Jehovah says to his faithful little band of servants,
“THEY SHALL NOT PREVAIL AGAINST THEE”
87	How is it possible for a small band of witnesses to withstand the onrush of that wicked horde coming against them? The Most High, addressing his faithful servants, answers: “For I am with thee,
January 1,1939
THE WATCHTOWER
11
saith the Lord, to deliver thee.” Be not dismayed at the faces and power of the enemy; and for encouragement look at the other side of the picture. Those who now love and serve Jehovah believe his Word and follow its instruction as their sure guide. To them the prophecies are now made clear, and by faith they behold a host of heavenly, glorious angels, under the command of Christ Jesus, marching to the battle of Armageddon, and they know that that invisible host shall gain the victory. The Lord is delivering to the little band of his faithful witnesses on earth, for their encouragement, this message: “[The enemy] shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee.” John, as set forth in The Revelation, had a vision of the approaching final conflict. There John pictured the anointed remnant now on the earth, and the vision he had is the vision of Jehovah’s remnant and also their “companions”, and concerning which it is written: “And I saw heaven opened, and behold, a white horse; and he that sat upon him was called Faithful and True, and in righteousness he doth judge and make war. His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns; and he had a name written, that no man knew but he himself. And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood; and his name is called The Word of God. And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean. And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations; and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.”—Rev. 19:11-16.
88	Christ Jesus is the head over Zion, around which Jehovah has erected an impregnable wall, and into that place of safety God, through Christ, has gathered the faithful anointed. The people of earth who are of good will toward God and his kingdom, upon hearing the kingdom message and learning of Jehovah’s gracious provisions, are hurrying to that defensed city, that they may have there complete protection until the storm of Armageddon has passed. Outside of that fortified city or organization there is no protection for anyone, and God’s announced purpose is to destroy all who are outside thereof.
88	Those who think to escape the terrors and destruction of Armageddon by taking a neutral place and remaining inactive are greatly deceiving themselves. Furthermore, those who do find protection and safety under the Lord’s organization cannot wait until Armageddon begins and then seek such protection. That great conflict is a time of greatest
distress upon the earth and is designated by the Lord as the winter time. Jesus gives this warning: “Pray ye that your flight be not in the winter [time].” —Matt. 24: 20.
40	Over a period of many centuries Jehovah dealt with his typical covenant people and fought their battles for them and delivered them. They were fought for his own name’s sake, because he had given his word that he would have a people for his name that would prove their integrity toward him. Now the end of Satan’s rule has come and the time for complete vindication of Jehovah’s name. It is a time of the final showdown, when the issue of supremacy shall be for ever determined. God has given his word that he will show his strength in behalf of those who have full heart devotion to him in this day. But that promise does not extend to any of his enemies, nor to those who remain indifferent and inactive toward God and his “strange work”. Each one must take a positive stand for the Lord. It is the day when the kingdom under Christ shall prevail and when the Lord will cover himself with glorious victory, and to all the words of Jesus now apply, to wit: “He that is not with me is against me.” (Matt. 12: 30) Those who find refuge now must boldly stand on the side of the Lord and fully and completely trust in him, for in him alone must the people hope.—Matt. 12: 21.
“Jeremiah had no personal fight with the men of Israel. He was sent as God’s messenger to proclaim the judgment of Jehovah that the people might know Jehovah’s purpose. Likewise today Jehovah’s witnesses, in fulfillment of the prophetic picture made by Jeremiah, have no fight with men on earth, but are sent as the messengers of Jehovah to declare unto the people God’s judgments already written and to inform them according to God’s Word what will be the result; and this they do to the end that those of good will toward God might be informed and flee to safety. The words of Jehovah given to Jeremiah now with stronger force apply to Jehovah’s witnesses, to wit: “I will utter my judgments against them touching all their wickedness, who have forsaken me and have burned incense unto other gods, and worshipped the works of their own hands.” Of the very things described by these words of the Lord “Christendom” is guilty, and Jehovah’s adverse judgment is written against “Christendom”, and particularly against the religious element led by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. That religious Hierarchy falsely and blasphemously claims to represent God on the earth. They have kept the Bible away from the people and thereby kept the people in total ignorance of Jehovah’s purpose and of his loving-kindness, as well as of his severity against those who disobey him. The
12
THE WATCHTOWER,
judgment written against the Boman Catholic Hierarchy and like religionists means their complete undoing, because it states the following, to wit: "Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet; and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding place. And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.”— Isa. 28:17,18.
41	To them and their allies Jehovah says: "Howl, ye shepherds, and cry; and wallow yourselves in the ashes, ye principal of the flock: for the days of your slaughter and of your dispersions are accomplished ; and ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel. And the shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the principal of the flock to escape.”—Jer. 25 : 34,35.
44 Those who are now in a covenant with Jehovah must keep this in mind: that there are many people held in bondage by the religious institutions and who are persons of sincerity, desiring righteousness. They must be warned and informed, and the Lord has laid this obligation upon his witnesses and their companions to give the warning. Those who love God and his King and kingdom will do exactly as commanded. They will not be fearful, but, on the contrary, will be fearless and have boldness in this day of judgment, making known Jehovah’s purpose.—1 John 4:17,18.
44 The power of Jehovah God is without limitation. He has committed into the hand of Christ Jesus the power to execute his judgment. The enemy cannot successfully resist the Lord. Do we believe that this is true) If we do, then there can be no excuse to hesitate or to be inactive in the service of bearing testimony to the name and purpose of the Most High.
Bbooki-vk, N. Y.
48 To now be fearful of the enemy means to fall into the snare of the Devil. (Prov. 29:25) To entirely trust in the Lord and prove that trust by full obedience, means deliverance and salvation. There is now no middle ground for Jehovah’s witnesses and the Lord’s “other sheep", their companions. To all such the Lord says: “According to your faith be it unto you.” For centuries past Jehovah has furnished the opportunity for men to prove their faith and integrity toward him. Now the greatest of all opportunity is offered, and all who receive the blessings of life from his gracious hand must seize upon that opportunity and perform joyfully.
44 The Lord is the buckler and shield of his people. We must therefore conclude that he is guiding all those who love and serve him and that such guidance includes his providing the text for the year 1939, and that the Lord is now saying to his people concerning the fight of the enemy against them: “They shall not prevail against thee." No foe can successfully fight against God and the people whom God has chosen for himself and who are blessed by his protection. To the faithful followers of Christ Jesus, who now bear testimony to the name of Jehovah and his kingdom, he says: “There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon the heaven in thy help and in his excellency on the sky. The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms; and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee; and shall say, Destroy them.”—Deut. 33:26,27.
4T Jehovah and his King shall gain the complete victory, and those who maintain their integrity toward the Lord shall share in that victory. Be very courageous, therefore, and go out to meet the enemy; and as we go let us continue to sing the praises of the Most High.
CAPTIVITY
BECAUSE Job maintained his integrity toward God Jehovah “turned the captivity of Job”, whom Satan had specifically afflicted. (Job 42:10) Death is the penalty inflicted for the violation of God’s law; and therefore death cannot be said to hold anyone in captivity. (Rom. 6:23) Neither Jews nor any others are God’s captives by reason of death. “The whole world in the wicked one [Satan] is lying.” (1 John 5:19, Roth.} All the human race, therefore, has fallen captive to Satan and his organization ; and only those who have devoted themselves wholly to the Most High God and his King, Christ Jesus, have escaped, and in order to receive Jehovah’s continued favor they must ever afterward maintain their integrity toward Jehovah.
Sodom, Samaria and Jerusalem were the captives of
the Devil’s organization, and all went down into death as such captives. The Almighty God will destroy Satan’s organization and will bring the people of those nations, with exceptions, back from that captivity. “When I shall bring again their captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, then will I bring again the captivity of thy captives in the midst of them.” (Ezek. 16:53) These scriptures show that the captivity means, not death, but captivity to Satan and his organization. Through his prophet Jehovah says: “But it shall come to pass in the latter days, that I will bring again the captivity of Elam." (Jer. 49:39) The religious systems falsely called “Christian” are like “silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts" into captivity to Satan and his organization. (2 Tim. 3:6)
January 1,1939
THE WATCHTOWER.
13
Such are “taken captive by [Satan the Devil] at his will”. —2 Tim. 2:26.
The ten tribes of Israel at Samaria went into captivity to Assyria, but this was merely the visible evidence that, having forsaken Jehovah’s typical organization, they had gone into captivity to Satan’s organization morally and religiously, and then actually became the captives of Assyria. Nor do the words of Jehovah by his prophet, “I shall bring again their captivity,” have reference to the return of the Israelites from Babylon by the order of Cyrus, because Sodom was not returned at that time. The return of all must take place at the same time, according to the Scriptures. Today all the Sodomites are the dead captives of Satan. Likewise the unfaithful Israelites are the dead captives of Satan. All these captives must be brought back or returned “in the latter days”. (Jer. 49:39) This can take place after Satan’s organization is destroyed and Satan is bound, and the divine mandate to the survivors of Armageddon to “fill the earth” has been carried out.
The bringing of the captives back will open their minds to the truth: “That thou mayest bear thine own shame, and mayest be confounded in all that thou hast done, in that thou art a comfort unto them.” (Ezek. 16:54) Israel will then bear her shame, not shame before Sodom by measuring and comparing themselves with themselves, because such is not right, and God will not permit it. (2 Cor. 10:12) They bear their shame before Jehovah, the great Judge, due to the light which exposes and correctly measures the depths of all sin and wickedness and reproves it. “But all things that are reproved are made manifest by the light; for whatsoever doth make manifest is light.” (Eph. 5:13) “In the day [of light] when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ.” (Kom. 2:16) “[He] will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts.” (1 Cor. 4:5) The Israelites will be ashamed of their wickedness before Jehovah, and those of “Christendom” will also bear their shame. The shame of both Israel and “Christendom” will be greater than that of Sodom and Samaria.
Nor does God’s Word necessarily mean that the Jews will be brought back to the land of Palestine. The prophet says: “When thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shall return to their former estate, and Samaria and her daughters shall return to their former estate, then thou and thy daughters shall return to your former estate.” (Ezek. 16:55) The word “estate” does not appear in the Hebrew. Leeser renders the text: “Shall return to their former state [condition].” Satan dragged them down into destruction and brought them into captivity, and the returning of them from captivity will mean their return unto a condition of conscious existence, freed from Satan’s organization, which will then have been destroyed. It would matter not whether they were brought back to Palestine or the United States. The Jews did much worse than the people of Sodom, and “Christendom” has done much worse than the Jews; and yet the people of Catholic and Protestant religious associations will be brought out of the graves, together with those of all other religions, and all will be given a knowledge of the truth for the purpose of judgment. This is all due to the fact that Christ Jesus, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man that believes and obeys and
that it is the will of God that such shall first be brought to a knowledge of the truth.—Heb. 2: 9.
The Scriptural testimony abundantly supports the conclusion that the purpose of returning them from captivity is for judgment. (John 5:29; 2 Tim. 4:1) In that judgment the Jews will have a harder time than the people of Sodom, and the people of “Christendom” will have a harder time than either the Jews or the Sodomites. This is proved by the words of Jesus: “But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment, than for you. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell; for if the mighty works which have been done in thee had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee.” (Matt. 11: 22-24) In the resurrection those of “Christendom” who have died as captives to Satan’s organization will find, when awakened from death, that Satan’s organization is gone, and there will be no more opportunity for spiritual fornication therewith. (Ezek. 16:58,59) In the full light of the truth they will be ashamed, except those who have been willfully wicked and who will not live again.
The heathen, such as Sodom, must return, if at all, in order to learn that the name of God has been vindicated. All then must have and will have opportunity to know and obey God’s law. Then all must see that they are not deserving of everlasting life, but that what God has done for them in providing the means of everlasting life is because of his great love and for his own name’s sake. “Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God, I do not this for your sakes, 0 house of Israel, but for mine holy name’s sake, which ye have profaned among the heathen, whither ye went.” — Ezek. 36:22; John 3:16.
“Christendom” is the most hypocritical of all organizations. “For thus saith the Lord God, I will even deal with thee as thou hast done, which hast despised the oath in breaking the covenant.” (Ezek. 16:59) She has.called herself by the name of God, claiming to be in a covenant relationship with him and claiming to be the followers of Christ Jesus. She has had the clergy officiate at the crowning of all of the kings; had her rulers sworn into public office by an oath with uplifted hand, on the Bible; and has designated her clergy as 'God’s ministers’; and declares that the “higher powers . . . ordained of God” are the rulers that have controlled and rule the nations of “Christendom”; and her clergy and the principal of the flock emphasize the “fact” that these rulers of “Christendom” are ruling by divine right. In the face of all this outward show “Christendom” has despised her oath, denied God and his Word, and denied the blood of Christ that purchased the life of humankind, and has taken a course under the Devil’s leadership that has brought the greatest reproach upon the name of Jehovah God that any peoples could possibly bring upon his name. For this reason “Christendom” is hypocrisy gone to seed, and is the most reprehensible of all peoples that have ever lived under the sun, and hence, according to God’s announced judgment, will be subjected to the most severe punishment of all nations or peoples.
SANCTUARY
JEHOVAH declares that he will give his glory to none besides his ‘elect servant’ class. (Isa. 42:1,8) No man takes this honor to himself; but the man must first receive the call from Jehovah, accept and respond to that call, and then prove faithful according to the measurements or requirements of Jehovah. Such a one is not anointed to the kingdom as soon as he is spirit-begotten. 11 is only after he has proved faithful up to a certain point that then he is anointed and is pictured as entering the temple of which Christ Jesus is the Head; hence the relationship or position thus pictured is closed to all others.
It was in the year 1930 that Jehovah caused to be published in The Watchtower the clearer view of the way into “Jehovah’s Royal House”, and since then the remnant discerned clearly how “shut” a proposition God’s royal house is. (The Watchtower, January 15 to March 15, 1930) Only those who comply with the rules or measurements can enter and be made members thereof.
These truths are emphasized in the prophetic vision of his sanctuary or temple given by Jehovah to his prophet Ezekiel. In that vision Ezekiel, led by an angel, saw himself making a tour of inspection of the grand approaches to the temple structure and of it itself. Having passed into and through the outer eourt, and then into the inner court, Ezekiel was brought to the east gate. “Then he [the angel] brought me back the way of the gate of the outward sanctuary [the outer gate of the sanctuary (R.V.)], which looketh toward the east, and it was shut.” (Ezek. 44:1) This gate is the entranceway from the outside into the outer court. The gate “which looketh toward the east” is the one that Jehovah’s glory used in entering into the temple. This gate Ezekiel saw was shut. To say the closing of this gate would indicate, as some claim, that the remnant class in the temple will never fall out is erroneous. The remnant are now in the temple, but faithfulness must be maintained unto death marking their complete change in the likeness of the Lord Jesus Christ, in order to abide there for ever.
To be sure, the ‘narrow way to life’ (Matt. 7:14) will be closed in God’s due time, but the ‘shut gate’ seen by Ezekiel does not seem to refer to the closing of the narrow way to life. Rather it seems to mean this: that since the coming of the Lord to the temple the privilege of entering into the royal house of Jehovah is seen to rest entirely with Jehovah, and with no creature.
The reason for the shutting of this outer gate Jehovah told to Ezekiel. “Then said [Jehovah] unto me, This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by it; because [Jehovah], the God of Israel, hath entered in by it, therefore it shall be shut.” (Ezek. 44:2) This decree Jehovah declares to him “that hath the key of David, [him] that openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no man openeth”. (Rev. 3:7) Jehovah gives this honor to whomsoever he will. (Isa. 42:8; Heb. 5:4-6) It is certain that the Lord’s angels look well to the safeguarding of the entrance to the temple and carefully inspect every one who is presented at that gate. Elsewhere it is shown under what circumstances, and when, and to whom, the east inner gate is opened.—Ezek. 46:1-8,12.
The Scriptures give abundant proof that the faithful
prophets of God will be given by Jehovah the honorable place of “princes in all the earth”. (Ps. 45:16) “As for the prince, he shall sit therein as prince to eat bread before Jehovah; he shall enter by the way of the porch of the gate, and shall go out by the way. of the same. (Ezek. 44:3, A.R.P.) These faithful men of old will be perfect human creatures when resurrected and will be representatives on earth of the Lord, the great “Prince of life”. These men are to have a “better resurrection” than other men, and thus enter into the glory of God. In support of this conclusion Jesus said: “Ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, and you yourselves thrust out.” (Luke 13:28) “And when one of them that sat at meat with him heard these things, he said unto him, Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God.” (Luke 14:15) The faithful men who are made “princes in all the earth”, sitting in the outer gate of the temple, do not detract from the glory of God that first passed through it. “He [the prince] shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate, and shall go out by the way of the same.” But note that these princes do not enter the inner court or step over the inner threshold of the east inner gate.
The “prince” does not enter the “inner court”, which is a precinct of the priests. The close proximity, however, shows the close relationship that shall obtain between the royal priesthood and the faithful prophets of God who will be made princes in all the earth. The word “prince” here includes all these princes. These are given an honor that the members of the “great multitude” will not share. The princes bear this honor only because they are the earthly representatives of those to whom Jehovah gives his glory, to wit, the royal priesthood.
Ezekiel is then brought into the inner court by way of the north gate. “Then brought he me the way of the north gate before the house: and I looked, and, behold, the glory of [Jehovah] filled the house of [Jehovah] ; and I fell upon my face.” (44:4) The cast gate being shut by Jehovah, Ezekiel is led from the east gate and goes north and around and enters the inner court through the north gate used by the priests. Ezekiel beholds the glory of Jehovah filling the temple and he falls down to worship. After this he sees God’s river of life, the waters of which flow forth from the temple. He hears further instructions of Jehovah from this time onward, as the record shows down to chapter forty-six, eighteenth verse. Since the remnant have discerned the ‘shut gate’ proposition they have beheld Jehovah’s glory in his temple in a far greater degree than ever before. “[Jehovah] is in his holy temple, [Jehovah’s] throne is in heaven; his eyes behold, his eyelids try, the children of men.” (Ps. 11:4) “But Jehovah is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before him.” —Hab. 2:20, A.R.V.; see also Ezekiel 10:3, 4; Isaiah 6:1-5.
The instruction given to Ezekiel begins: “And [Jehovah] said unto me, Son of man, mark well, and behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine cars, all that I say unto thee concerning all the ordinances of the house of [Jehovah], and all the laws thereof; and mark well the entering in of the house, with every going forth of the sanctuary.” (Ezek. 44:5) Judgment begins at the house 14
January 1,1939
WATCHTOWER,
15
of God. (1 Pet. 4:17) Ezekiel is told to mark well what he sees and hears. “The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, Jehovah hath made even both of them.” (Prov. 20:12, A.R.V.) God has graciously given both the hearing ear and the seeing eye to his faithful remnant now on earth. Ezekiel is thus made to occupy the position of a law-transmitter to God’s people like unto Moses declaring unto Israel the tabernacle pattern shown to him in the mountain. (Heb. 8:5; Ex. 25:40) God’s remnant is now being thus used. Jehovah’s commandments must now be called to the attention of his covenant people, and these commandments must be observed and kept by them. The manner of the remnant in serving God in going in and out of his temple service is very important to observe. We must get acquainted with his gates of praise and must use them as he has commanded. His organization directions must be observed and obeyed.
Rebellious “Christendom” must be warned. “And thou shalt say to the rebellious, even to the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God, 0 ye house of Israel, let it suffice you of all your abominations.” (Ezek. 44:6) Therein is the “great multitude”. “Christendom” must be told that “the end of all things is at hand” and that the time for the end of their abominations has come. Let this suffice them for all time. The message of warning that the remnant has delivered to “Christendom”, and particularly that message first proclaimed July 26, 1931, was here clearly foretold. “Christendom” has committed many abominations in the name of Almighty God. “In that ye have brought into my sanctuary strangers, uncircumcised in heart, and
uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to pollute it, even my house, when ye offer my bread, the fat and the blood, and they have broken my covenant, because of all your abominations.” (Ezek. 44:7) The clergy have brought into what they called 'the church of Christ and of God’ those who made no pretense of consecration to do the will of God, who were not justified by the shed blood of Christ Jesus, and who then had no faith in the merit of his sacrifice. Many of these so-called “pillars in the church” of “Christendom” wholly repudiate the blood of Christ and the Word of God.
The clergy have had no real, honest concern about God’s house and its reputation, but have been ready to let it be polluted by bringing in those men of uncleanness, just so they could get members into their congregations for support and from whom they received collections. They have opened their arms to the big and corrupt politicians, the capitalists and the crooks, and have invited them to come in and share their delicacies, and paid them for so doing by giving them their support and full co-operation in their oppressive schemes. In the face of such abominations the clergy have broken God’s everlasting covenant by participating in the shedding of human blood, and also broken their covenant which they have claimed to have with God to do his will and his service. Assuming his name and the name of Christ, they were in at least an implied covenant to do God’s will, and such they have utterly failed to do. They must be warned, and the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses is now engaged in that very work.
TAKE JEHOVAH
AT HIS WORD
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Loving greetings in Zion.
With great joy and gratitude in our hearts to Jehovah, through his dear Son, we wish to outwardly express this by writing to you, his servant, whom the great Jehovah has led in such a wonderful way to guide his people in this great witness work; and to have a share in this great work (a strange work) is the joy of our hearts. We are seven pioneers here, and very happy. The home is very comfortable and pleasant, and well managed, and is a haven of rest, even in this day of intense battle, and helps us to press the battle to the gate with greater intensity. This letter, too, should be a help for all who will to join the pioneer service while there is yet time, and for more homes to be opened up,
that the dear Jonadabs may all come into the city of refuge before the great storm breaks forth. The joy of serving these dear ones is a joy known only to those who have that blessing. Those that take Jehovah at his word will find how he will sustain them. Truly dear Brother Schroeder was a gift from God and now England is fully awake and carrying high the banner of truth. “Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed because of the truth.”—Psalm 60: 4.
With much love and every good wish, we are Yours in Jehovah’s royal service, Rosetta Emily Slade	Dorothy L. Hide
Louie Beale	Beryl Springatb
Emmie Hodge	L. E. Deighton
Phyllis Daniels	—London.
YEAR BOOK FOR 1939
The Year Book for 1939 is not only a detailed and comprehensive record of world activities of Jehovah’s witnesses during the past year, but also a compendium of information of the most up-to-date development, and hence useful and necessary for all active publishers to have as a ready reference now. This has all been prepared by the president of the Society. Also, there is his comment on the 1939 year text, and a daily text and comment for every day of the year, said comments being drawn from The Watchtower. Every active Kingdom publisher and all seeking the way to Zion should be equipped with this new Year Book. As the edition is limited, thus enhancing the cost of production, the contribution of 50c is asked for per copy. Company servants should each arrange for a combination order for his respective company.
1939 CALENDAR
The year text for 1939 is timely: “But they shall not prevail against thee.” (Jcr. 1:19) That those on the side of Jehovah and his King and kingdom may conveniently have this strengthening promise daily before their attention during 1939 this text is featured on the Society’s new calendar and accompanied by a beautiful three-color picture showing in symbolic style the thrilling fulfillment of the promise to the modern Jeremiah class and their companions. Underneath appears the president’s letter setting out the united service periods for 1939, a ready reference for kingdom publishers. The calendar pad shows the dates thereof. Company servants should send in a combination order for all wanting calendars. Remit, with order, at 25c each, or $1.00 for five to one address.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
FROM A LETTER ENCLOSING SUBSCRIPTIONS
“This is the result of a four-month Jonadab study meeting, which is being attended by 20—25—28 and 30 respectively, and gradually increasing. When they were asked how many would like to subscribe for The Watchtower eight of them gladly responded Yes. Ten of them are full of zeal for the Lord and regular workers for the last two months, and the others take part in the Kingdom service as soon as they see the privilege; four of them have ordered phonographs, and one of them is inquiring for a sound equipment. It requires a little effort on our part to go two or three times and help them to come to these meetings. That is our work, especially now. The commandment of the Lord (John 21:17) applies now with greater force to the anointed ones than ever before. We had to go after every one of them to bring them to this meeting the first time, and now they come by themselves and bring new ones along with them. When the question was propounded to them whether they want to be organized as a separate unit (because they live twenty miles from here) they gladly responded Yes, and willingly gave their names for service, whose names I like to submit to the zone servant and, if it is proper, to help organize these groups of real Jonadabs as a separate unit.”
“WATCHTOWER” SAMPLE COPIES
“The usefulness of extra copies of back numbers of The Watch tower as part of each publisher’s regular equipment is emphasized in a publisher’s experience here narrated. It serves to show the need to be always alert to display a sample copy to any person that exhibits sincere interest, even at the publisher’s first call upon such person.
“A lady of the house courteously refused to take the booklet Warning, pleading she was not in position to offer any contribution. Holding out the booklet to her, the publisher quickly rejoined that since she had greatly enjoyed reading some of the other booklets it was important for her to have this timely information and she could share in the work by making a small contribution voluntarily. At once she took the booklet, remarking as she started away: ‘Oh, I can certainly give a dime.’ She did. Then the publisher presented another booklet, saying: ‘One of your relatives or good friends will greatly appreciate receiving this information, and here’s an extra copy of the same booklet that you can use in that way.’ She gladly accepted it. Then, alert to the opportunity, the publisher followed up with a 'Ey the way, have you heard the latest record ?’ Thereupon she welcomed him onto her porch to play the recording ‘Relief’. At its end she said: ‘I certainly want to hear the Resolution also.’ That played, and just before proceeding to pack up, the publisher handed her a sample Watchtower, remarking: ‘This sample copy of The Watchtower you will also enjoy. It comes to you by mail, twice each month, and the subscription is only a dollar a year.’ As he was packing up his phonograph and records she hastily glanced through the journal and said: ‘Maybe I’ll send in a subscription sometime, or perhaps you will take it now ?’ ‘Yes, your subscription can be entered right now,’ said he, and took out his pad of Watchtower subscription blanks and began filling in the house number and name of street while she was inside procuring the dollar.”
According to this publisher’s observation, the particular piece of literature, whether book, booklet or magazine, actually produced by him and turned over to the householder’s hand is an essential aid to such to clearly understand what the publisher then tries to describe verbally.
RESULT OF A REFERENCE
An interested man who wrote the Society was referred to its local representative, who now writes concerning him:
“Mr. ------- called on me and, of course, I was glad
to have him. I arranged for a back call, and placed a Bible, Enemies, and Warning. He said he would subscribe for The Watchtower and Consolation next time. Also listened to the phonograph and seemed to enjoy it. Wants to attend our meetings at the hall next Sunday.”
PERSISTENCE IN BACK-CALLING REWARDED
“I decided to make another try for a back call. Son was home, and mother. I started [the lecture series] ‘Warning’, and in more than an hour between questions, explanations and appreciations I got in four lectures, four bound books, three booklets, a Consolation sample, and a contribution of $1.10 with no solicitation or urging whatsoever, and a very definite invitation to re-call at ‘10:00 a.m. next Sunday’; which I assuredly did. All three heard the rest of ‘Warning’. They had been reading. With much appreciation the man said: ‘I can now understand what it is all about. I can read these books now and understand them.’ ”
MODEL STUDY HELPS TO SEE THE ISSUE
“In another home where we have conducted a model study for some time, the father never ‘joined a church or religious organization’, but is now engaging in the witness work with the phonograph. The wife does not see the issue yet, but listens attentively (a church member). The daughter, a junior high-school student of about 14 years of age, about a week ago asked whether she should salute the flag. We suggested that she read the Loyalty booklet and then decide. Last night, November 1, she eagerly stated that she does not salute the flag. Her teacher questioned her refusal, whereupon she declared: ‘God’s law forbids worshiping images.’ Another young girl, a classmate, also declined to salute. She was asked by the teacher if she was a Jehovah’s witness. ‘No! I am a Baptist.’ ‘Then why don’t you salute V ‘I don’t see the sense of it.’”
This last writer reports that his report of 155 back calls represented visits to 34 different individual homes, and that twelve persons thus visited have begun attending the regular studies of the local company.
“FACE THE FACTS”
This new 64-page booklet, with two-color cover design, contains the two world-convention speeches by the president of the Society at the convention assembly in London, England, last September, to wit, “Face the Facts” and “Fill the Earth". Because of the world-wide request for and the present need to place these history-making addresses with as many as possible in these perilous times the first printing of this booklet is in the huge quantity of 12,000,000 copies, in many languages. Read your personal copy now and get set to distribute it. Remit therefor at 5c contribution per copy.
16

ft

4

. v . “! »H5J? ?
:;J^'

M ■ V*jbe

■-V'"
^4
I
/#
Lt’


■/'V
W™»
«'ffelwaffi Iff
(Itici lleralcl of (Jjjrwfe fungaotn
-■£<
ijWjSl&irtfs r-
/i
'.V/7//7'
%>X*57t?. -v.'V
">'rW



*
i
4 "y »• •' v 4 »-• A.; ,


"They shall know that I am Jehovah.
’Ewkie) 35;&
Vol. LX Semimonthly
JANUARY 15. 1939
CONTENTS
“Government and Peace”....
Religion Organized .....
The Kingdom ............
Redemption .............
For His Name ...........
Satan ..................
The Monstrosity ........
Princes ..................
Vindicator ...............
Letters ..................
Field Experiences..........
“Lovers of Righteousness” .
“Watchtower” Campaign......
Correction ...............
“Watchtower” Studies ......
Year Book for 1939 ........
1939 Calendar..............
No. 2
19
21
22
23
24
25
26
28
29
31
32
18 18
18
18
31
31
£
■M
t

h
Wg*”
©WTB. & IS.
r- ’**- ,*< f-r •—r < b "	< ><***^- * 0 ’ -	— •>• -•*'- m t •**	’	**	- . *■	. w	•	-	*	<*• ■*» *• •“ t '	*•- -»•••« ■*-' *	r~ ~T .r - •*.-	' •" r • <	*	“	“ “ '•* ’
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street -	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 34:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive. Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed tn the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of Its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge In controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, *1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, *1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British .....„............... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian...................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian........... 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield. N. S. W., Australia
South African ..................Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T., under the Act of March 3, 1879.
“LOVERS OF RIGHTEOUSNESS”
Thia name designates the testimony period which will occupy the entire month of February. Those of Jehovah’s anointed remnant and their companions, foreshadowed by David and Jonathan, being lovers of righteousness of God, will rejoice to make special efforts during this period to devote more time and energy to the Watchtower Campaign, as announced below and which includes the month of February. More time and effort in the field, or a new start into the field, as a kingdom publisher, will require special planning on your part. If you desire to become a publisher, get in touch with our local organization or direct with this office.
“WATCHTOWER” CAMPAIGN
Four full months of 1939, January to April inclusive, have been set aside for the biggest, if not most important, yet of the campaigns to publish Jehovah’s kingdom. It is designated the “Watchtower” campaign because of the special offer made, agreeable to arrangements of the Society, to wit, a full year’s subscription for the magazine The Watchtower together with the book Enemies or any other one desired of the bound book series and a copy of the new booklet Face the Facts, on a contribution of
but $1.00. This is now the offer in every language in which The Watchtower appears; hence this four-month campaign is both an international and a world-wide one. Every reader of The Watchtower who appreciates its real value and the dire need of all people of good will today for its spiritual food will without urging desire to take part in this campaign. If not already in touch with the Society’s service organization, write this office and make arrangements for the campaign. A monthly report will be expected of each publisher. Consult the Informant for all details hereon.
CORRECTION
In the December 1, 1938, issue of The Watchtower, page 364, in the article “Kingdom Activities”, the expression “strange aet” in paragraph 1, line 5, should read “strange work”.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of February 19: “Government and Peace,”
fl 1-25 inclusive, The Watchtower January 15, 1939.
Week of February 26: “Government and Peace,”
fl 26-46 inclusive, The Watchtower January 15, 1939.
AND HERALD OF CHRIST’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX
January 15, 1939
No. 2
"GOVERNMENT AND PEACE”
"Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end."—Isa. 9:7.
TEHOVAH, knowing the end from the beginning, I long centuries ago caused his prophetic Word J to be recorded and, among other things, declared that in his own due time he would set up a government on the earth and under that government there shall be peace and that neither the government nor peace shall ever end. Since the recording of that prophecy many centuries have come and gone and today there is no peace on the earth. For that reason we may know that God’s promised government is not fully in operation so far as the present rule of the earth is concerned. Every nation of earth is now the victim of morbid fear. There is internal dissension, bitterness and strife amongst the people. Many nations are actually at war, and violence and wickedness reign in every part of the earth. All the nations and the people are in distress and perplexity. The masses of the people see no hope for future peace and prosperity. They are discouraged and in despair, and yet if such persons would give heed to the truth their fears would disappear and their despair pass away, and in the place thereof would come peace of mind and joy of heart. The time is here when the people of good will toward God shall receive instruction, and Jehovah has graciously provided that such persons shall be enlightened, that they may lift up their heads now and rejoice, seeing the day of deliverance is near.
* Jehovah God has not forgotten his promise, and his prophecies have not failed in the least. His due time must arrive before his promises are carried out; and having purposed to establish a government and peace, he is certain to do that very thing. No one who believes on God and Christ Jesus, and who has a knowledge of the Bible, will have any doubt about that.
• At this stage of world distress faithful persons should be completely convinced that there is no government amongst men that gives promise of lasting peace. There is no one statesman on the earth who can lead the people into conditions that are desirable. There is no commercial or religious institution that can relieve the people of fear, trepidation
and strife. In the present world there is no hope. It is time to turn to the Word of the Almighty God and learn what he says, and give heed thereto. To the people he now says: “Behold, my servant whom I have chosen; my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased. ... In his name shall the [nations] hope.” (Matt. 12:18-21, A.R.P.) Persons of good will are the ones who will now give heed to the Word of God and turn their heads in the right way, because it is God’s time for them to do so. Knowledge and understanding of the Bible will now give consolation and hope to those in distress and who desire righteousness and peace.
4 Foreknowing his purpose to send his beloved Son to earth and make him the King, Jehovah caused his prophet to write of the matter long ago as though that great event had already come to pass, and to record the admirable and marvelous things the King shall accomplish; and hence the prophet wrote: “For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called Wonderful Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end.”—Isa. 9:6,7.
“ Having given his word of promise, God will perform it; and that the faith and hope of all persons of good will towards him might be strong, Jehovah furthermore caused his same prophet to record these words: “Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me. Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure: calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man that executeth my counsel from a far country: yea, I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it.” (Isa. 46:9-11) The setting up of his “government and peace”, and which will continue forever, will completely fill every longing and sincere heart with joy. Shall such government be realized? It is absolutely certain.
20
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
•After the recording of the prophecy by Isaiah concerning the King as then stated, many more long centuries came and passed away, and only a few persons on the earth during those centuries have looked for and hoped for the coming of that kingdom. Among those who had faith in God and hope were a little company of sheepherders watching their flocks near Bethlehem, and who were graciously permitted to be Jehovah’s witnesses to the marvelous evidence of the birth of the Son about whom the prophet had before made record. To those faithful men Jehovah sent his angel who announced the birth of the “Saviour, which is Christ the Lord”. Immediately the angelic host proclaimed this message of gladness in the hearing of those witnesses: “Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.” (Luke 2:14) What is known as the “King James” or Authorized Version of the Bible does not render the above text as it should be; and evidently this was permitted of the Lord for a purpose until his due time to make it clearly understood. The correct rendering of that text is this: “Glory in the highest unto God! and on earth peace, among men of good-will.” {Rotherham) This definitely and consistently settles the matter that those who will enjoy that “government and peace” are the men who are of good will toward God. All such must and will believe that Jehovah is the Almighty God; that Christ Jesus is the King, and that his kingdom is the hope of humankind. There are many persons who claim to believe the Bible as God’s Word who do not have and enjoy peace. Many such are at enmity with one another, and are also viciously persecuting those who are wholly devoted to God and his kingdom. What is the reason? Is it because the Bible is confusing and not understandable? No, that is not the reason. The correct answer and proper understanding of that matter will aid all sincere persons to appreciate the Lord’s gracious provision. What follows herein constitutes the answer found in God’s Word, and is therefore the correct answer.
T There are two powers which are active, and which are unalterably opposed to each other: the one, which is supreme, enlightens the minds of men of good will; the other deceives men, blinds their minds to the truth, and causes them to pursue a wrongful course. The supreme, righteous One is the Almighty God, whose name is Jehovah. The opposing one or enemy of God is named Satan, the Devil. Jehovah is the God of peace. Satan is the mighty one of strife. Mark this: that the message brought to the men by the heavenly host, as above stated, says, “On earth peace among men of good will.’’ That means that only those who are of good will toward God can find and enjoy everlasting peace. The purpose of what is here written is to give a
plain statement of the facts and the Scriptures in order to help persons of good will to learn the right way. What is here said is not the opinion of man, nor man’s interpretation of the Scriptures. Jehovah’s Word is the authority, and He is his own interpreter. The Scriptures cannot be properly interpreted by any man.
8 God the Almighty is the Creator of heaven and earth, which together constitute the world, and the world belongs to Jehovah, as it is written: “The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.” (Ps. 24:1) “The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine; as for the world, and the fulness thereof, thou hast founded them.” (Ps. 89:11) God created the earth and created the perfect man to live forever on the earth. (Isa. 45:12,18) God gave man the rule over the lower animal creation, and he made Lucifer, the heavenly creature, the overlord of man. (Gen. 1:26; Ezek. 28:14; Isa. 14:12-17) All creation then dwelt together in peace and praised the Almighty God. Lucifer coveted that praise, desiring it for himself (Jer. 51:13), and hence he rebelled against Jehovah. Many of the angels of heaven and the perfect man Adam joined in that rebellion. God changed the name of Lucifer, giving him four names, to wit: Dragon, Satan, Serpent, and Devil. Satan then challenged Jehovah God to put men on the earth who would remain true and faithful to God. The rebellious Satan was sentenced to death; but in order that all creation might in due time know that Jehovah is supreme, and that his power is without limitation, and that Satan would have an opportunity to prove his challenge, God suspended the sentence of death and permitted Satan to continue to live for a specified period of time, at the end of which time God will execute Satan. Therefore God said to Satan : “But for this cause have I allowed thee to remain, in order to show thee my power; and in order that they may proclaim my name throughout all the earth.”—Exod. 9:16, Leeser.
8 Jehovah God also gave his word of promise that in his due time he will set up a government that will rule the people in righteousness, and in which there will be everlasting peace on earth, and that such government of righteousness will be administered by Christ Jesus. A long period of time elapsed between the date of God’s promise and the setting up of his government of righteousness, in which period of time Satan the Devil has full opportunity to make proof of his wicked challenge. If Satan should succeed in turning all men against God, that would prove that Satan is equal to Jehovah God, or even greater, and that Jehovah is not supreme. If Satan fails, that means his end in complete destruction. Satan is certain to fail. It is of
January 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
21
vital importance to every person of good will to know the facts.
10	The issue or question for final determination is therefore plain and clear, and that issue is, Who is supreme? The conflict of Satan against Jehovah God began; and mark how it progressed to this day, when there shall be a final showdown. Eve was deceived by the lie of Satan, and Adam voluntarily joined in the transgression, and they were expelled from Eden. Adam and Eve then began to have children. Their son Abel devoted himself to Jehovah God. Satan induced his elder brother Cain to murder Abel, and hence Satan is not only the arch liar but a murderer. (John 8:44) Approximately 1600 years passed. In that time, of all the human creatures born on the earth only a few of them stood on the side of Jehovah God. At the end of that time Satan had turned almost all the human race against God and the earth was filled with wickedness and violence; and for that reason God declared his purpose to destroy all human creatures, which he did in the flood; only Noah and his family, eight persons in all, survived.—Genesis chapters 6, 7, 8.
RELIGION ORGANIZED
11	Noah brought out of the ark numerous animals and fowls, all of which were free to roam the earth. These would soon multiply in great numbers and would endanger men; hence, for the protection of Noah and his descendants, God said to Noah: “And the fear of you, and the dread of you, shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are they delivered.”—Gen. 9: 2.
11	More years passed, and Nimrod, the descendant of Ham, came into prominence. Satan evolved a scheme to defame God’s name, and to turn men away from God, and he used Nimrod for that purpose.
18 All human creatures are born to look up to and worship some recognized superior power. Nimrod became an object of adoration and worship by weaker men: “He [Nimrod] began to be a mighty one in the earth; he was a mighty hunter before [in defiance of] the Lord.” (Gen. 10: 8, 9) Being deceived, the people were induced to honor and worship Nimrod; and thus they were turned away from and against Jehovah. That was the beginning of organized religion. Nimrod was a wicked man, a cruel slayer of wild beasts, and also of men. By reason of his power and influence over men he organized Babylon, the first arbitrary, dictatorial or totalitarian government that ever existed. He was the Devil’s instrument in organizing religion against God and in organizing a political government against God, and in setting in operation commercial traffic.
(Gen. 10:10,11) In his cruelty he chased and viciously slaughtered many wild beasts and fowls of the air, thus causing the beasts and the fowls to become vicious and fight against man. He trained young men to fight other men and thus engage in murder. From the time of Babylon until the present day Satan has combined religion, politics and commercial traffic, and by this means or combination he has controlled the people, deceived them, and turned them away from Almighty God and his provision to give man life in peace.
MONSTROSITY AGAINST THEOCRACY
14 The government of the world by the immediate direction or administration of Jehovah, the Almighty God, is a theocracy. Following the rebellion by Satan God gave his word of promise that in his due time the world shall be ruled by a theocrat or theocratic government.
18 Any rule or government set up in defiance of Almighty God or claiming to rule the world in the place and stead of Jehovah God is a monstrosity. God describes such in these words: “The abomination that maketh desolate.” (Dan. 11:31; 12:11) Such an abomination or monstrosity turns men against God and leads them into destruction. A monstrosity is ugly, extremely wicked, horrible, deadly and destructive of the rights and liberties of the people, and leads the people into destruction. The rule by Nimrod was a monstrosity.
10 Satan’s monstrosity takes away all the liberties of the common people and makes them slaves to Satan’s chief representatives. The theocracy sets men completely free, enables them to pursue a course of righteousness in peace, and the people of good will in due time shall dwell under the theocratic government and be for ever at peace. Thus the two great ruling factors are contrasted.
17 The world powers, to wit, Assyria, Egypt, Babylon, Medo-Persia, and ancient Rome, were each a monstrous government, or monstrosity. Those world powers were arbitrarily and cruelly ruled by the three elements of Satan, to wit, religion, politics and commerce, in defiance of Almighty God. From time to time God has given evidence of his supremacy in order that men might have an opportunity to observe the right way and to walk therein. To safeguard the Israelites from the Devil religion God selected the Israelites and gave to that people his law and his statutes for their true guide and protector until the coming of the Messiah, Christ Jesus, and his kingdom. (Gal. 3:19) God specifically commanded the Israelites to strictly obey his law, informing them that the practice of religion would ensnare them and result in their destruction. (Deut. 7:16,25; Exod. 20:1-4; Judg. 2:1-3) All
22
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
nations of the earth aside from Israel were called "heathen”; and all of such nations practiced religion in defiance of Almighty God, and this they did because of the influence of the Devil. That a clear distinction between religion and Christianity may be seen, the following definitions are given, to wit:
*" Religion means any form of worship of some superior power or creature, and which form of worship or form of practice finds support or authority in the teachings or traditions of men. It is often claimed that the Bible supports religion; but such is not true.
*• Christianity means full obedience to the law and commandments of Almighty God as set forth in the Bible, and therefore the worship of God in spirit and in truth, disregarding all forms or formalism. Christ Jesus always obeys the 'aw and commandments of Jehovah God; and therefore Christianity means the following the lead of Christ Jesus in obeying God’s law and commandments.
” Men have invented the phrase “the Christian religion”; but such phrase is entirely misleading, because religion and Christianity are exactly opposite one to the other. According to the Scriptures the so-called “Christian religion” is a form of godliness, which denies the power of God; and the admonition is to turn away from such. (2 Tim. 3:5) The leaders amongst the Israelites, or Jews, were the scribes and Pharisees, corresponding to the clergy of the present time, and which leaders departed from the law and commandments of God and adopted tradition or the teachings of men; and thereby they became religionists, although they claimed to represent God. For that reason Jesus said to them: “Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition. Ye hypocrites! well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying, This people draw-eth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips: but their heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.”—Matt. 15:1-9.
11 Good men have been deceived and in ignorance have practiced religion and still do so. An outstanding example is a man whose name originally was Saul, but whose name was afterwards changed to Paul, the apostle of Jesus Christ. Paul states that he was a practitioner of religion until the Lord opened his understanding to the truth, and then he became a Christian. (Gal. 1:13-16; Acts 9:1-20; 26:4-17) Furthermore Paul states that religion and superstition are one and the same. (Acts 17:22) From the time of Nimrod until now Satan has used religion to deceive men and to cause them to indulge in the practice thereof in defiance of Jehovah. Satan’s purpose in practicing this deception is readily seen
when one discerns the issue of supremacy growing out of his challenge to Almighty God. It should be kept in mind that all wickedness in the world is due to the influence of Satan, who induces men to fight against one another. There is no cause for a controversy amongst sensible men, because the interests of all men are of necessity the same. The Devil subtly and deceitfully brings about conditions causing men to fight amongst themselves and to defame Almighty God; and this he does in his efforts to make good his challenge.
THE KINGDOM
” That which is of greatest interest to all men, if they only realized it, is the kingdom of God, the theocratic government, with Christ Jesus, the King and official representative of Jehovah, in full charge, ruling in righteousness and bestowing lasting blessings upon all men of good will toward God. Because that theocratic government under Christ is of most vital importance to humankind the Devil bitterly opposes it; and he employs fraud, deceit and lying, as well as violence, to oppose the kingdom of God. Religion is the Devil’s chief instrument employed to lead the people into his trap. Having these indisputable facts in mind, that among all the religious institutions on earth today there is not one of them magnifying the importance of God’s kingdom, those persons on earth who are completely devoted to God and Christ, and who strive to obey God’s commandments, are the only ones who advocate and advertise the theocratic government, that is, the kingdom of God under Christ. Religionists stress the importance of escaping “hell” or “purgatory” and finding bliss in some other existence, and they are entirely ignorant of the fact that God’s kingdom under Christ is the only means of salvation.
23 For more than eighteen centuries God gave attention to the Jews, or Israelites, using that people for the purpose of making pictures illustrating the development of his kingdom, which prophetic pictures God is now performing in reality by bringing to pass the things which were foreshadowed by the prophecies. God began the fulfillment of his prophetic pictures when he sent Jesus to earth, more than nineteen centuries ago. Jesus emphasized the kingdom, or theocratic government, as the most important of all things. At the age of thirty years God anointed Jesus to be the King of the world because it pleased God to use Jesus to carry out his purpose. (Matt. 3:15-17) Immediately the Devil attempted to destroy Jesus. The Devil knew that Jesus was the Anointed One, whom God would set to rule over his theocratic government, and therefore the Devil tried to cause the death of Jesus by tempting him to violate God’s
January 15, 1939
WATCHTOWER.
23
law. (Matt. 4:1-11) In that attempt Satan completely failed; and immediately thereafter Jesus began to proclaim to the people the importance of the kingdom: ‘‘From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.” (Matt. 4:17) During the three and one-half years that followed Jesus constantly emphasized the kingdom of heaven, the theocratic government. He went about telling the truth, and healing the sick and afflicted, and demonstrated that life, health and happiness can be had by the people only under the theocratic government.
14 Jesus informed his disciples that the kingdom is of first importance. (Matt. 6:33) He taught them that God would select from amongst men a certain number who would prove faithful, and to whom he would entrust the interest of his kingdom on earth, and that the very least amongst these would be greater ultimately than any man living on earth. Jesus made it clear that not all men that get life will go to heaven, but only a small number go to heaven and are made a part of the kingdom; and concerning these he said: “Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom.” (Luke 12:32) Such are likened unto a little flock of sheep, and these will be with Christ in heaven as spirit creatures, being changed from human to spirit. Then Jesus declared he would select another class of persons of good will and that these would find everlasting life and peace on earth, and concerning which he said: “And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.” (John 10:16) Thus he showed that all human creatures that get life must be either of the little flock that go to heaven or of the great multitude of persons of good will to whom he grants life as human creatures on the earth. The only means by which anyone can obtain life is by faith in the shed blood of Christ Jesus and by complete obedience to the law of his theocratic kingdom. Again Jesus emphasized the paramount importance of the kingdom when he urged his disciples to pray at all times to God, ‘Thy kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as in heaven.’ (Matt. 6:10) Religionists utter these words from time to time but they do not sincerely desire the kingdom to rule the earth. (2 Tim. 3:5) Jehovah sent Jesus to earth to tell the truth of and concerning his kingdom, and the record in the Bible by Matthew, Mark, Luke and John proves beyond all doubt that Jesus magnified the importance of the kingdom above everything else because that theocratic government will be a complete vindication of the word and the name of Almighty God and the only means of man’s salvation.
REDEMPTION
25 Because of Adam’s sin in joining in the Devil’s rebellion he was sentenced to death and all his offspring were born as sinners. (Rom. 5:12) Before any human creature could have opportunity to get life, either in heaven or on earth, such creature must be purchased or redeemed. In agreement with God’s will Jesus the man was put to death and thereby purchased the human race. Jesus died as a man and God raised him out of death as a spirit who lives for ever. He was “put to death in the flesh, but [made alive] by the spirit”. (1 Pet. 3:18) He is alive now for evermore. (Rev. 1:18) God raised him out of death and exalted him to the highest place in the universe, clothed him with all power and authority in heaven and in earth, made him Lord and King, and commands that everyone that gets life must bow to and obey Christ, the theocratic King. (Matt. 28:18; Phil. 2:9-11; Acts 2:3336; John 18:36,37) By his obedience unto death as a man, and his resurrection by Jehovah from death, Jesus Christ becomes the owner of all of the human race who believe on and obey him. No one else can obtain life; as it is written: “He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.”—John 3:36.
RECEIVING THE KINGDOM
28 A short time before his crucifixion Jesus informed his faithful disciples that he must go away to heaven and receive the authority for the kingdom, and that he would return and receive unto himself his faithful followers and associate them with him in his theocratic government. (John 14:1-6; Matt. 25:14-31; Luke 19:12-15) The last night that Jesus was on earth with his disciples he said to them: “Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations. And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as ray Father hath appointed unto me; that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.”—Luke 22: 28-30.
27 Jesus died upon the tree, being crucified, and thereafter at Pentecost God revealed to his faithful disciples the purpose of the death and resurrection of Jesus and informed them that the lifeblood of Christ Jesus furnished the ransom or redemptive price for the human race and that God had appointed Jesus as Lord and King, and that Jesus would come again and set up the theocratic government, to the glory and vindication of Jehovah. The disciples then discerned that a long period of time must elapse before the Lord Jesus would come again and set up the theocratic government; and therefore under his command they went forth, preaching to the people the great importance of the coming of Jesus Christ and
24
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of his kingdom. This they continued to do as long as they lived.
FOR HIS NAME
18 In the centuries that have passed since the resurrection of Jesus the Devil has continued to use his deceptive schemes to blind and mislead the people, religion being the chief amongst such things. The Devil has induced religious leaders to promulgate false doctrines, amongst which are these: That every man has an immortal soul and at death the soul goes to “hell” or “purgatory” and the only way to get out is by the aid of priests or preachers, who receive a consideration for uttering prayers in their behalf. The people thus being put in fear, great multitudes rush into the religious organizations. (Isa. 29:13) Such credulous persons have been induced to believe that salvation depends upon their joining some religious organization. Thus the Devil has kept the mass of the people in some religious organization. In that long period of time, what has God been doing toward his kingdom? It is written concerning this that when Jesus ascended on high, although he was then the King, God commanded him to wait until God’s due time for Jesus to begin his reign. (Ps. 110:1, 2; Heb. 10:13) Shortly after the resurrection of Jesus his faithful disciples learned that during this long period of waiting God proceeds to take out from amongst obedient men “a people for his name”, who must be witnesses to the name and kingdom of Jehovah. (Acts 15:14) Those who prove themselves faithful must proclaim before the people the testimony of God’s Word as he commanded at Exodus 9:16. Therefore such are Jehovah’s witnesses. (Isa. 43:10-12) It clearly appears that ‘the people taken out for his name’ must be witnesses for Jehovah regardless of all opposition. Christ Jesus is the “First and Chief Witness” of Jehovah, and one of his titles is “The Faithful and True Witness”. (Rev. 3:14) Everyone who is a true follower of Christ Jesus must also be a witness to the truth. (John 18:36, 37) The apostles of Jesus were faithful witnesses to the truth and always emphasized the importance of the kingdom and the second coming of Christ. They were faithful unto death and knew that they must remain dead until the coming of Christ Jesus and his kingdom, at which time they would be resurrected as spirit creatures and ever thereafter be associated with Christ Jesus in his theocratic government.— 2 Tim. 4:1,6-8.
88 Jesus Christ told his apostles what conditions would exist on earth at the time of his coming, by which conditions all of his true followers would know that the time had arrived for setting up of the theocratic government. Those foretold conditions definitely began to appear in A.D. 1914, at which time Jehovah enthroned his King, Christ Jesus, and sent
him forth to rule while the enemy Satan still operates in the earth. (Matt. 24:3-12; Ps. 110:2; Rev. 11:16-18) A great conflict then took place between Christ and Satan, which resulted in the casting of Satan out of heaven and down to the earth, and Satan, knowing that his time is short before the final battle, has since that period of time brought ever-increasing woes upon the peoples of earth, even as the Lord foretold. (Rev. 12:1-12) That conflict beginning in 1914 and continuing until 1918 marked the time of the second coming of Christ and the beginning of his theocratic government.
80 At the same time, as Jesus had foretold, the world war between nations of the earth took place. Did the religious organizations and their leaders inform the people that such was evidence of the coining of God’s kingdom? Not one did so. Almost all the religious leaders advocated and supported the world war and bitterly persecuted those who insisted on telling the people that the world war was evidence of the coming kingdom. It was in 1918 that the Lord gathered his faithful ones into a compact body to be used for his particular purpose, causing them to bear testimony to the people that the kingdom had come. Then the Lord revealed to his people the distinction between religion and Christianity, making it clearly to appear that religion is the Devil’s snare and that Christianity means to faithfully follow Christ Jesus. To the faithful Christians on earth, Jehovah says: ‘Ye are my witnesses and my servant, whom I have chosen. Ye are my witnesses that I am God, the Almighty, the Supreme One.’ (Isa. 43:10,12) Thus are faithful Christians commanded to proclaim the name of Jehovah throughout the earth just preceding the final battle of Armageddon. Jehovah’s theocratic government has come and the people must be told, and all of good will toward God rejoice because of this good news or gospel. In harmony therewith the command is given: “And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations: and then shall the end come. . . . For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.”—Matt. 24:14,21.
31 This is done exactly in fulfillment of the prophecy of Exodus 9:16. In obedience to the Lord’s command the faithful Christians named by the Lord as his witnesses have come out from the religious organizations, including the Catholic, Protestant and others, and now go about the earth proclaiming the name of Jehovah and his theocratic government. Jehovah’s witnesses are not religionists, and indeed they could not be supporters of any religious system and at the same time be witnesses to the name and kingdom of Jehovah. They are not in competition with any religious organization. Their sole duty is to tell the
Janvakv 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
25
truth concerning Jehovah and his kingdom, which theocratic government will vindicate God’s name and bring salvation and peace to the people of good will.
SATAN
32 The Devil’s name Satan means adversary or opposer of God. It is certain, therefore, that he opposes everything that is on the side of Jehovah and his kingdom, and whatsoever is in opposition to Jehovah and his theocratic government is an instrument of Satan and hence a monstrosity. Let every person who desires to know and to do what is right be honest and fair with himself. The fact that one has been a supporter of some religious organization can do that person no good. Every person that gets life must choose to support the theocratic government under Christ. All opposers God declares shall be destroyed, together with Satan, the chief wicked one. (Ps. 145: 20) Jesus and his apostles were unalterably opposed to religion because religion is Satan’s deceptive means to ensnare the people. Now give a moment to a sober consideration of the facts:
M Satan employed religion to ensnare and bring about the destruction of the nation of Israel, as shown by the following scriptures: Amos 3:2; Deuteronomy 7:4; Jeremiah 51:6,7. When Jesus came he found the leaders of Israel practicing religion and inducing the people to do the same. He denounced the leaders, calling them hypocrites and the children of the Devil. (Matt. 23:13-28) During the entire three and one-half years that Jesus was on earth he was cruelly persecuted. And by whom? In every instance the religious leaders. They accused him of every crime known, and because he proclaimed the theocratic government of his Father the religionists charged Jesus with sedition and treason and caused him to be wrongfully convicted and crucified. Thus those religionists proved they were on the Devil’s side. The same religionists put Stephen to death because he testified to the name of God and his theocratic government. (Acts 6: 8-15; 7:1-59) Saul, who was afterwards Paul the apostle, took part in the cruel murder of Stephen; and this he did ignorantly, as he declared. Later the Lord revealed the truth to him and Saul the religionist became Paul the Christian. Thereafter Paul and the other apostles of Jesus were bitterly persecuted by religionists because they told the truth. Why is it material to mention these things here? As further proof that religionists are the instruments of the Devil who persecute Christians and oppose God’s kingdom.
•* With fairness take note of the Roman Catholic religious organization, which is ruled and controlled by a few men called the “Hierarchy of Authority”. Do not permit prejudice to control you and follow the lead of the Hierarchy, who cry that “all of Jehovah’s
witnesses are liars; they are ignorant and bigoted”. Look at the leading histories and encyclopedias of the world and there read the record of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization. From beginning to end such record is filled with the cruel persecutions of the true followers of Christ Jesus. Today Jehovah’s witnesses are bitterly persecuted in every nation. And who takes the lead in such persecution? The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their dupes. What are Jehovah’s witnesses doing that furnishes an excuse for the Hierarchy to persecute them? Telling the truth of and concerning the theocratic government of Jehovah, as the only means of safety and salvation for the good people of the world. Jehovah’s witnesses have no controversy with any person because he is a Catholic. Many sincere persons have been induced to join the Catholic organization, and God’s express purpose is to give such persons, who are of good will, an opportunity to know of and concerning his theocratic government. The telling of the truth exposes the Devil, his organization and his religious schemes; therefore the fight is, Satan against everyone and everything that is for God and his kingdom or theocracy. The Catholic Hierarchy claims that it is the pope and his immediate associates that shall rule the world as the vicegerent of Christ; but that is a clear deception invented by Satan for the purpose of turning the people away from God and his theocratic government. Jehovah’s witnesses are the only real friends on earth of sincere and honest Catholics. Jehovah’s witnesses have no desire, and make no effort, to build up a religious or any other organization on earth. Their sole mission is to bear testimony to the people in obedience to God’s commandment, and to inform the people that Jehovah is the Almighty God and that his theocratic government is their only hope.—Matt. 12:18, 21.
35 If the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and religious allies in fact represented God and Christ Jesus they would be boldly and joyfully telling the people that God’s kingdom under Christ is the only means of bringing peace and salvation. Instead, they persecute Jehovah’s witnesses for telling about the kingdom. The fact that the Hierarchy and allies oppose the message concerning God’s theocratic government, and persecute his messengers, is proof conclusive that the Hierarchy are the servants of God’s enemy Satan. Jehovah repeatedly declares in his Word that He will soon destroy Satan and all his supporters, and particularly the religious organizations.
GOOD WILL
’* Persons of good will are those who desire to know Jehovah God and Christ Jesus and who seek to know and to obey the Lord. When God caused his angel to announce, “Behold, I bring you good tidings
26
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of great joy,” he was announcing the birth of Jesus the King, upon whose shoulder his theocratic government shall rest. (Isa. 9:6) At the same time the angelic host sang: "Glory in the highest unto God! and on earth peace, among men of good-will.” (Luke 2:14, Roth.) Let it be carefully noted that the promise of peace is only to men of good will and is not to anyone that opposes God and his theocratic government.
M Are you a person of good will ! Pause now and honestly answer the question following; whether you are a Catholic, a Protestant, a Jew, or without all religion, your answer involves your eternal destiny. Do you desire to see and to live under a government of righteousness, peace and happiness! Only God’s theocratic government can bring that condition to the earth and give you life. There is no religious institution that can give you such blessings, because all of such are anti-God and against his kingdom. If you are not for God and his kingdom under Christ, then you are against him; because, says Jesus the King, “He that is not with me is against me.”— Matt. 12:30.
THE MONSTROSITY
*• Satan tries to mimic Jehovah; and in doing so he brings forth dictators to rule the earth. As the theocratic government is centered in Jehovah under Christ, so the dictatorial governments on earth are centered in Satan. Knowing that his time is short till Armageddon, immediately following the World War Satan caused men to form the League of Nations to rule the earth. The religious organizations supported that League. It has now failed. Fascist dictatorial government was then set up in Italy by an avowed atheist. A similar government was set up in Russia; then a dictatorial government was set up in Germany under Hitler, who defies Jehovah God and bitterly persecutes everybody that names Jehovah’s name. The Roman Catholic religious organization is the most powerful on earth; and while it claims to serve God, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, including the pope, has made a covenant with Mussolini and with Hitler, supports these dictatorial governments, and offers support to the dictatorial government of Russia. The Hierarchy has supported and still supports the destruction of Abyssinia, approves and supports the rebellion in Spain, and the prosecution of the war by Japan against China. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy claims the right to rule as the spiritual overlord of the dictators, all of whom are combined against Jehovah’s government under Christ Jesus. Hence that monstrosity of Satan, claiming the right to rule in defiance of God and Christ, is the abomination that maketh desolate, as stated in the Scriptures.—Mark 13:14-19.
••If the Roman Catholic religious system is on the side of God and Christ, then why does that institution join forces with the totalitarian governments that now misrule Europe, and which dictators are desperately trying to gain control of England and America! The Catholic religious system does not support Jehovah’s theocratic government. Why, then, does that religious system claim to represent God! The answer is, Satan the Devil is the arch deceiver and he has always used religion to deceive the people, and now the Hierarchy operates that religious system at the Devil’s command to carry out his deception. Why be led into Satan’s trap! Why not heed and obey the Lord’s command, to wit: ‘When you see the abomination of desolation [the monstrosity, dictatorial government] standing where it ought not to stand, then flee to the mountains [symbolic mountains, picturing God’s government under Christ].’ As Jesus has declared, the greatest affliction that has ever befallen man is shortly to come upon the world. That tribulation is the battle of the great day of Jehovah and will completely destroy all organizations in opposition to Jehovah’s theocratic government. Such will be a manifestation of Jehovah’s supreme power against the Devil, which he declares shall take place immediately following the finishing of the work of declaring his name by his witnesses in the earth.—Exod. 9:16, Leeser.
40	The Roman Catholic Hierarchy charges that Jehovah’s witnesses now engage in a campaign of hate. That charge is entirely untrue. Jehovah’s witnesses act only in obedience to God’s commandment to proclaim his name and his kingdom, and to warn the people of what is about to follow upon the earth, even as Noah, in obedience to God’s command, sounded the warning just preceding the flood.
SURVIVORS
41	Only eight persons survived the flood; and God spared them because of their faith and obedience to his command. Only persons of good will toward God, and who prove their good will by exercising faith in him and obedience to his commandments, will survive Armageddon. (Jer. 25:34; Zeph. 2:3) AU persons of good will now must seek righteousness and meekness by learning of God’s purpose and obeying his commandments.
BLESSED RESULTS
42	Jesus covenants with the faithful ones called to “the high calling”, promising them to share with him in his kingdom, and these he designates as his ‘ little flock”. (Luke 12:32) But mark the conditions that must be met by each one of them before they can be counted entirely faithful and worthy to share with him in that kingdom and behold forever the glory
January 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER.
27
of Jehovah. They must be at peace with God. (Rom. 5:1) They must have the peace of God. (Phil. 4:7) And they must dwell together on earth in peace amongst themselves. (1 Thess. 5:13; Ps. 122:1-9) They must also be at peace with their companions the Jonadabs. As long as men are in the flesh, however, they must have chastisement or discipline, because it is under such conditions of discipline that one learns obedience and proves his integrity toward God. Without chastisement or discipline, and without continuing faithful under such circumstances, one could not prove his integrity toward God. Brethren of the Lord, while in the flesh, find that they have differences or misunderstanding between themselves, but when such differences or misunderstanding arises each one must take into consideration the natural weaknesses of the other and deal with one another accordingly. In this connection note the instruction and admonition written by the apostle for the benefit of those in the covenant with the Lord for the kingdom: “Pursue peace with all, and that holiness without which no one shall see the Lord; looking carefully, lest any one fall back from the favor of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up may disturb you, and through it many be poisoned.”— Heb. 12:14,15, Diaglott.
41	The root of bitterness in the heart, as above stated, grows into malice; and therefore no root or bitterness in the heart of one against another must be permitted to remain there, because it may result in the defilement and destruction of many. Unless such one puts bitterness out of his heart, and pursues a course of righteousness, which means to be governed entirely by the law of God and His commandments, he could not be finally approved of the Lord and made a part of the little flock. The way that those of the little flock are required to travel often seems very hard; but to the faithful the results are grand beyond the description of words or appreciation of the human mind. To have a part in the everlasting kingdom of God is the greatest favor that could come to any creature. For this reason the faithful rejoice in tribulation; because such tribulation furnishes the opportunity to prove one’s faithfulness and maintain his integrity toward God. Then Jesus turns his attention to the others that shall find life under his theocratic government of peace, and concerning them he says: “And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.”—John 10:16.
44	Then the Lord names his “other sheep” or obedient ones, and collectively these are called the “great multitude”. (Rev. 7:9-17) God used a good man named Jonadab, long ago, to picture those who
form the great multitude (2 Ki. 10:15-23), and hence such persons are now called “Jonadabs”; and these must prove their full obedience to the Lord’s command. (Jer. 35:18,19) It is such persons of good will toward God whom he will protect and shield from the fiery tribulation of Armageddon, and which persons will survive and continue to live. Such persons mus prove their good will toward God by taking their stand on the side of his theocratic government under Christ, and must do so before the battle of Armageddon takes place. The time is short. God commands his witnesses to carry the message of truth to such persons of good will that they may know God and Christ and find life. (Ezek. 9:4; John 17: 3) The great multitude are ‘the millions now living that will never die’ and that will live for ever on the earth and be regenerated and brought up to a perfect condition physically, mentally and morally.
45	Before the rebellion Jehovah God gave his command to Adam to “multiply and fill the earth”. Adam became a sinner by reason of his disobedience and could not fulfill that command. At the end of the flood God repeated that mandate to Noah and his sons. The flood was a type of Armageddon, and Noah’s sons pictured the Jonadabs, who form the “great multitude” and survive Armageddon. That mandate to fill the earth must be carried out, and will be carried out by the “great multitude”. They will bring children into the earth, and all the obedient ones of such will live for ever on the earth in perfect peace. The earth will become a glorious place to live. Sickness and death will end for ever, because under the reign of Christ all obedient ones will be given life everlasting.—Rev. 21:1-4; 1 Cor. 15: 26.
46	The message which Jehovah’s angels brought to the earth when Jesus was born will then be fully realized. Jesus Christ, the Lord and King and Redeemer, is the administrator of life to the obedient ones. (Rom. 6: 23) All men who live will then be of good will toward God, the King, and his Kingdom, and proving obedient they will dwell for ever in peace. Therefore the message “Peace on earth among men of good will” applies only to those who are of good will. The King, Christ Jesus, is the Prince of Peace, and “of his government and peace there shall be no end”. (Isa. 9:7) Such are the blessed results from the theocratic government under Christ, and which will come to men of good will. All persons of good will shall enjoy the blessings of everlasting life if they remain obedient unto God; and this will be a vindication of Jehovah’s name and prove Satan a liar. The earth will be filled with a joyful, peaceful and blessed human race to the eternal glory of the Most High. If you would live, learn of and obey Jehovah and his King.
PRINCES
JEHOVAH’S temple organization, seen in vision by his prophet Ezekiel, the Most High God will use in behalf of the people on earth during the period of reconciliation and regeneration. Note the picture thereof: “And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering, and put it upon the [door] posts of the [temple] house, and upon the four corners of the settle of the altar, and upon the posts of the gate of the inner court. And so thou shalt do [on] the seventh day of the month for every one that erreth, and for him that is simple: so shall ye reconcile [make atonement for] the house.” (Ezek. 45:19,20) This use of the sin-atoning blood pictures that the acceptance of the temple and the power of the temple toward the human race are by virtue of the shed blood of Christ Jesus, God’s beloved Son. The holy angels do not need this temple, but the human creatures do need such blood-sprinkling in the temple to save them from death.
When Jehovah would deliver the Israelites from the oppressive hand of Egypt he pictured his victory over the enemy by the application of the blood of the paschal lamb on the door posts and over the door of the houses of the Hebrews. This pictured the deliverance of the people from the oppressive hand of Satan and his organization, and it is reasonable to conclude that this great victory of Jehovah over the enemy at Armageddon will be celebrated. “In the first month, in the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall have the passover, a feast of seven days; unleavened bread shall be eaten. And upon that day shall the prince prepare for himself, and for all the people of the land, a bullock for a sin offering.” (Ezek. 45:21, 22) During the thousand-year reign of The Christ (Rev. 20:4) the peoples of earth will be under the leadership of the “princes in all the earth”, and this portion of Ezekiel’s prophecy suggests that during that time the people will celebrate their deliverance from the oppressive hand of the enemy and will recognize that the Tiamb of God has taken away their sin’ and that the great and mighty Christ Jesus has trodden ‘the wine press of God’s wrath’ to the destruction of the enemy and all of his organization. Then unto Christ every human knee shall bow, and all will acknowledge that he is the great Lamb of God, to the glory of the Most High.—Phil. 2:9-11.
The peoples of earth will have a real reason to celebrate and to faithfully keep the festival, and such is shown by the following: “[The] seven days of the feast he shall prepare a burnt offering to [Jehovah], seven bullocks and seven rams without blemish, daily the seven days; and a kid of the goats daily for a sin offering. And he shall prepare a meat [meal] offering of an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and an hin of oil for an ephah.” (Ezek. 45: 23, 24) Throughout the thousand-year reign the earthly princes and the people will hold such feasts to the Lamb of God, Christ Jesus, and to the honor of Jehovah’s name.
Instead of “holiday hilarities” that are now held by the people under Satan’s organization, during the thousand-year reign of Christ the people will celebrate feasts at stated times. “In the seventh month, in the fifteenth day of the month, shall he [the prince] do the like in the feast of the seven days, according to the sin offering, according to the burnt offering, and according to the meat [meal]
28
offering, and according to the oil.” (Ezek. 45:25) During that millennial reign the people will be under Christ, the great High Priest and King, and on their way to justification. They must be finally and fully justified before being brought into Jehovah’s permanent organization. During the entire period of that righteous reign the people will be figuratively dwelling in tents or tabernacles. At the end of the thousand years, when Satan is loosed for a little season (Rev. 20:3), they, the justified ones, together with their earthly leaders the princes, will constitute the “eamp of the saints”, which Satan and his forces will encompass and attempt to take. Then the people will know that their dependence is upon God and upon Christ. Already the people of good will begin celebrating the feast of tabernacles and are gathering and bringing in all fruits of praise and thanksgiving unto God. The “princes in all the earth” when resurrected will receive the fruits of the kingdom from the trees of life which grow on either side of the river of the water of life and will be holding forth these fruits of the kingdom for the benefit of the people. (Rev. 22:1, 2) This figurative language means that the earthly princes will minister the life-giving truth to the people.
Jehovah’s glory passed through the east gate, and therefore “Thus saith the Lord God, The gate of the inner court that looketh toward the east shall be shut the six working days; but on the sabbath it shall be opened, and in the day of the new moon it shall be opened”. (Ezek. 46:1) The princes, rulers in the earth, do not pass through this gate, but the fact that it is open at certain times is manifestly for the purpose of communication. According to verse twelve of Ezekiel 46 this east gate was opened on special occasions. The vision shows the witness class in the temple. If the official members of the earthly remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses are sealed before the return of these faithful men, who shall be made princes in all the earth, surely during this interim, no matter how brief, this symbolic eastern gate of divine glory will be shut tight and none other will be permitted to enter thereafter. However, when these faithful prophets or princes do return, then the eastern gate of praise and service to Jehovah’s glory will be opened, and then the “prince” may proceed so far, but no farther, and shall not pass over the inner threshold of the gate. It seems likely that for a little season these faithful men will be associated personally with the last members of the faithful remnant of the “servant” class on whom Jehovah has put his glory. Thus there will be a direct connection between the faithful remnant and the princes in the earth, even though for a short time.
That the “prince” could not go entirely through and beyond the eastern inner gate where the glory of Jehovah entered is shown by the following: “And the prince shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate without, and shall stand by the post of the gate, and the priests shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, and he shall worship at the threshold of the gate: then he shall go forth; but the gate shall not be shut until the evening.” (Ezek. 46:2; see also 44:3) It appears from this text that the priests meet the prince, that is, members of the royal priesthood meet members of the “princes in all the earth”, and the priests shall prepare their offering of acceptance.
January 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
29
May this not mean also that the last members of the remnant will enjoy the privilege while in the flesh of a personal contact with some of the faithful men of old, resurrected and beginning their work on earth under the kingdom! This verse shows that the princes shall worship Jehovah in a special way at the gate of praise and service to him, at the threshold of the east inner gate, which seems to denote their special position in Jehovah’s organization. Jesus speaks of the same thing: “And I say unto you, That many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven.” (Matt. 8:11) This special gate of praise and service is open to the princes throughout the entire “Lord’s day”, that is, the one thousand years’ reign of Jehovah’s King of kings, who is both Lord and Christ.
The princes will lead the people in their worship of Jehovah and of Christ. “Likewise the people of the land shall worship at the door of this gate before [Jehovah], in the sabbaths, and in the new moons.” (Ezck. 46:3)
The peoples of earth will then be worshiping in the outer place, that is to say, on the east of the temple and before the doors of the temple. The worship will be orderly and with regularity; and this is indicated by the regular processions of the people on the sabbaths and new moons. This will draw the people ever nearer to Jehovah and to Christ. Then they will stand together as one unit and united people, and the princes will be their leaders.
On the sabbath day and new-moon day the prinee ‘shall offer the burnt offerings for the people to the Lord’, these offerings being specified in verses four to seven. “And he shall prepare a meat [meal] offering, an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram; and for the lambs according as his hand shall attain unto, and an hin of oil to an ephah.” (Ezek. 46:7) The prince must not enter into the inner court; hence it is written: “And when the prince shall enter, he shall go in by the way of the porch of that gate, and he shall go forth by the way thereof.” (Ezck. 46:8) The inner court is exclusively for the priests’ service.
VINDI
THOSE who are members of Jehovah’s organization and who faithfully perform their part of participating in the vindication of his name may properly be designated as vindicators. Christ Jesus is the Head and the Chief One, and therefore he is the great Vindicator, and the work done by the earthly members of his organization is very insignificant; yet Zechariah, the prophet of God, gives attention to the temple company, both Head and body, manifestly for the comfort and encouragement of the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses on the earth. The builders of the temple of Jerusalem had been in captivity in Babylon and were now released. Those who now have part in the building of the real temple, and who are yet on the earth, were once in captivity to Satan’s organization, and these now bring their little all, pictured by the silver and gold to which Zechariah refers, to be used in connection with the temple work. As stated at Zechariah 6: 9,10: “And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Take of them of the captivity, even of Heldai, of Tobijah, and of Jedaiah, which are come from Babylon, and come thou the same day, and go into the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah.” The captives have returned and come to Zion, which is God’s organization.
The names given in verse 10 of the prophecy are significant. “Heldai” (evidently the same one called “Helem”, “Strength,” in verse 14) means “worldly; enduring; long-lived”. The name “Tobijah” means “pleasing to Jehovah”. The name “Jedaiah” means “Jehovah has known”; “Jehovah cares (for him).” The meanings of the names of these mentioned appear to apply collectively to the remnant. “Heldai,” the remnant, being in the world and having a transient existence here, is no part of the world but endures through Armageddon, and henec is long-lived. “Tobijah” is pleasing to God because of his faithful devotion to Him; and “Jedaiah” signifies not only that God knows the remnant, but that he cares for and preserves them. The three men named had come from Babylon and evidently had been sent as a delegation by those Jews remaining in Babylon, and had come to observe the work on the temple, which
CATOR
work had been resumed. Zechariah was commanded to go into the house of Josiah and there to do certain things to Joshua the high priest and do them in the presence of these three men, which things they would later report to their brethren remaining in Babylon. Evidently the house of Josiah was chosen and used because the temple was not then completed. The house was a priest’s house, “founded by Jehovah” (which the name “Josiah” means), and well pictures Jehovah’s priestly house, the remnant, the members of which are now in the secret place of the Lord, hidden and protected by him.
This delegation being gathered into the house- of Josiah, Zechariah was directed to “then take silver and gold, and make crowns, and set them upon the head of Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest”. (6:11) It seems probable that this silver and gold had been collected or contributed by the three men and brought by them, because verse 10 says, “Take of them.” The Revised Version of verse 11 agrees with this, reading: “Yea, take of them silver and gold.” The fact of the coming of this delegation of three men years after the original remnant of the Jews had returned from Babylon, and after the temple work had been resumed, suggests that the three men pictured the same ones as those represented by Esther and Ruth. (See verse 15.) Corresponding to this, members of the faithful remnant elass, who are scattered throughout the earth and are therefore in the world but not of it, come and present themselves unto the Lord and offer their contribution to the work of Jehovah’s King and kingdom, and this was foreshadowed by the use Zechariah made of the silver and gold brought to him.
Zechariah made “crowns”, “a erown” (Roth.), and set it on the head of Joshua the high priest, thus picturing the crown on the head of Christ Jesus. (Ps. 21:3) The setting was done by Zechariah, and suggests that it is the remnant that calls attention to the fact that Christ is crowned King and has come. This the remnant do after the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple, and particularly after 1922, when they cried out: “The Lord is in
30
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
his temple; advertise the King and his kingdom!” Now it is seen that Jehovah crowned Jesus in 1914, and the remnant bear witness to that fact, even as Heldai, Tobijah and Jedaiah on returning bore testimony before those men remaining in Babylon. Jehovah now commands that “all men should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father”. (John 5:23) This is symbolized by their contributions of silver and gold.
Zechariah was commanded to speak to the high priest and to do so in the presence of and for the benefit of the three men who were there as witnesses and who pictured the remnant now on the earth. “Speak unto him, saying, Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, saying, Behold the man whose name is The BRANCH: and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the temple of the Lord.” (6:12) At the time Christ, The Stone, was laid in miniature in Zion, Pilate said: “Behold the man!” (John 19:5) At the time Christ Jesus, the anointed King, the Stone, was laid in completion in Zion, Jehovah says: “Behold, the man whose name is The BRANCH,” “The Sprout” (A.R.V., margin). Jesus Christ is the Sprout or Branch of Jehovah. It was not Zerubbabel of the house of David that was crowned, he being then the governor at Jerusalem, but Joshua the high priest that was crowned. This proves that David’s natural house was merely typical and that The BRANCH is Jehovah’s direct Offshoot, his Chief Officer and great High Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek. It was in 1914 that Jehovah sent forth The BRANCH out of Zion (Ps. 110:2), which Branch is an insignificant “sprout” in the eyes of the earthly rulers, but he shines in the temple of Jehovah and shall vindicate Jehovah’s name.
The words in the prophecy “out of his place” mean “out of Zion”, that is to say, Jehovah’s universal organization from which Christ Jesus is taken and is made the Head of the capital organization, and, as The BRANCH, grows up out of the top thereof. (Ezek. 17:22-24) This prophetic picture particularly shows that after the crowning of Jesus as King by Jehovah, and after the casting of Satan out of heaven, he must come to Jehovah’s temple as a crowned King and as High Priest and as Judge of the house of God. Here he brings the faithful into the temple and prepares them to take a part in the work of vindicating Jehovah’s name. These witnesses of Jehovah, pictured by the three men, must bear testimony to others of the world, and that is what they are now doing.
Zerubbabel the governor and Joshua the high priest prefigured one and the same person, to wit, Christ Jesus, who is a “priest upon his throne” and fills the office typified by Melchizedek, the ancient king of Salem and priest of the most high God. (Gen. 14:18; Heb. 7:1) Zechariah 6:13 reads: “Even he shall build the temple of the Lord; and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne; and he shall be a priest upon his throne; and the counsel of peace shall be between them both.” As builder of the temple he is clothed with majesty, honor and glory, and he bears the commission and the responsibility as the great Vindicator of his Father’s name. Isaiah 22:23, 24 says: “And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father’s house. . . . And he shall be for a glorious throne to his father’s house.” Christ Jesus fills the two offices of king and priest, and there is no conflict between the two;
hence it is written: “And the counsel of peace shall be between the two of them.” (Roth.) The counsel or purpose of both offices is peace. As sacrificing priest he is the way for man to be at peace with God. (Eph. 2:14) He completes the atonement work in heaven as the royal priest. As God’s king he rules and destroys Satan and his organization, which has long been the disturber of the peace, and he will establish ‘peace on earth toward men of good will’. He is “King of Salem”, meaning “King of Peace” (Heb. 7:2); “and his name shall be called Wonderful Counsellor, . . . the Prince of Peace.” (Isa. 9: 6, 7) He is the Vindicator and brings everlasting peace by fighting for it.
Zechariah made from the silver and gold contributed a crown for the high priest, and this served as a memorial of the faithfulness and devotion of the contributors. “And the crowns [(Roth.) crown] shall be to Helem [another name for Heldai], and to Tobijah, and to Jedaiah, and to Hen [another name for Josiah] the son of Zephaniah, for a memorial in the temple of the Lord.” (6:14) These men had shown their faithfulness by coming from Babylon to the Lord’s house in “the day of small things”, when the temple was hardly begun. (Hag. 2:3) The Lord shows his appreciation of their devotion and also that of Josiah (Hen), the son of Zephaniah, who allowed his house to be used on this occasion. These men pictured the faithful remnant who share with Christ Jesus in the honor bestowed upon him by Jehovah, and for which faithful ones he reserves “a crown of righteousness”. (2 Tim. 4:8) And this they receive upon the appearing of the Chief Shepherd. (1 Pet. 5:1-4) They must continue faithful, seeing that no man takes their crown. It is “for a memorial in the temple of Jehovah”; showing that the four men named are honored with recognition in Jehovah’s sanctuary, and it shows that the remnant are now gathered together under Christ at the temple and are at the same time heirs of the kingdom and joint-heirs with Christ Jesus. This is symbolized by the crown.
The work of these men did not end with their contributions of silver and gold. They had to witness the crowning of Joshua and to hear the words of the prophet, and now it devolved on them to return and bear testimony to others of what they had learned. This shows that the remnant, whom these men foreshadowed, must engage in the witness work, testifying to others, and this after they have received enlightenment; and this is supported by the concluding words of the prophecy, to wit: “And they that are far off shall come and build in the temple of the Lord; and ye shall know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto you. And this shall come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice of the Lord your God.” (6:15) Those afar off are the ones taken into the temple after the second outpouring of the holy spirit, as foretold at Joel 2:28, 29, and to whom those of the temple company give testimony. (Isa. 43:6,7; Ps. 147:2; Matt. 24:31) Those who are thus gathered come and do temple service. These fill up the places of others who might have been of the temple, and who were engaged in the “Elijah work” of the church, but who were negligent and stumbled over The Stone and who have been talking about “character building” since, and have been set aside by the Lord. There were some at Jerusalem who concluded that, as stated at Haggai 1:4, it was ‘a time to dwell in ceiled houses and let the temple
January 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
31
lie in waste’. Such foreshadowed the ones who have been obtaining “rest” in what the Lord gave to his people prior to the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple in 1918, and who have lost the opportunity to have a place of service in the temple; and “they that are far off” have entered now, in their stead, into that blessed privilege of temple service. These latter are particularly pictured by Esther and Ruth, in the prophecies which bear their names.
The fact that Jehovah supplied all needed help for the building of the temple in harmony with the prophecy of Zechariah proves that Zechariah was a true prophet sent by the Lord. Jehovah thus vindicated his own word and now vindicates his own witnesses before “Christendom”,
and in this manner his witnesses have part in vindicating Jehovah’s name. Jehovah’s witnesses do not need to worry about when and how the many things promised will come to pass. If they are obedient to what the Lord gives them they shall see the fulfillment of Jehovah’s purposes: “if ye will diligently obey the voice of the Lord your God”; meaning that the remnant must now be diligent in doing with their might the work which Jehovah has given them to do, regardless of what others may do. The temple will be completed in due time and Jehovah’s name will be vindicated ; but those who are now in the temple are required to render full obedience if they will ultimately participate in the vindication of Jehovah’s word and name.
LETTERS
RESOLUTION AND DECLARATION
We, the associated companies of Jehovah’s witnesses and companions of Kansas,' Zone 3, do hereby declare ourselves in favor of and adopt the following resolution and declaration:
That centuries ago Jehovah gave his word of promise that in his own due time he would set up a government that would be administered wholly in righteousness, under his direct supervision ; that such government would bring boundless blessings to the lovers of righteousness, and break in pieces the lawless ones who set themselves in opposition thereto. Recognizing the fact that the time for such Theocratic Government to be put in operation has come, we declare ourselves unreservedly devoted to the One in charge thereof, and to such higher powers, Jehovah and his anointed King, Christ Jesus, we give our joyful allegiance.
We are in full harmony with, and recognize, the Society as the visible channel through which the instructions from the great Theocrat are issued, and we are determined henceforth and always to carry out all such instructions to the very best of our ability. We wish to heed all commandments of our Father—never do we wish to lean unto our own understanding, nor to forsake the ‘law of our mother’.
Furthermore, we wish to announce that we are in harmony with, and fully endorse, the Declarations made by Brother Rutherford against the modern-day monstrosity that has arisen in defiance of the Kingdom of Jehovah God. Having heard the thundering command of the Almighty Warrior to arise against such defamers of his name, we are determined to press on vigorously, shouting as w.e go the battle cry: “For Jehovah and His Vindicator.” We recognize that ‘He that is for us is far greater than all that be against us’, and therefore we will go forth in the face of any and all opposition, however bitter it may be, fearing neither man nor devil, knowing that the battle is Jehovah’s. For the vindica
tion of Jehovah’s name we are ready and willing to give all that we have, even to the cost of our lives—yea, we are willing to “die with our boots on” if so be it his will.
To our beloved Brother Rutherford and all coworkers at Brooklyn and elsewhere we send our fervent greetings and warmest Christian love, and wish to assure the Society of our full cooperation in advancing the interests of the Theocratic Government.
Unanimously adopted by the following companies of Kansas:
Wichita	Arkansas City	Westphalia
Emporia	Manhattan	Winfield
Abilene	Eureka
TRUTH FROM JEHOVAH
Dear Brother Rutherford:
After concluding the studying of the article “Fill the Earth”, the Harrisburg (Pa.) company desire to express their thanks to Jehovah and our appreciation to you, dear Brother Rutherford, for the wonderful articles of truth coming through the channels of The Watchtower.
This wonderful article of truth from Jehovah makes us feel as though standing beyond the battle of Armageddon and seeing Jehovah’s mandate being carried into action. This gives us great strength to face the things we know we are sure to see in the near future.
Realizing, dear Brother Rutherford, the great danger that lurks about you constantly, we present you daily before the throne of grace asking Jehovah’s protection as you continue to expose the hiding place of lies of the most vicious and cruel organization on earth, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy.
We are with you in this great fight as we carry the battle to the gate.
YEAR BOOK FOR 1939
The Year Book for 1939 is not only a detailed and comprehensive record of world activities of Jehovah’s witnesses during the past year, but also a compendium of information of the most up-to-date development, and hence useful and necessary for all active publishers to have as a ready reference now. This has all been prepared by the president of the Society. Also, there is his comment on the 1939 year text, and a daily text and comment for every day of the year, said comments being drawn from The Watchtower. Every active Kingdom publisher and all seeking the way to Zion should be equipped with this new Year Book. As the edition is limited, thus enhancing the cost of production, the contribution of 50c is asked for per copy. Company servants should each arrange for a combination order for his respective company.
1939 CALENDAR
The year text for 1939 is timely: “But they shall not prevail against thee.” (Jer. 1: 19) That those on the side of Jehovah and his King and kingdom may conveniently have this strengthening promise daily before their attention during 1939 this text is featured on the Society’s new calendar and accompanied by a beautiful three-color picture showing in symbolic style the thrilling fulfillment of the promise to the modern Jeremiah class and their companions. Underneath appears the president’s letter setting out the united service periods for 1939, n ready reference for kingdom publishers. The calendar pad shows the dates thereof. Company servants should send in a combination order for all wanting calendars. Remit, with order, at 25c each, or $1.00 for five to one address.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
AN HONEST MAN IN A CATHOLIC MOB
"While witnessing in the central part of Philadelphia, Pa., on Sunday last, I was followed by a mob of about 22 young men and boys, who kept yelling abuses at me and telling the householders, as they answered my calls, to slam the door in my face and to take none of the literature, as I was ‘a Communist and fighting the Catholic church’. They kept this up for about two blocks and told me to get out of the neighborhood, asking me if I would like to be tarred and feathered.
“Finally. I came to a door of a house directly off the sidewalk, with only a couple of steps ascending to it. I rang the bell and got no answer. In the meantime the mob had gathered around in back of me; so I turned and witnessed to them, telling them they were acting ignorantly, having no knowledge of the contents of this message, and asking them if they would rather remain ignorant and fight against God’s work at the behest of the lying priest, or investigate the literature and learn the truth that would enable them to take their stand on God’s side and escape his wrath at Armageddon. Additionally, I cited the prophecies foretelling the present world conditions and the monstrosity government, backed by the Hierarchy, to rule the world. Some of the crowd would remonstrate at times and others would tell them to keep still and let me talk, stating that I was telling the truth.
“One man, about 35 years of age, I should judge, said he would take the book Enemies. As he was getting his 25 cents out to contribute, one of the fellows said: ‘There is a sucker for you.’ The man answered: ‘Who dares call me a sucker? Let me hear anyone call me a sucker.’ After talking a little longer with them and telling them to investigate the book Enemies with this gentleman, I departed on my way rejoicing.”
ENCOURAGEMENT FOR APARTMENT HOUSE “BELL RINGERS”
“Recently I met an old friend on the liner Normandie, whom I had not seen for years. Giving him a witness of the truth, he told me that not long ago one of our publishers rang the bell of his apartment. His wife was out, and he himself was just sitting in the bathtub. He asked: ‘Who is there?’ The voice of a woman came through, saying something about a watch tower, and he replied: ‘Nobody home.’ Came back the quick-witted question: ‘Well, who, then, are you? are you a ghost?’ That amused him so much that he asked the voice to wait a minute; he wished to see the person. He saw her, listened to her with interest, and took literature.”
BOOKLETS BREAK GROUND FOR FURTHER WORK
“An old Italian gentleman obtained a book, studied it carefully, and was thrilled by the truth. Words were inadequate to express his joy. He had never eared much for the priests, and was glad that the book exposes their racket. He now treasures the truth so much that ‘it has made him feel twenty years younger’. He wants to listen to the phonograph some more and wants more literature.
"A few weeks ago a young man obtained four booklets. He liked them so much that, when I called on him and had him listen to the phonograph, he took 16 bound books and a Bible and, the following morning, went out witnessing with me. He now attends study meetings and service meetings, and goes out witnessing regularly despite the opposition of his Catholic family and friends. He has subscribed for The 'Watchtower and Consolation and has bought a phonograph, even though he is out of work.”
CATHOLIC POPULATION RESPONDING TO MESSAGE
“Some time ago I visited a family, and the lady from the apartment above happened to be there. She is Catholic. She complained that, try as hard as she could, she could not understand the Bible, and knew not why. Naturally she couldn’t get help from her priest. So I suggested that we open up a study meeting, a model study. Now overjoyed at understanding the Bible, she has attended the model study ever since and has invited her two strictly Catholic sisters and others to the study, who in turn have become much interested in the truth. There are about fifteen now, who attend this study, and the Lord has blessed them richly with knowledge of the truth appreciated by them all. They have obtained many of our books, many subscribe for The Watchtower and Consolation, and some have already taken part in the field service.”
MODEL STUDY OVERCOMES OBJECTIONS
“Three weeks ago I called on an interested lady, who had written to the Society, requesting a copy of the lecture ‘Fascism or Freedom’ and showing much interest. I suggested starting a model study at her home, which would benefit her and her intelligent-looking children. But she seemed to have many excuses why she couldn’t allow it in her home. After a few words of encouragement I played a few phonograph records and said no more on the subject. The following week I called back, all prepared for a model study but, of course, not mentioning anything of it to the lady or the children. I stated that, since the entire family was in, I was going to show them how to study the Bible in a most efficient and systematic way, increasing their knowledge of the truth. Having only one hour’s time, I suggested we start right away. They all sat around the table. I distributed to each one a Bible and a Model Study booklet and, without their seeming to realize it, we started the study. They eagerly looked up the Scriptures cited, read the questions and answers in the booklet, and at the end of the hour they liked it so much that they repeatedly requested me to come back and continue the study. One of the objections the mother had before was that she didn't want too many people to come to the study at her home, because the landlord wouldn’t like it. But now she doesn’t care what the landlord says; she wants others to come to the meeting there.”
My sheep hear my voice, and 1 know them, and they follow me: and 1 give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall anir man pluck them out of my hand. My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man w able to pluck them out of my Father’s hand.—John 10: 27-29.
32
THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street «	« Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President____W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world ; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and Is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act Is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS Journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilt It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It Is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and south Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Bemittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British....................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian....................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian............7 Beresford Road, Strathfleld, N. S. W., Australia
South African .........._.......Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year Is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Broohjgn, N. T., under the Act of March 3, 1819.
“LOVERS OF RIGHTEOUSNESS”
This name designates the testimony period which will occupy the entire month of February. Those of Jehovah’s anointed remnant and their companions, foreshadowed by David and Jonathan, being lovers of righteousness of God, will rejoice to make special efforts during this period to devote more time and energy to the Watchtower Campaign, as announced below and which includes the month of February. More time and effort in the field, or a new start in the field, as a kingdom publisher, will require special planning on your part. If you desire to become a publisher, get in touch with our local organization or direct with this office.
tion for the magazine The Watchtower together with the book Enemies or any other one desired of the bound book scries and a copy of the new booklet Face the Facts, on a contribution of but $1.00. This is now the offer in every language in which The Watchtower appears; hence this four-month campaign is both an international and a world-wide one. Every reader of The Watchtower who appreciates its real value and the dire need of all people of good will today for its spiritual food will without urging desire to take part in this campaign. If not already in touch with the Society’s service organization, write this office and make arrangements for the campaign. A monthly report is expected of each publisher. Consult the Informant for ail details hereon.
“WATCHTOWER” CAMPAIGN
Four full months of 1939, January to April inclusive, have been set aside for the biggest, if not most important, yet of the campaigns to publish Jehovah’s kingdom. It is designated the “Watchtower” campaign because of the special offer made, agreeable to arrangements of the Society, to wit, a full year’s subscrip-
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of March 5: “Drama of Vindication,” (Part 1) fl 1-23 inclusive, The Watchtower February 1, 1939.
Week of March 12: “Drama of Vindication,” (Part 1) fl 24-44 inclusive, The Watchtower February 1, 1939.
AND HERALD OF CHRIST’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX	February 1, 1939	No. 3
DRAMA OF VINDICATION
PART 1
"Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe to do according to all the law.” —J osh. 1:7.
JEHOVAH was never under any obligation to disclose to human creatures the means of executing his purpose in vindication of his name. What he has done is a manifestation of his loving-kindness toward those who obey him. God has caused to be enacted and recorded many prophetic pictures setting forth in detail the manner of carrying out his purpose. “The last days” are here, and these are times of peril, and Satan and his forces are viciously assaulting the people of God, and for the purpose of giving to those faithful ones courage and comfort and hope Jehovah now reveals to them the manner of carrying out his purpose, and this he does through prophetic pictures. (Rom. 15:4) Because Christ Jesus, the Beloved One, is the Executive Officer and Vindicator of Jehovah, the prophetic pictures identify him specifically. Aside from Jesus, however, the prophetic pictures do not foretell or foreshadow individuals and do not show God’s dealing with individuals, but do set forth the work of God and Christ in which the faithful people of God are privileged to have some part. Individuals are not important, but the work in which they engage is important. Generally the faithful are permitted to have some part in the Lord’s work relating to the execution of his purpose, and thereafter they are permitted, by the grace of God, to see how they have been led by the hand of the Lord and used in his service. Such revelation serves to increase their faith and courage, and hence they joyfully sing the praises of God and say: “By his hand he leadeth me.” Surrounded by the enemy that viciously assaults the “remnant” and their “companions”, these faithful ones, full of faith and confidence in the Lord, say: “In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust; let me never be ashamed: deliver me in thy righteousness. Bow down thine ear to me; deliver me speedily: be thou my strong rock, for an house of defence to save me. For thou art my rock and my fortress: therefore, for thy name’s sake, lead me and guide me.”—Ps. 31:1-3.
* Prophetic pictures enable those who trust Jehovah to keep in mind that underneath are his everlasting arms’ bearing them up (Deut. 33:27), that the battle is God’s and not man’s, and that the victory is with Jehovah and Christ Jesus, and that those who remain true and steadfast shall profit by that victory.
8 Jehovah withdrew his chosen people from the land of Egypt, and by the hand of his servant Moses he led them for forty years on a trek through the wilderness, using them in that time to make pictures of greater things that must come to pass in future days. When Moses had about finished the work committed into his hands he assembled the Israelites on the plains of Moab and there recounted to them what God had done for them and instructed them what they must do in the days to come. That instruction was given for the benefit of the antitypical Israelites, the true followers of Christ Jesus, whom God builds up into his capital organization. Finishing his work, Moses died, and Joshua was assigned to the place once filled by Moses. God was about to enact a prophetic drama foretelling events that lead up to the full vindication of his name. Those dramas which are here considered were, to wit: The crossing of the Jordan; Rahab, who because of her faithfulness gained God’s approval; the siege and fall of Jericho; sin in the ranks of God’s typical people; and the assault upon and destruction of Ai. The fulfillment of these prophetic pictures are today of keenest interest to the people of God on earth who are in a covenant with him to do his will.
JORDAN
*	This drama opens with Joshua in command of the host of Israel, which host were encamped on the plains of Moab waiting the commandment from their visible leader: “Now after the death of Moses the servant of the Lord it came to pass, that the Lord spake unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses’ minister.” (Josh. 1:1) There Joshua pictures the Lord Jesus
36
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Christ, engaged in the work of vindicating Jehovah’s name and in which work he associates with himself his faithful followers on the earth. The death of Moses and the transfer of authority to Joshua pictures the transition period from the “Elijah work” of the Lord to the “Elisha work” of the church under the direction of its Head, Christ Jesus. Joshua had been the ‘minister of Moses’, just as, thereafter, Elisha was minister to Elijah. (Ex. 24:13) Before his death Moses, at God’s command, had invested Joshua with authority as his successor to lead the Israelites into the promised land. (Num. 27:12-23; Deut. 31:14) Likewise Elijah, in obedience to God’s command, designated Elisha as his successor. (1 Ki. 19:13-21) The name Moses means “drawing” or “rescued”, as he was rescued from the waters of the Nile, and the suggestion is also that of God ‘taking out a people for his name’ during the period of time from A.D. 1878 to 1918. The death of Moses was due to his disobedience of God. (Num. 20: 7-12, 24) This pictured the death of the Elijah work, which work came to an end because of the ‘lawlessness of lip* of Jehovah’s servant class on the earth and fleeing for fear, as Elijah fled from before Jezebel. (Isa. 6: 5, 7; 1 Ki. 19:1-3) The prophetic picture and the physical facts exactly fit, and therefore we are certain we have the right understanding.
•	Moses died in the last month, that is to say, the twelfth month of the fortieth and last year of Israel’s wilderness journey. Israel mourned thirty days from his death, and at the end thereof only three days remained before the host of Israel must cross the river Jordan, which they did on the tenth day of Nisan or tenth day of the new year, that is, the forty-first year after their leaving Egypt. (Deut. 34:7,8; Josh. 1:10,11; 4:19) The period of mourning for Moses well pictures the period or duration of time during which the witness work was stopped by the acts of the enemy in the spring of 1918 and when some of the witnesses of the Lord were imprisoned and “appointed to die”. That period of time is there pictured as ‘a half hour of silence in heaven’. (Rev. 8:1) This period or pause was shown in the prophetic picture when, after Elijah had been taken away, Elisha returned to the Jordan and stood over on its eastern banks just opposite from Jericho, at the same place where Joshua had crossed the Jordan centuries before.—2 Ki. 2:4-8,11-15.
•	In fulfillment of the picture the events began to come to pass in A.D. 1918. Thus it appears that the covenant people at the end of the world (1914) would not cross over their Jordan, nor did they do so, before or during the year 1918. Moses, leading the Israelites, reached Moab on the east side of the Jordan at the end of forty years and came over opposite Jericho, and Moses still lived. So Jehovah’s
covenant people during the Elijah work survived until the end of A.D. 1918, when the Elijah work came to an end. Israel’s victory over Sihon the Amorite and Og, the king of Bashan, was accomplished before the death of Moses and, of course, before the time of crossing the Jordan; so, while the Elijah work was yet alive and active, the Greater Moses, the Lord Jesus Christ, gained the victory over Satan in a “war in heaven” and cast Satan and his angels to the earth, and this was accomplished between 1914 and 1918. (Rev. 12:1-9) The Devil tried to prevent the Israelites from crossing the Jordan, by causing the unfaithful Balaam to curse Israel and by turning some of the Israelites to the devilish religious practice of Baal-peor. (Numbers, chapters 22 to 25) Satan has made similar efforts against Jehovah’s witnesses to prevent their crossing the antitypical Jordan and moving against the modern-day Jericho, and Satan has failed in this.
T At the end of forty years, as it is written, “it came to pass that the Lord spake unto Joshua.” At that time a settled place had been assigned to the Israelites by Jehovah, which country was on both sides of the Jordan river, and that part on the east side of the Jordan was already occupied by some of the tribes. Unlike Abraham and other faithful prophets of Israel, who “looked for a city which hath foundations”, having faith in the coming kingdom of God under the Messiah, the Israelites were now certain of their assigned place, and in their assigned territory pictured the faithful followers of Christ Jesus who, in 1918, had arrived at the kingdom country represented by Jesus’ coming to the temple. (Mal. 3:1-3) The King, Christ Jesus, was enthroned in 1914, and in 1918 appeared at the temple, and the journey of the antitypical Israelites unto the kingdom had come to an end. The time of the fulfillment of the prophetic picture here made is therefore definitely fixed. This, however, we could not see, understand and appreciate until after the facts had been performed and came to mind which exactly fit the prophecy and thus show its fulfillment.
"The original name of Joshua was Hoshea or Oshea. (Deut. 32:44, margin) Moses, as the representative of the Lord God, had given Joshua a new name, to wit, “Joshua,” which means “Jehovah the Savior”. (Num. 13: 8,16) That “new name” was given to Joshua at the time Moses sent twelve spies into Canaan. The change of name shows that Joshua would magnify and celebrate the name of Jehovah God. Likewise Jehovah’s people, the faithful followers of Jesus Christ, originally known at times as “Bible Students”, received the “new name”, Jehovah’s witnesses, and they must magnify the name of Jehovah God. (Rev. 2:17; Isa. 62:2; 65:15) At
THE WATCHTOWER
37
February 1, 1939
Acts 7:45 and at Hebrews 4:8 the name Jesus is used instead of Joshua, Jesus being the name in Greek and Joshua the name in Hebrew. The father of Joshua was named Nun, and that name means “perpetuity”.
•Joshua therefore pictured Christ Jesus, the Son of the only perpetuating one, Jehovah God, and this particularly after 1918, when Christ engaged in the work of vindicating his Father’s name.
10	Joshua descended from Joseph, through Joseph’s son Ephraim. Joshua was born in Egypt, where he served as a slave, and at the end of forty years’ wilderness journey he was approximately ninety years old. He was preserved by the Lord to cross the Jordan into Canaan because he and Caleb brought back a good and faithful report after spying out the land, on which mission they had been sent by Moses. (Num. 13:17; 14: 6-10,30) He fought in battles for the name of Jehovah before reaching the Jordan and crossing it. He took command of Israel in Shittim, on the east side of Jordan, opposite Jericho. Shittim means “Acacias” or “scourge trees”, by reason of the thorns on them. (Num. 25:1; 33:48-53; Josh. 2:1) Likewise Christ Jesus, the Greater Joshua, came to the temple and took direct command of God’s people on earth amidst a time of scourge or trouble upon the faithful remnant, which was brought on them by the "scourge trees” of human creatures acting under Satan’s command. Joshua assigned three cities of refuge west of the Jordan, in addition to the three cities of refuge Moses had assigned east of the Jordan. (Joshua, twentieth chapter) Joshua began the celebration of the feast of tabernacles in the land of Canaan after crossing the Jordan. (Neh. 8:17) These definite facts further serve to fix the time of fulfillment of the book of Joshua as after 1918, as this will be observed as progress is made in this study. This is further and conclusive proof that all things recorded in that book were written aforetime for the special aid of the faithful people of God upon whom the ends of the world have come.
11	Not until A.D. 1919 did the faithful followers of Christ Jesus then on earth realize that the Elijah work had ended. In the picture the Lord said to Joshua: “Moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land which I do give to them, even to the children of Israel.” (Josh.. 1:2) The Elijah work likewise was then dead, and the Elisha work must be done from that time forward. The Lord, without a question of doubt, directed and caused to be published in The Watchtower August 1 and 15, 1919, the articles under the title “Blessed Are the Fearless”, which brought forth the distinction between the Elijah and the Elisha work and showing that
the Elijah work was done and that the Elisha work must begin, and that without any fear of the enemy. The same message was published and publicly proclaimed at the Cedar Point (Ohio) convention in September of that same year. Of the Israelites that came out of Egypt only a remnant, Joshua, Caleb and Eleazar, survived and crossed the Jordan and entered the land of Canaan. Even so also only a small remnant of those who, during the Elijah period, covenanted to do the will of God, and hence who left antitypical Egypt, survived the Elijah period and came over the antitypical Jordan and engaged in the Elisha work.
** As the Israelites under the leadership of Joshua were commanded to arise, cross the Jordan and take possession of the land occupied by the enemy, so likewise the faithful followers of Christ Jesus under his leadership were commanded to engage in the kingdom work and to take possession of the land, which the enemy had been permitted to occupy and claim. From that time onward activity must increase to its full limit, and this is shown by the command of the Lord to Joshua, to wit: “Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have I given unto you, as I said unto Moses. From the wilderness and this Lebanon, even unto the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the great sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your coast.” (Josh. 1:3,4) Also for the benefit of Jehovah’s witnesses God said to the Israelites who stood on the east side of the Jordan: “There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life; as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee; I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.”—Josh. 1:5.
COURAGEOUS
” To be courageous one must have full faith and confidence in the power that is backing him up, and relying completely on that power he must vigorously press forward in doing the work that is set before him. Therefore it is written: “According to your faith be it unto you.” The command to Joshua to take with him across the Jordan “all this people’’ proves that Christ Jesus, the Greater-than-Joshua, makes his faithful followers share with him in his kingdom work, and which faithful ones become his joint-heirs in the kingdom. His faithful followers need not be fearful; they do need to be very courageous in order to meet the onslaughts of the enemy; and this is further shown by the words of the Lord spoken through Joshua: “Be strong and of a good courage: for unto this people shalt thou divide for an inheritance the land, which I sware unto their fathers to give them.” (Josh. 1:6) Jehovah covenanted with Jesus the kingdom, and Jesus covenants
38
THE WATCHTOWER.
with his faithful followers that they shall share with him in that kingdom by the grace and according to the will of God.—Luke 22: 29, 30, Diaglott.
14 Full faith and great boldness are required to carry forward the Elisha work, and certainly greater courage than was required to do the Elijah work, because of the more strenuous opposition. In proof thereof are these words of Joshua: “Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe to do according to all the law which Moses my servant commanded thee; turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest prosper whithersoever thou goest. This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all that is written therein; for then thou shalt make thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success. Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed; for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest.”—Josh. 1:7-9.
’‘The Lord does not require that his people do spectacular things, but does command that they be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might and have full faith in his power. They must be very courageous, and hence must not permit the slightest doubt in mind that God can carry out every word he has promised and that he will do so, and that as long as they serve him in obedience to his commandments no power can prevent the doing of the work which he has assigned them to do. Having this courage, they go forward with joy. Jehovah’s witnesses have been put to the test during the period of the Elisha work and can fully realize what is here stated. His witnesses have come to well know that they must study the Word of God and be fully obedient to his law if they would have God’s guidance and protection. They are not to turn aside to discuss with opponents their views; they do not need to hear the arguments of all opposers; they are to rely solely upon the Lord and, knowing that his Word is true, they go forward, and in so doing the Lord says to them that “thou mayest prosper whithersoever thou goest”. God’s people must feed upon his Word, which is, as Joshua stated, “this book of the law.” They must study it and carefully meditate upon it at all times and follow carefully the instruction given therein. Christ Jesus, the Greater-than-Joshua, is leading his people and instructing them from the temple, which instructions he transmits to his people in his appointed way and channel, and Jehovah’s witnesses are commanded to follow his instructions so transmitted to them, and, doing so, the promise is to them: “Thou shalt make thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.”
Brooklyn, N. Y.
The Devil’s agents viciously assault Jehovah’s witnesses, threaten and abuse them, and attempt to wrongfully enforce their laws against them and to compel Jehovah’s witnesses to do according to the law of the land, which forbids the publication of God’s message without a permit from some human power. But the Lord’s faithful servants will not be deterred from doing their duty by reason of such threats, nor by fines, scourgings and imprisonment. At all times they have in mind the power that is behind them and backing them up and they know that “underneath are the everlasting arms” of the Most High and in due time, as God has promised, “he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee.” —Deut. 33:27.
16 The commandment that Jehovah gave to Joshua and other Israelites, as set out in the foregoing scripture spoken by Joshua, indicates that there would be an occasion for fear on the part of Jehovah’s witnesses during the period of the Elisha work and that some of them would be inclined to go easy and let up on a vigorous campaign, but that the faithful would not do so. Such are exactly the facts, as many of Jehovah’s witnesses can now testify. The less zealous ones have admonished some of the others to be less aggressive and not to bring upon their heads by their acts the vicious assaults of the enemy, but the Lord says to them: “Have not I commanded thee ? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed; for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest.”—Josh. 1:9.
” When assaulted because of preaching the gospel, and when persecuted for boldly giving the warning to the people as commanded by the Lord, and when commanded by worldly officials that Jehovah’s witnesses must cease their activities, the faithful and courageous ones have replied and continue to reply: ‘We ought to obey God, and not man.’ Our God has commanded us; his will we will do.
18 Those who by reason of fear of man refuse or fail to do the Elisha work cannot have the approval of the Lord, and they cannot have “good success”, because such lack in faith and confidence in the Lord. Those who really love God and his kingdom will not be afraid, and this conclusion is fully supported by the inspired words of the apostle: “Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment; because as he is, so are we in this world. There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear; because fear hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect in love.”— 1 John 4:17,18.
18 The kingdom is here, and Christ the King knows no defeat. He will get the victory. The enemy will bluff and bluster and threaten to inflict bodily punishment upon Jehovah’s witnesses, but the enemy
February 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER.
39
cannot stop the witness work and it will not stop until finished and until God permits it to be stopped. As Jehovah said to Joshua and the other Israelites, so now he says to his faithful people on earth when facing the enemy: “Be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed; for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest.” Today the fight is on, and the faithful, with good courage, are proclaiming Jehovah’s praises and are relying upon the promises of Jehovah, well knowing that ‘the battle is not man’s, but God’s’. The foregoing facts well known, and which have been experienced by many of Jehovah’s witnesses in the recent past, prove also that the prophetic drama, of the book of Joshua concerning the host crossing the Jordan, had its beginning towards fulfillment in 1919 and continues in course of fulfillment to this very day.
BEGINNING OF FULFILLMENT
10	The imprisonment of some of the Lord’s servants in 1918 put fear into the minds of many of the others. In the spring of 1919 those imprisoned ones were released and the Lord’s people began to get more courage. The command given by Joshua was likewise given in 1919 by the Greater Joshua, Christ Jesus, to wit: “Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying, Pass through the host, and command the people, saying, Prepare you victuals; for within three days ye shall pass over this Jordan, to go in to possess the land, which the Lord your God giveth you to possess it.”—Josh. 1:10,11.
11	To prepare victuals is necessary for a journey or continuous activity. It was in the year 1919 that activity began in preparation for the publication of a magazine and other publications and for the building up of the service organization, and that continued for three years, until 1922, when the visible organization of the Lord God was well under way and pushed forward in the increased witness work. During that period much work of preparation had to be done, however, and that work was done. Spiritual food was necessary, and the Lord provided it; his servants, having their minds illuminated by the revealed purposes of God, put forth greater zeal in doing what was given them to do.
22	In fulfillment of the prophetic picture everyone who had covenanted to do the will of God and who had been faithful up to the coming of the Lord to the temple and had received the Lord’s favorable judgment must go forward and do the kingdom work. The “three days” mentioned by Joshua corresponds to the three years in fulfillment of the prophecy from 1919 to 1922. Verses twelve to eighteen of Joshua one shows that there shall be no slacking of the hand, but the work must be done with energy. The original and faithful Elijah work
ers must now go into the service and do the Elisha work. No one of the remnant could be exempt from that service. No one could rest on his past laurel; and say, ‘I have done my part; let the others do it now’; but all must faithfully share the work with their fellows. No one could hire a substitute to work for him and leave that work to be done by someone else; but he must work himself. Those attempting to take such a course of shirking or failing to do the work were warned by the words which Moses spoke: “Be sure your sin will find you out." (Num. 32:19-23) Those faithful in the service heard the command by Joshua and obeyed: “And they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou commandest us we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us we will go.” (Josh. .1:16) Those words express the right sentiment of one engaged in the Elisha work, willing to work, and to be willing to work in any place to which he may be assigned.
23	During the Elisha work those who have really shown their love for God and his kingdom have said in response to the call to go forth in the service, even as the Israelites said to Joshua: “According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee; only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses.”—Josh. 1:17.
24	The prophecy indicated that there would be some fearful and who would be rebellious, and the facts show that some were fearful or indifferent and did rebel against the commandments of the Lord, and concerning such it is written: “Whosoever he be that doth rebel against thy commandment, and will not hearken unto thy words in all that thou commandest him, he shall be put to death: only be strong and of a good courage.”—Josh. 1:18.
28	Those of the Elisha period who have been fearful and indifferent and have rebelled have been cast out. The faithful ones have had no time nor inclination to mourn over those who have fallen away, but they have joyfully acquiesced in the judgment of the Lord in putting out the unfaithful. To one another the faithful have said and continue to say: “Only the Lord thy God be with thee, . . . only be strong and of a good courage.’’ These words foretold those who were full of faith, confidence and courage, and who would maintain their integrity toward God, doing the Elisha work. As they had gone forward in the Elijah work they continued to go forward in the witness work in the Elisha period, and they have been given understanding and an appreciation of that work in which they are engaged, knowing it has to do with the vindication of Jehovah’s name. The Lord has illuminated their minds and shown them that these prophetic dramas are pictures of vindication.
40
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
spies
“ Another act in the drama is staged at this point, showing another part of the work performed. Men were sent by Joshua to spy out the land beyond the Jordan before the Israelites began to move across. “And Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shittim two men to spy secretly, saying, Go view the land, even Jericho. And they went, and came into an harlot’s house, named Rahab, and lodged there.” (Josh. 2:1) The names of the two men are not given, because the individuals are not important, but it appears that probably one of them was Salmon, who afterward married Rahab. It was a dangerous mission to which those men were assigned, and they went about it with discretion and secretly. Thirty-nine years before that Moses had sent out Joshua and eleven other men on a similar dangerous mission to the same land. In fulfillment, the Greater Joshua, Christ Jesus, also sent out his representatives in due time to do work assigned to them; as it is written: “Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth. As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world.” “Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word.”— John 17:17,18,20,21.
,T The two men sent out by Joshua represented all Israel. They would take a view of the enemy organization and the people in and about Jericho, and their attitude toward the Israelites, because at that time the people of Jericho had heard of the coming of the Israelites. Their coming would afford an opportunity to the people of Jericho to do either good or evil to the two messengers. The spying out of the land was not needed by Jehovah before he could act against Jericho, and it is therefore certain that Jehovah was here making a picture for the benefit of others. He caused Joshua to display proper caution in not counting on Jehovah to do everything while certain things were within the power and permission of humans to do them. Also it was a test on those two spies as to their faith in the Lord, just as the twelve spies had to show their faith, having it tested, after Moses sent them into Canaan.
“Another part of this picture is that Jehovah discerned a woman in Jericho who did show faith in God and who was used to make a part of the prophetic drama, and that part of the picture shows that she was given the opportunity by her acts to show her faith in God and thus to gain his approval, which approval assured her that she might be spared when Jericho would fall. On another occasion God sent two angels down to Sodom and afforded an opportunity for Lot to demonstrate his faith, that he might be saved when Sodom was destroyed. (Gen. 18:16; 19:1) The fulfillment of this part of
the prophetic drama concerning the spies and the woman is after 1918, when Jehovah’s witnesses went forth to do the work assigned to them by Christ Jesus, the Greater Joshua. There being “two men” in the picture suggests the two parts that engage in the work and that go to make up the remnant of the witnesses of Jehovah, that is to say, the older and the younger part. The older were the ones that survived the period of Elijah and the persecution of 1919, and who continued to be faithful, and whom the Lord Jesus formed into the “faithful and wise servant” (Matt. 24:45-47), and the second or newer part was composed of those who became members of the “faithful and wise servant” from and after 1922. Both parts were foreshadowed by Naomi and Ruth, and by Mordecai and Esther.
” The spies were commanded to view the land, and particularly the city of Jericho and the environment. The name Jericho means (1) “Fragrance”, probably due to its situation in a place of fragrance produced by the growth of fragrant shrubs in abundance thereabout; it also means the “city of palm trees” (Deut. 34:3); and (2) its name signifies “its month”, which may mean that the people of Jericho worshiped the moon god. The people of that city were descendants of Canaan, who was a son of Ham and who came under Noah’s curse. (Gen. 10:15,16; 9:25,26) This shows that the people of Jericho were cousins of Nimrod (Genesis 10: 6-9) and hence they were worshipers of the Devil. The city of Jericho was full of treasure and had commercial traffic with Babylon. (Josh. 6:24; 7:21) The city was situated on what later became the border of Ephraim, but which territory was bestowed upon the tribe of Benjamin. (Josh. 18:21; 16:7) The description of Jericho, its surrounding conditions and its people, shows that it pictured the religionists of the “present evil world” and known as “Christendom”, and which religionists practice what is improperly called “the Christian religion”, but which is in fact the practice of the Devil’s religion. “Christendom,” by its religious practice, attempts to make itself “fragrant”, and its practitioners ‘smell sweet and look wise’ This they do by applying to themselves the beauties and blessed promises of the Bible respecting those who are the true followers of Christ Jesus, and which Bible texts have no application to them “Christendom” claims to be the organization of the upright ones, that is to say, ones that grow up right as the palm trees do. (Jer. 10:5; Ps. 92:12) But “Christendom” is as crooked as a gimlet. It has the form of godliness or godly piety but denies the power of Jehovah God and worships the creature instead of the Creator, giving honor and praise to men, and not to God and the Lord Jesus Christ
February 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
41
Jesus is authority for the statement that “Christendom” is the product of the Devil, and for the judgment of Jehovah written against “Christendom” that she is to be brought low, greatly “humiliated”, and destroyed; which is the meaning of the name “Canaanite”.
80 The city of Jericho was to be the first city of Canaan to be delivered by Jehovah into the hands of Joshua, his officer leading the host of Israel. It therefore must be the one offered up to Jehovah as the firstfruits of Canaan. The Israelites might let other cities stand, but not so with Jericho. She had to go down. (Deut. 6:10,11) Likewise there is no possibility for “Christendom” to stand. Like Jericho, she must be completely destroyed. At Armageddon “Christendom” is the Lord’s first point of attack, as shown by many of the Scriptures. His armies will destroy it first, and it will never be restored or revived. As a devoted thing it is a cursed thing and must be completely blotted out. — Lev. 27:28,29.
81 Now as to the fulfillment of that part of the picture concerning the “two men”. They represented Jehovah’s witnesses, who spy out the land, the modern Jericho, “Christendom.” This is fulfilled in the fact that Jehovah makes clear to them in his Word concerning Satan’s organization that it is religion which forms the chief part thereof, and by which the people are held together in subjection. Jehovah’s witnesses, by studying the revealed prophecies and by comparing them with the physical facts of history as well as the facts of the present day, discern the fulfillment and the meaning of the prophecies, and thus they are encouraged, and their hope strengthened, to press on. Such discernment, particularly of the enemy organization, began to be made known by the Lord to his people through The Watchtower as early as 1921. Note therein the article on Joshua 1:9, “Be of Good Courage,” pages 90 and 91, where “the Devil’s organization” was mentioned for the first time. The opposition of Satan’s organization to the kingdom of God was clarified still more when the Lord Jesus, through the publication The Watchtower, revealed and caused to be published, in March 1925, the article named “The Birth of The Nation”. In 1926 the book Deliverance was published, by which the Lord revealed to his people a clear vision of Satan’s organization, and in 1929 appeared the book Prophecy, with a more detailed expose of Satan’s organization. Since then the “spying” work has continued by those faithfully devoted to God and his kingdom. The word “spy” (according to the Hebrew) means literally “to walk along”, that is to say, tc reconnoiter. During the years above mentioned Jehovah’s witnesses, who were pictured by the two men Joshua sent to
spy out the land, have done much reconnoitering in God’s service, they being sent out into the midst of Satan’s visible organization and getting in communication with the people and ascertaining what is their stand towards Jehovah and his kingdom under Christ and their attitude toward the world, as well as toward the witnesses of the Lord. As we now recount the way in which the Lord has directed his people during the past fifteen years, we can see how God pictured their course of action long ago and how he has made his people walk therein without their knowing at the time just why they were doing so. Beginning with 1919, by the help of Jehovah and Christ Jesus his faithful servants on earth have gone forth to the work, trusting entirely in the Lord and well knowing that according to his promise he who directs their paths will continue to do so and to guide and protect them; and it has made no difference to them whether or not they knew just why they were doing the work, and what it signified at the time, but all that has been necessary is for them to know that they were being guided by the Lord and hence acting according to his will.
RAHAB
38 Obedient to the command received from Joshua the two spies went forth and ‘came unto the harlot’s house named Rahab, and lodged there’. Evidently there were no hotels available in which they might lodge and find a place to sleep and rest while they went forward in their investigations. Aside from the other conclusions, we must know that Jehovah led those two men into the house of Rahab there to make a picture or part of the prophetic drama foretelling his purpose. For this reason there is no occasion to find fault with or criticize the men, or Rahab, or anyone else in connection therewith.
33 The woman Rahab, because of her course of action, was a disreputable person, and for the two men to go into her house would no doubt put a test upon them; but they were obeying instructions and they were willing to go where sent. No doubt there were many harlot houses in Jericho, but Jehovah led those two men to the one on the city wall where Rahab’s house was situate, and that he did for reasons well known to him. Jehovah’s witnesses going forth to the work have been tested as to their faith in God and their willingness to obey instructions and to go to that class of persons that are less popular than others in the world, even into the places inhabited by disreputable persons, and to there carry the message to a people not of the highest reputation. As Jesus made himself of no reputation, his faithful witnesses do not stop to consider what their reputation might be. Jonah had a like test put upon him to carry the message to Nineveh. Harlots are
THE WATCHTOWER,
42
not always responsible for their course in life. No doubt the cruel “higher-ups” of the world, who put on the appearance of being reputable but who in fact, if generally known, are disreputable, have pushed many a young woman into a wrong course and forced her into a situation that is greatly humiliating. Some women who have found themselves in that situation have sincerely desired righteousness, and are much more susceptible to the hearing of the message of the kingdom and giving heed to it than are the higher-up religionists who appear to be pious and pure but who are in fact abominable in the sight of God. The pompous religious leaders, amongst the Jews, came to Jesus to make a showing of their own wisdom and piety, and they demanded of him by what authority he was working amongst the people without getting permission of the higher-ups. Those same roosters had charged Jesus with associating with publicans and sinners and harlots. Those religionists assumed to be exceedingly good and reputable, and yet Jesus said to them: ‘Publicans and harlots enter the kingdom before you.’ (Matt. 21:31) The reputation that one has amongst men may gain him nothing and may lead to his downfall, whereas one’s standing with the Lord means everything.
** It appears that Rahab was used in the prophetic picture to show that those people who are of less reputation than others, that is to say, the common people, are much more inclined to believe and receive the Lord with sincerity and walk in his way than are those who are of high reputation amongst men and who have a desire to receive the favor and approval of men. Jehovah’s witnesses find that it is the common people who are most ready to hear the truth of and concerning the kingdom. It was even so when Jesus was on earth, that the common people heard him gladly, while the higher-ups opposed, rejected and persecuted him, no doubt thinking that by so doing they would make themselves more popular with their fellow creatures. Men must recognize that they need help and that their help comes, not from men, but from God through Christ Jesus, and that this help must be received before they can receive and exercise faith in God and Christ Jesus. They must have a sincere desire for a condition of righteousness. In this prophetic drama Rahab pictured that class of sincere, honest-hearted persons.
" The name Rahab is derived from the verb “to broaden”, and means either (1) “wide, broad, large, roomy”, or (2) “at large, or at liberty”. Rahab, by receiving the spies, showed she was broad-minded and not a narrow, nationalistic patrioteer or religionist, who thinks by saluting a flag or “heiling” worldly men to gain some profit. Her confession
Brooklyn, N. Y.
shows that her heart and mind had been widened and enlarged by the things that she had learned, but that she had fear of God. The second meaning of the name, “at liberty,” fits well the class whom Rahab pictured, who are at liberty and stand aloof from the religious fetters that have long held them in restraint or held them in prison. Rahab, therefore, pictured in this drama those honest-hearted, sincere persons of good will, the Jonadabs, who form the “great multitude”, that is, the “other sheep” of the Lord, and who are of those ‘people not desired’. (Zeph. 2:1) “And I will walk at liberty [(margin) at large; (Hebrew) rahab]; for I seek thy precepts.” (Ps. 119:45) It is the habit of the ultra-religionists, sanctimonious ones, to say to others: “What will the world think of you if you don’t go to church and if you go about handing out pamphlets to the common people?” To that the Rahab class of the present day respond: “We are seeking the Lord’s approval and care not what the world may say about us. We have left the world behind to obey God.”
36 Rahab’s house was on the wall of the city of Jericho, which appears to mean that she was quite at outs and out of touch with Jericho’s elite or important class. When the city should fall, her house’s being on the wall would put her in a very dangerous position, and only the power of God could save her. Such likewise describes the condition of the Jonadabs of the present day. Their position is dangerous, and the fall of Satan’s organization “Christendom”, which is certain to come, would mean their destruction unless those Jonadabs find protection with the Lord. Rahab had heard of the God of Israel and believed on him, and she must have discerned whom she was taking into her house when she admitted the two men. Her subsequent conversation with them shows that she did have faith in God. Likewise as Jehovah’s witnesses spy out the land in “Christendom”, the Rahab class, that is, the people of good will toward God, will discern that Jehovah’s witnesses are servants of the Most High about whom they have heard, and they desire to learn more about God and his ways and to have his protection; therefore they readily receive God’s messengers and do what they can for them.
SEEKING THEIR HURT
"The watchmen of Jericho would know that the Israelites were encamped just across the Jordan river opposite Jericho, and when they saw two strangers in the city and going toward the house of Rahab they reported the matter to the political rulers of the city: “And it was told the king of Jericho, saying, Behold, there came men in hither to night of the children of Israel, to search out
February 1,1939
THE WATCHTOWER,
43
the country.” (Josh. 2:2) Those watchmen making the report pictured the present-day religionists of "Christendom”, who act as clergymen and who are on the watch to see that no one invades their realm and exposes them and interferes with their fences that they have put around the imprisoned sheep. Instead, however, of taking some action themselves by coming boldly to the front, they report to the political rulers and induce them to take action and to do hurt or injury to the witnesses of the Lord. The repeated experiences of Jehovah’s witnesses in the land of “Christendom” exactly fit this part of the picture here made. Those religionists have not the interest of the people at heart, but are looking out for their own selfish interests and see to it that so far as within their power the people are kept in ignorance of what is being done by the religionists and that the witnesses of the Lord are kept from them and are persecuted for going about telling the people the truth.
" The political rulers of the city acted immediately: "And the king of Jericho sent unto Rahab, saying, Bring forth the men that are come to thee, which are entered into thine house; for they be come to search out all the country.” (Josh. 2:3) Likewise today the clergy or chief religionists hope to have the political authorities to compel the Jonadabs to surrender up and testify in the court against Jehovah’s witnesses, that injury or hurt may result to Jehovah’s witnesses. For Rahab to have disobeyed the command given by the police and which had been issued at the direction of the higher officers, who were acting on the advice of the religious priests, would have been rather dangerous for Rahab. They would have charged her with harboring enemies. But Rahab would no doubt have reckoned that, if she delivered the two spies into the hands of the officers, such would have resulted in their death, and that would not have saved Jericho from falling; whereas her receiving the two spies and protecting them would show her faith in Jehovah God, from whom alone help could come to her. She had acted as Jesus has stated concerning strangers who do good unto the Lord, when he said, “I was a stranger, and ye took me in,” for the sake of God’s name and because of your good will toward God. —Matt. 25:34,35.
” Rahab showed her faith in God, even as the Jonadabs, or “other sheep”, today show their faith in Jehovah and the Lord Jesus Christ: "And the woman took the two men, and hid them, and said thus, There came men unto me, but I wist not whence they were.” (Josh. 2:4) Rahab regarded the favor of God much more to be desired than to have the favor of the king of Jericho. She showed her fear of God and no fear of man. Her conduct was ap
proved by the Lord; as it is written in the Scriptures: “Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified by works, when she had received the messengers, and had sent them out another way?” (Jas. 2:25) Her faith was pleasing to the Lord, and for that reason he counted her righteous. (Heb. 11:31) Thus is shown that faith in God is the first essential to protection.
*° Religious commentators have taken issue with the Lord’s Word concerning Rahab. Their argument is that good morals and obedience to the law of the land required Rahab to tell the king’s police officers the state of facts, even as they existed, though it might result in the death of the two men. This shows that such critics are either ignorant of the Scriptures or else for selfish reasons make such arguments, wishing to appear as upholding good morals and the law of the land regardless of what God may say, in order that they, the preachers, may have a good reputation amongst men. Had Rahab followed the course marked out by the religionists, she would have shown her selfishness and her desire to save her own neck at the cost of the lives of two men who represented Jehovah. Instead she showed her faith in the power of the Almighty God. Rahab was not a betrayer of those who had brought her good information and advice. Likewise those who form the “great multitude” refuse to betray the messengers of the Lord into the hands of the enemy and to thereby do injury to the kingdom witness work. The true Jonadabs show their faith in God, knowing that he will bring about always what is best, and therefore they rely upon him, knowing always that if they do good unto the witnesses of the Lord they are doing good unto the Lord himself. Such faithful men appear in the eyes of others “as deceivers, and yet true” to God and his cause of righteousness.—2 Cor. 6:8.
41 Nighttime had then fallen over the city of Jericho, because Rahab mentioned it was the “time of shutting of the gate”. She refused to lend herself to the enemies of God. Even so those of the “great multitude” refuse to render assistance to the persecutors of Jehovah’s witnesses. Rahab used her wits and her head and aided the two men to get away, and therefore she said to the police officers that which would throw them off the track of discovery. (Verse 5) Anticipating the coming of the officers who would raid her house, she let them in without making an objection and then spoke to the officers, having concealed the spies. “But she had brought them up to the roof of the house, and hid them with the stalks of flax, which she had laid in order upon the roof.” (Josh. 2:6) The roofs of houses in that land were flat, and Rahab’s house being on top of the wall of the city, it raised the
44
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
roof above the line of vision of the guards and of the people on other roofs. She was no idler, and this is shown by the fact that she had gathered flax and placed it on her roof, and she used that to a good purpose. “Who can find a virtuous woman! for her price is far above rubies. She seeketh wool and flax, and worketh willingly with her hands. Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain; but a woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised.”—Prov. 31:10,13, 30.
41 Likewise those of the “great multitude” are not idlers, but are industrious and fruitful. They may in the eyes of the world appear unclean and disreputable, like unto a harlot, but they are diligent and appreciate their privileges of serving Jehovah God, and hence they busy themselves in doing so as opportunity comes to them, and they serve with joy.—Rev. 7:15.
** The Jonadabs, who are lovers of righteousness, see the righteous course of Jehovah’s witnesses, and, anticipating trouble will come to them because they are faithfully delivering the message of the Lord, they take precaution to arrange for the protection of Jehovah’s witnesses and they do what they can to safeguard their interests. The abundant experiences along this line by Jehovah’s witnesses
fully support this conclusion. Such action on the part of the Jonadabs receives the approval of the Lord, and this is shown by what afterwards came to Rahab, and is further shown by what Jonathan did toward David when he resorted to a ruse to throw David’s enemies, his cruel persecutors, off the track. He helped David to get away from his enemies. Likewise Rahab aided the two men of the Lord’s army to escape from the enemy, and thus rendered service to the Lord’s organization. In both instances the Jonadabs are pictured, who show their faith in God and the Lord Jesus Christ by doing what they can to aid the faithful men and women who bear the message of the Lord to the people at the present time.
“ The police of Jericho heard the report of Rahab and immediately went forth in pursuit of the two men with the avowed purpose of doing them injury. So likewise since the Lord has begun to gather unto himself his “other sheep”, the religious leaders incite the political officers and the strong-arm squad to pursue after Jehovah’s witnesses and do them injury. What now is the proper course for the Jonadabs to pursue that they may have God’s approval? and is this pictured in the prophetic drama here recorded?
(To be continued)
FIRST TRUMPET
IN THE wondrous revelation sent to him by the Lord the apostle John saw the Lamb of God accept at the hand of Jehovah God a scroll, the Lamb’s portfolio, sealed with seven seals, and saw the Lamb open them one by one, and the events that followed the opening of each. John’s description (Rev. 8:1-6) goes on to say: “And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven about the space of half an hour. And I saw the seven angels which stood before God; and to them were given seven trumpets. . . . And the seven angels which had the seven trumpets prepared themselves to sound.” Since the Scriptures are written for the encouragement and comfort of God’s consecrated people, upon whom the end of the world has come (Rom. 15: 4; 1 Cor. 10:11), and since The Revelation is prophecy, and God is the interpreter of prophecy (2 Pet. 1:20,21), it is to be expected that God, by and through his deputies, or angels, and particularly his chief one, Christ Jesus, would cause his people on earth to perform certain things that would be in fulfillment of prophecy, and afterwards show those consecrated ones the application thereof for their own encouragement and comfort. Such is an act of love on God’s part; and God is love.
The angels proceeded with the sounding of the trumpets. The facts seem to clearly show that it was in 1922 that the first angel began to sound his trumpet and God’s consecrated people were given a part therein; and duly after eight years had elapsed the Lord was pleased (in 1930, by the publi
cation of Light, Books One and Two) to show his people how they had some part in the fulfillment of his prophecy because they were his devoted and willing instruments. His name be praised! All honor and glory be given to him.
On Sunday, September 10, 1922, more than 10,000 of God’s people were assembled in international convention at Cedar Point, Ohio, U. S. A. A resolution was offered, supported by oral argument, and was unanimously adopted. That resolution was a proclamation declaring that Jehovah is God and Christ is King and that his kingdom has come. It was a challenge to the rulers of the visible part of Satan’s organization to prove that man has wisdom to rule the earth, or else admit the truth of God’s Word that peace, prosperity, life and happiness can come only through Jehovah by and through Christ Jesus. Incidentally it is mentioned that an electrical device with a large horn or trumpet, commercially called a Magnavox, for magnifying the volume of a speaker’s voice, was used to amplify the voice of the speaker and all present in that vast audience heard. Visible human creatures had to do with that message there delivered, yet, in fact, it was a message of the Lord sent through his invisible angels, because without a doubt these are clothed with authority to direct the course of earthly members of God’s organization. The said document reads as follows:
“resolution
“(Adopted by the International Bible Students Associa
February 1,1939
THE WATCHTOWER,
45
tion in Convention at Cedar Point, Ohio, Sunday, September 10, 1922)
“The International Bible Students in convention assembled deem it a duty and privilege to send this message to the nations of earth.
“As a body of Christians consecrated to obey and follow our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, we are opposed to engaging in war, revolution, anarchy, or violence in any form; and we are opposed to fraud and deception being practiced upon the people by the misrepresentation of the Word of God or otherwise. We earnestly desire peace, prosperity and the blessing of the people with life, liberty and happiness; and we hold that the only means by which this can be accomplished is by and through the reign of Christ.
“In the light of the Word of God, and particularly of fulfilled prophecy, we submit the following as a true statement of the facts relating to present conditions:
“1. That the rulers of earth have frequently boasted that the World War was fought to make the world safe for democracy, which claim has proved to be a delusion and a snare;
“2. That the international conferences at Paris, Washington, Genoa and The Hague, participated in by the financiers and statesmen and approved by the denominational clergy of the world, held for the purpose, as announced, of establishing peace on earth, have failed to bring forth the desired result;
“3. That all of the nations of earth are now in distress and perplexity, as the Lord foretold they would be at this time, and that the entire social and political structure is threatened with complete dissolution; and the leading statesmen and rulers of the earth, being aware of this fact and of their inability to establish peace and prosperity, are frantically calling upon the denominational churches to save the world from disaster;
“4. That it is the desire of all the nations and peoples of earth that they might dwell in peace and enjoy life, liberty and happiness;
“5. That the people are being misled by those who are attempting to bring about this desire through international conferences and agreements in the form of the League of Nations and like compacts.
“We therefore call upon the nations of earth, their rulers and leaders, and upon all the clergymen of all the denominational churches of earth, their followers and allies, big business and big politicians, to bring forth their proof in justification of the position taken by them that they can establish peace and prosperity on earth and bring happiness to the people; and their failing in this, we call upon them to give ear to the testimony that we offer as witnesses for the Lord, and then let them say whether or not our testimony is true.
“Relying upon the Word of God and his providential dealings with mankind through Christ Jesus, we as his witnesses hold and testify as follows, to wit:
“1. That the World War came in 1914 and was followed by great famines, pestilences and revolutions in various parts of the earth exactly as foretold by the Lord;
“2. That 1914 marked the legal ending of the old world and there Christ the rightful King took unto himself his power as king;
“3. That the Lord Jesus Christ is now present, invis
ible to man, and proceeding with the work of establishing his kingdom, for which kingdom he taught his followers to pray;
“4. That Satan, long the god of this world, has deceived the statesmen, financiers and the clergy, by inducing them to believe that by international agreement or other combined efforts they can bring the desire of all nations;
“5. That all of the world’s present organization constitutes the visible part of Satan’s empire or organization, and that Satan’s empire must now fall before the forward march of the King of glory;
“6. That all international conferences and all agreements or treaties resulting therefrom, including the League of Nations compact and all like compacts, must fail, because God has decreed it thus;
“7. That all efforts of the denominational church organizations, their clergy, their leaders and their allies, to save and re-establish the order of things in the earth and to bring peace and prosperity must of necessity fail, because they do not constitute any part of the kingdom of Messiah;
“8. That on the contrary, during the World War, the clergy of these various church denominations were disloyal to the Lord Jesus Christ in this, that they wrongfully united with big business and big politicians to further the World War; they preached men into the trenches and falsely and blasphemously told them that their death upon the battlefield would be counted as a part of the vicarious atonement of Jesus Christ;
“9. That they further repudiated the Lord and his kingdom and showed their disloyalty by voluntarily uniting themselves with Satan’s organization and boldly announcing to the world that the League of Nations is the political expression of God’s kingdom on earth, which announcement so made by them was in utter disregard of the words of Jesus and the apostles.
“10. We further hold and testify that this is the day of God’s vengeance against Satan’s empire visible and invisible;
“11. That the re-establishment of the old world or [organization] is an impossibility; that the time is here for the establishment of the kingdom of God through Christ Jesus; and that all the powers and organizations that do not willingly submit to the righteous reign of the Lord will be destroyed;
“12. That if the politicians would faithfully represent the people, and big business would cease exploiting the people, and the clergy would tell the people the truth concerning God’s arrangement and the people would cease from strife, the kingdom of Messiah would be established by him without further trouble or distress; but failing thus to do, greater trouble must shortly follow;
“13. That for this reason there is now impending and about to fall upon the nations of earth, according to the words of Christ Jesus, a great time of ‘tribulation such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be’ again, and it is this impending trouble that the rulers and mighty men of earth see coming.
“But we hold and declare that Messiah’s kingdom is the complete panacea for all the ills of humankind and will bring peace on earth and good will to men; that those
46
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
who yield themselves willingly to his righteous reign now begun will be blessed with lasting peace, life, liberty and endless happiness.
“Therefore we bring to the peoples of earth God’s message of good tidings contained in the Bible, his Word of truth, and we publish to them his message of peace and everlasting salvation, to wit, that the King of glory, the Deliverer of man, is invisibly present and has begun his reign; that the old world, under the control of Satan, has ended and soon will be broken in pieces, to make way for the everlasting kingdom of righteousness now being set up, and that millions of people now living on earth, if obedient to the laws of that righteous kingdom, will continue to live and never die; and we call upon all nations, peoples, kindreds and tongues who love righteousness and hate iniquity to recognize and freely acknowledge that Jehovah is the only true God and that his beloved Son Christ Jesus is King of kings and Lord of lords.”
It is stated at Revelation 8: 7 that the first trumpet was followed by “hail and fire mingled with blood” being “cast upon the earth”. The symbols used are deeply significant. Hail is a phenomenon, “a sign and wonder” that glorifies the Lord and fulfills his will. (See Psalm 148: 7, 8; Exodus 9:29; Ezekiel 38:21,22.) It is cold, hard, and destnictive to lies and liars. It is such as is reserved for the time of trouble, and it smites, according to Isaiah 28:2-17; Haggai 2:17; Job 38:22,23. “Hail” causes unconsecrated men to blaspheme; so reads Revelation 16:21. “Fire” expresses God’s indignation, and is destructive, and devours before God’s armv that expresses his judgments. (Pss. 50: 3; 97 : 3; 79: 5; Joel 2:3; Luke 12:49) “Blood” poured out is symbolic of death, and pollutes and befouls those coming in contact with it. These symbols in figurative phrase describe the effects of the “proclamation” upon those of Satan’s organization.
The above-mentioned “Proclamation” charged that the nations of earth had been befouled and polluted with the blood of men unrighteously shed and that the clergy who hypocritically claim to be God’s representatives are largely responsible therefor. The clergy and their allies, the resolution charged, resorted to lies, fraud and deceit to mislead and exploit the people and to misrepresent God and his
kingdom. These were hard truths, and destructive of lies. The public press gave wide note of the resolution. October 31, 1922, marked the beginning of a world-wide distribution of the resolution and argument in support thereof in many languages, and upward of forty-five million copies were put in the hands of the rulers and of the people. The visible part of Satan’s organization on earth received it; and the effect the Lord described in the symbols that follow, to wit:
“The third part of the earth was burnt up, and the third part of the trees was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.” (Rev. 8:7, R.P.) The peoples of earth may properly be placed in three divisions, to wit: (1) the agricultural group; (2) the artisans, mechanics, seafaring men and other laborers; and (3) the financial, religious and political group; the last forming the ruling class. The proclamation was a challenge to the latter to bring forth their witnesses and prove their position, or admit they are liars; and their failing to do so places them in a position of disrepute and proves their counsel without value, and therefore they must admit it.
“The third part of the trees was burnt up.” “Trees” represent the selfish, exalted and ruling group of living creatures that draw sustenance from the people and cast their shadows upon the earth. “All green grass was burnt up.” Isaiah 40:6, 7 states “the people is grass” and withered!, when the spirit of the Lord blows upon it. “Green grass” would represent the people’s hopes centered in the announced schemes and plans of the ruling class. Such are ‘burned up’, and today the people have no hope in the schemes of men
The forty-five million copies distributed of that message of truth went a good way toward showing the people that they cannot hope for any blessings from the Devil’s organization, represented on earth by selfish men. With the earth charred, and the trees and the green grass burned, it is a desolate outlook for the Devil’s earthly organization, and this is held up before the people. The clergy warned their flocks not to read the aforesaid “Proclamation” and the accompanying literature, but their warning went unheeded.—See The Watchtower 1923, page 83.
LETTERS
BLESSINGS OF JEHOVAH WERE ABUNDANT
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We thank our Teachers for the privilege we had this past year to work in the field uninterrupted. By His grace we placed in the hands of the people 555 bound books and 5,012 booklets; a total of 5,567. We worked in Syria and the Sanjak. In the cities Alexandretta, Laodicea and Antioquia we found a very liberal spirit and we placed literature beyond our expectations. The blessings of our dear Father were abundant. Satan caused us to be arrested; and after we gave a good witness to the authorities about our work we were released.
One former attorney and his son, a judge, on our two visits provided themselves with all the Arabic books we had, getting the rest on which we were short in the French language. Also the director of the customhouse took all the books in the French language, and another businessman got all the books in the Arabic language.
We visited also the two Arabian bishops, and on entering in one’s home we found him reading the book Government. He received us kindly and provided himself with three other books. The other bishop likewise received us politely and got four bound books and a few booklets. The Orthodox clergy here are not persecutors and have not fanaticized the people. Some people visited us at home to provide themselves with literature, and these as well as others asked us to visit them at their homes.
We thank our Teachers for the food they provide for us and for Jonadabs, which gives us courage, faith, strength and boldness in participating in His “strange work” until every vestige of Satan’s wicked organization is destroyed and the name of the Almighty God given the proper honor and praise due to Him. —Psalm 150.
May Jehovah bless you with strength and wisdom to finish the work committed to you, is our daily prayer.
With much love, your brethren by His grace,
Petros and Calliope Lagakou, Syria.
February 1,1939
THE WATCHTOWER,
47
JEHOVAH’S MARVELOUS ARRANGEMENT
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Of late years I have refrained from intruding upon your precious time; however, the article “Organization” in the June 1 and 15 Towers impels me to express in a few words to you, whose faithful service Jehovah is using, my gratitude to Jehovah for the marvelous arrangement that he has made for his visible organization, as outlined in these two Watchtowers.
“Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honour dwelleth,” and I rejoice to see Jehovah’s name take its proper place in his visible organization. What a relief it is to see the end of “Home Rule for Happy Hollow”, including ‘women’s rights’ and other unscriptural procedure that subjected some souls to local opinions and individual judgment, instead of to the Higher Powers, thereby bringing reproach upon Jehovah’s name.
It is true that only ‘in the recent past the Society has designated all in the organization as “servants” ’, yet I observe that for many years previous to that time you have in your correspondence with your brethren acknowledged yourself as “your brother and servant, by His grace”.
I delight to serve in the theocratic organization of the Most High, wherever assigned.
Praying Jehovah’s continued rich blessing upon your faithful service in this thrilling day of His battle, and with much love, I am
One of your brethren and fellow servants,
Maud Rosson Yuille, Brasil.
REAL COMFORT AND JOY
Dear Sir:
Some time ago two of Jehovah’s witnesses came to see me, and after talking for some time about the kingdom work, and letting me hear some of the records of your speeches, they left several of your books with me, Creation, The Harp of God, and Government. Since then I have bought others; and I can say with absolute truth that they have brought me more cheer and understanding of the Bible than I ever had before. I have always been repelled by the church (of any denomination), but have felt in great need of some explanation of the Bible. This I have found in your books. I can now realize the real comfort and joy there is in the Bible, and it has altered my whole life and attitude towards people.
Satan’s organization has certainly strained every effort in this last crisis in Europe, and Mr. Chamberlain seems to have played right into his hands.
I am getting more of your books, to give to people who are much distressed in these present times, in the hope that they may find the same comfort and cheer that I have found in them.
Yours sincerely,
(Mrs.) Mary Hall, Australia.
JOY AND BLESSINGS IN SERVICE OF JEHOVAH
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We have just arrived back in France from the most marvelous of all conventions we have ever attended, in the Royal Albert Hall, London. We felt we must write you to tell you of our great joy and all the many blessings we constantly receive in the service of our great Jehovah God.
The prospect of the Jonadabs is thrilling! Brother Harbeck addressed the Paris company on Thursday evening (the hall was packed, and many were standing) and they too were delighted. They are mostly Jonadabs.
We went to England for our annual rest, and to attend the Birmingham convention. On hearing the wonderful news of an international convention by telephone we decided to stay in England and work there until the great event. We enjoyed the change, and must say how very much easier the work in England is compared with France. No opposition, no police trouble, and the people mostly kind and calm. It has been our privilege to work out here these past seven and a half years, and we really feel we are in a fight. What with concierges in Paris, and dogs in the country, and dodging police and gendarmes, we feel there is something wrong if all goes smoothly.
We feel, too, we must say a word about the kindness and love we receive from the office here, which makes us feel happy to return.
And now we would like to tell you that we love you very much and are with you wholeheartedly in the work Jehovah has given us to do. May Jehovah richly bless and keep you and give you strength.
Your fellow warriors
Tom and Jessie Musgrave, Pioneers.
REALLY AND TRULY SERVE JEHOVAH
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Greetings in Jehovah’s namel
Happy and thrilled are we for the privilege of thus sharing with you and others, who really and truly serve Jehovah in this wonderful day of praise to Him.
We arc deeply grateful to the Lord at this time for the privilege of engaging in the special pioneer branch of the service, in which the opportunity is extended in all its fullness and beauty to see and appreciate and aid those of good will to become a part of the “great multitude”.
Our joy and hope is increased, after studying the new organization arrangement, even now in effect throughout the earth, thus bringing perfect harmony, peace and precise activity. And now while studying the Watchtower series “Fill the Earth”, surely all of the Lord’s people rejoice for such a sweet understanding.
Be assured of our Christian love and best wishes.
Your brethren and fellow publishers,
Brother and Sister William H. Walters.
YEAR BOOK FOR 1939
The Year Book for 1939 is not only a detailed and comprehensive record of world activities of Jehovah’s witnesses during the past year, but also a compendium of information of the most up-to-date development, and hence useful and necessary for all active publishers to have as a ready reference now. This has all been prepared by the president of the Society. Also, there is his comment on the 1939 year text, and a daily text and comment for every day of the year, said comments being drawn from The Watchtower. Every active Kingdom publisher and all seeking the way to Zion should be equipped with this new Year Book. As the edition is limited, thus enhancing the cost of production, the contribution of 50c is asked for per copy.
1939 CALENDAR
The year text for 1939 is timely: “But they shall not prevail against thee.” (Jer. 1:19) That those on the side of Jehovah and his King and kingdom may conveniently have this strengthening promise daily before their attention during 1939 this text is featured on the Society’s new calendar and accompanied by a beautiful three-color picture showing in symbolic style the thrilling fulfillment of the promise to the modem Jeremiah class and their companions. Underneath appears the president’s letter setting out the united service periods for 1939, a ready reference for kingdom publishers. The calendar pad shows the dates thereof. Remit, with order, at 25c each, or $1.00 for five to one address.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
“TURNING ON THE HEAT” IN THE STATES
“The- work is going on grandly here. We are getting lots of back calls and are playing the whole one-hour lectures on ‘Face the Facts’, with ‘Fill the Earth’ and Fascism or Freedom’, and many people can see that religion is a big racket. We are trying to increase our back calls each month.”
WHY OTHERS SHOULD HEAR RECORDED SPEECHES
"A Baptist preacher and wife who heard Brother Rutherford’s lecture ‘Face the Facts’ stated that he had been prejudiced against Rutherford from what others said about him until he had heard for himself the broadcast over the radio, and has changed his mind. He took Enemies, Riches, The Harp, and Warning, and was reading them and showed quite an interest.”
SPECIAL PIONEER, “WARNING” SERIES, AND A CATHOLIC
“The prospects are very bright for an active company here. An Enemies study has been organized in a home. The first meeting was held last Sunday, with ten in attendance. A Watch tower study was arranged at that time, to begin this next Saturday (December 3) at seven o’clock and to continue each Saturday night. This study is to be held at the home of a Mr.-----, who until ten days ago had never
heard of the truth. His wife has had some of the booklets, but did not let her husband know of it. In the first call during door-to-door work, she took the book Enemies and gave an appointment for a back call. After hearing the ‘Warning’ lecture series, Mr. ----- began reading the
book Enemies, and by the time he was halfway through his enthusiasm was great. He was reared a Catholic. During the War he and a buddy who were to go to the front on Monday went to confession and to take sacrament the preceding Saturday. A couple of hours after leaving the church he saw the ‘holy father’ who had ‘absolved them from their sins’, too drunk to stand alone. He had never been to chureh since. His wife stated that this is the first time in her twenty-nine years that she has received any light on the Bible. They plan to go out in the service Sunday. They already are telling the good news to the extent that his boss cursed him.”
COUNTERING A PRIEST’S FALSE CHARGE
“A Catholic priest walked into an oil station where I had the phonograph set up ready for action. Priest: ‘And what do you expect of this fellow after he hears the record?’ Pioneer: ‘I don’t expect anything of you.’ Priest: ‘What do you have in that bag? Do you have some of those pamphlets with you that spread religious hate?’ Pioneer: ‘Do you have any of those Catholic papers with you in which priests have stated that they would like to see Judge Rutherford’s body impaled on hot iron spikes? and another which states that he would like to use a knife to cut his throat?’ Priest:‘I doubt that. I would like to sec a copy of such a paper.’ Pioneer (taking out pencil and notebook): ‘I will see that you get a copy. Your name is---?’ At this point
the priest declined to give his name and dropped the issue.”
INCREASE FOLLOWS THEOCRATIC ORGANIZATION
A zone seiwant reports: “At —---, Oklahoma, the peak
of publishers during the past two years in that company of Jehovah’s witnesses was two. Effective with the new government {according to “Organization Instructions”, issued
through the Watch Tower] October 1, the interested in that vicinity were called upon and, resulting therefrom, in two months, under Jehovah’s theocratic government, that company is now reporting thirteen regular publishers.”
ANOTHER ZONE SERVANT REPORTS
Honest opposition to the message must not be misinterpreted as indicating the opposer is a goat; his opposition is probably due to misinformation. A publisher witnessed to a very staunch Baptist who had for years opposed the truth; today he is rejoicing in his privileges of service. This former Baptist had had the literature in his home for fifteen years before he saw the truth. Back calls and m 1 cl studies serve to awaken and stimulate interest in the millions of books and booklets hitherto unstudied.
An interesting “back call”. Two publishers were riding into town. A woman was seen taking a paper out of the rural mailbox. “Wasn’t that a Watchtower?” one witness asked the other. “It looked like it,” the other answered. The location of the mailbox was noted, and a call was made upon the woman later. It was found she was a subscriber for The Watchtower and for Consolation and had all the literature and professed to being a Jonadab. She had met none of the publishers, had never been to a meeting, had not been in the service, and couldn’t explain why, except that she said she just seemed to be waiting for someone to come along. A model study was started with her and her husband. The following Sunday she went into the field and her first placement was a set of Vindication. At the next model study there were seven present—she had rounded them up herself. This is only one experience of many such where back calls and model studies are faithfully pushed.
THE PHONOGRAPH A NECESSITY
A group of us were going from house to house. I have become so accustomed to using my phonograph, I’m lost without it. It provides such an excellent means of gaining access to the homes, where conversation is much easier. Additionally, one becomes so confident in the realization that with the clear-toned message on the record one doesn’t have to fear loss of memory, lack of speech or embarrassment. The record speaks for itself. A sister stepped out of our car to call at a home. I loaned her my phonograph. I saw another single house, the last one in the territory. I stepped out; suddenly realized I hadn’t my phonograph, but thought I’d try it without. Never again! I stumbled with my words, I forgot what I wanted to say, I felt terribly embarrassed; in fact, my “trumpet gave a very uncertain sound”. Of course I made no placement and awakened no interest. As I came away from the house I realized as never before the gracious provision the Lord has made in providing the phonograph.
I am convinced that every publisher who has any appreciation of Jehovah’s purposes and his own great privilege as a publisher should value efficiency enough to provide himself with a phonograph. Any publisher who thinks he doesn’t need to use the phonograph is either lacking in the understanding of his responsibilities or is a self-conceited egotist. It is a proven fact that no one, without exception, can possibly improve on the phonograph presentation for house-to-house witnessing. The more one labors in the field, the more does one realize the phonograph is a necessary part of Kingdom publishers’ witnessing equipment.



'i!, ,<
.4


3
J
(IM Seralcl of km
Ot)risfe 3di^.aotn H*


“They shall know that lam Jehovah.”
•Ezekiel 35:15.

■V
Vol. LX
Semimonthly
No. 4
3


•h . -4.
FEBRUARY IS. 1939
CONTENTS
4
IMrs.
U


I
p<3 . *<


Drama of Vindication (Part 2)
The March Begins .........
Second Trumpet..............
Letters ....................
Field Experiences ............
Memorial ...................
“Lovers of Righteousness” .... “Watchtower” Studies .......
“Watchtower” Campaign ........
Year Book for 1939 .........
1939 Calendar ..............




a
.....51 .....56 —.60 ..... 62 ...„64 .....50 .....50 ..... 50 — 50 — 63 — 63
©WTB. 6.15.
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Buthebfobd, President___W. E. Van Ambubgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” »Isaiah 54^3 •
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to Ufe.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and Is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and'the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It Is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of Its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge In controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
'r’-ABLY SUBSCRIPTION PRICE
United States, J:' 0; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Ar»iralasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British...................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian...................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian...........7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African ................  Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The 'Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank, (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, 1S79.
MEMORIAL
For the year 1939 the date for the feast in celebration of the name of Jehovah and to the sacrifice of his Vindicator, Christ Jesus the Lamb of God, is Tuesday, April 4, after six p.m. Let each company, therefore, assemble after six p.m. of April 4, and the anointed thereof celebrate the Memorial, their companions the Jonadabs being present as observers. The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red wine. The Lord and his apostles used real red wine in symbol of his blood, and the anointed remnant should follow their lead. A report on the celebration should be made to the Society as instructed in the Informant. In preparation therefor the article “Memorial” in The Watchtower March 1, 1938, will be studied with profit.
“LOVERS OF RIGHTEOUSNESS”
This name designates the testimony period which is occupying the entire month of February. Those of Jehovah’s anointed remnant and their companions, foreshadowed by David and Jonathan, being lovers of righteousness of God, now rejoice to make special efforts during this period to devote more time and energy to the Watchtower Campaign, as announced below and which includes the month of February. More time and effort in the field, or a new
start in the field, as a kingdom publisher, calls for special planning on your part. If you desire to become a publisher, get in touch with our local organization or direct with this office.
“WATCHTOWER" STUDIES
Week of March 19: “Drama of Vindication,” (Part 2) fl 1-23 inclusive, The Watchtower February 15, 1939.
Week of March 26: “Drama of Vindication,” (Part 2) fl 24-42 inclusive, The Watchtower February 15,1939.
“WATCHTOWER” CAMPAIGN
Four full months of 1939, January to April inclusive, have been set aside for the biggest, if not most important, yet of the campaigns to publish Jehovah’s kingdom. It is designated the “Watchtower” campaign because of the special offer made, agreeable to arrangements of the Society, to wit, a full year’s subscription for the magazine The Watchtower together with the book Enemies or any other one desired of the bound book series and a copy of the new booklet Face the Facts, on a $1.00 contribution. A like combination is made in every language in which The Watch-
(Continued on page 63)
AND HERALD OF CHRIST’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX	February 15, 1939	No. 4
DRAMA OF VINDICATION
PART 2
“Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven.”—Matt. 10:32.
JEHOVAH not only maneuvered the two spies but also directed Rahab and maneuvered the guards of Jericho, that the picture might be made according to his will. We now see this is true, because the prophetic drama was being performed according to the will of Jehovah to show forth what is taking place at the present time. Jehovah made the ruse of Rahab to work, and the guards were turned away from her house and went in search of the spies. (Josh. 2:7) Another very important part of the drama enacted at this point shows the course that the Jonadabs must take. The two spies were on the roof of Rahab’s house, and it appeared that they had been concealed there probably before the police officers came to make the search. Rahab had shown faith in God by protecting the men and by sending the guards away, but there was something more she must do to protect herself according to the will of God. She must make a confession with her mouth that she did have faith in God and that she had concealed the men for that reason. “And before they were laid down, she came up unto them upon the roof.”—Josh. 2:8.
’Rahab did not return to the roof to entice the men, but went there because God directed her to do so, even though she did not know that fact. She went there to confess to the men her faith in God: “And she said unto the men, I know that the Lord hath given you the land, and that your terror is fallen upon us, and that all the inhabitants of the land faint because of you. For we have heard how the Lord dried up the water of the Red sea for you, when ye came out of Egypt; and what ye did unto the two kings of the Amorites, that were on the other side Jordan, Sihon and Og, whom ye utterly destroyed. And as soon as we had heard these things, our hearts did melt, neither did there remain any more courage in any man, because of you; for the Lord your God, he is God in heaven above, and in earth beneath.” (Josh. 2:9-11) While she did show some faith in what she had done up to that time, she must openly confess with her mouth to witnesses
that she had such faith in God. This part of the prophetic drama shows that everyone who receives the blessings of the Lord God, and who then takes a wise course, makes confession of his faith in God: “For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. For the scripture saith, Whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed.”-Rom. 10:10,11.
8 Jehovah has made known his unchangeable rule, which applies to all who receive life, and which rule is, ‘Unto me every knee shall bow and every tongue shall confess.’ (Isa. 45: 23; Rom. 14:11) Rahab here played the part representing the “great multitude”, every member of which must confess faith in God and in Christ Jesus and therefore must take their stand publicly before men and bear testimony, all trusting in God and in Christ Jesus. It is so commanded by Jehovah: “That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.” — Phil. 2:10,11.
* It is not sufficient that one have the mental conclusion that Jehovah is the true God and that Christ Jesus is the Savior of men, and earth’s rightful King. Man must go farther than that. He must openly acknowledge that he is trusting in God and in Christ Jesus. Confession means the acknowledgment of Jehovah as supreme and that the one confessing has made a covenant or agreement to do his will. No one will be a member of the “great multitude” unless doing so, and then he is to render himself in full obedience to the will of God. Life from the gracious hand of Jehovah is given to those who show by their works and by their activity in the course they take that they are trusting in God and in Christ. One who thus shows faith exhibited by Rahab is not ashamed to acknowledge God and Christ and is not backward in taking an active part in doing the witness work according to the will of God. Rahab showed that she had faith that Jehovah would gain the vic
52
THE WATCHTOWER
tory for Joshua over the people of Jericho. The Jonadabs must show by their course of action that they have faith that Jehovah at Armageddon will give the victory to Christ Jesus and his faithful followers over Satan and his crowd. Rahab feared God. The Jonadabs must fear God. The value resulting to Rahab because of her faith and her acts emphasized the importance of faith, and the Scriptures show that without a question of doubt this part of the picture is made for the benefit of those whom Rahab represented. “By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when she had received the spies with peace.” (Heb. 11:31) “Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only. Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified by works, when she had received the messengers, and had sent them out another way? For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also.”—Jas. 2: 24-26.
* Let the Jonadabs take notice of the importance of faith and works, and that the two must go together, that the Jonadabs may by their works prove their faith. The Lord has provided that they shall be and are companions of the remnant and that it is their privilege and duty to have an active part in the public witness work concerning the kingdom. By the grace of the Lord the Jonadabs now hear the glad news of the kingdom, and it is the Lord’s command that those who hear shall say to others: ‘Come and receive the water of life.’—Rev. 22:17.
•	The words of Rahab show clearly that the name of the Almighty God was being declared throughout all Canaan and much was being said about the covenant people of Israel. The people of Canaan were under the domination of Satan’s religious representatives, who were terrified by the words that had come to them of the victory of God’s people over their enemies on the other side of the Jordan, and in order to hold the Canaanites in line the religious leaders were saying much and putting forth strenuous efforts to stir up a bitter opposition to the Israelites. This part of the prophetic picture corresponds exactly with the attitude of the religionists of today, and particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, who fear the result of the proclamation of the kingdom message. They say much about the kingdom of God under Christ and the proclamation thereof made by Jehovah’s witnesses, and those religionists are filled with fear of what that message might work for them. Having a selfish desire to hold the people in subjection to them, that they might continue to carry on their racket, those religionists resort to all manner of lies against the remnant and Jonadabs. They use their many newspapers and their pulpits to publicly libel and slander the witnesses of Jehovah, thereby hoping to stir
Brooklyn, N. Y.
up the people to a bitter and vicious resentment of God’s witnesses. The Roman Catholic press publishes much about Jehovah’s witnesses, quoting isolated and disconnected paragraphs from the Watch Tower publications, thereby expecting to create prejudice on the part of the people and stir up the government officials against the Lord’s witnesses. The Watch Tower publications point out the clear distinction between religion and Christianity, and the ecclesiastical leaders quote what is said about religion but nothing that is said about Christianity, and seize upon this as an excuse to put Jehovah’s witnesses in a class with Communists. The drama shows this would come to pass, and the words of the inspired apostle describing the attitude of religionists against those who truly serve God and his kingdom support this conclusion, as it is written: “Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some also of good will. What then? notwithstanding, every way, whether in pretence or in truth, Christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.” (Phil. 1:15,18) Instead of the attacks by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy upon Jehovah’s witnesses accomplishing what they desire, many honest Catholics see the duplicity of the clergy and they have their eyes opened to the truth and turn to the Lord and his kingdom.
’ The Lord leaves no room for doubt as to the proper course to be pursued by the remnant and their companions, the Jonadabs, and for their benefit it is further written in this connection: “Only let the lives you live be worthy of the good news of the Christ, in order that, whether I come and see you or, being absent, only hear of you, I may know that you are standing fast in one spirit and with one mind, fighting shoulder to shoulder for the faith of the good news. Never for a moment quail before your antagonists. Your fearlessness will be to them [the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allies] a sure token of impending destruction, but to you it will be a sure token of your salvation—a token coming from God.”—Phil. 1: 27, 28, Weymouth.
g No doubt the information concerning the victory of Jehovah for the Israelites over the Egyptians, the kings and others on the east side of the Jordan, had come to Rahab, which information had been spread about by the religious leaders of Jericho. That information had the very opposite effect on Rahab to that which the religionists expected and intended. She saw that Jehovah is the Almighty God. She had faith in God. Likewise in these days the vicious lies promulgated by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their supporters against Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions, and the publication of lies, have the effect to widely advertise Jehovah, his King and kingdom, and also Jehovah’s witnesses,
February 15,1939
THE WATCHTOWER
53
who bear testimony thereto. Such has caused the fair-minded people of the “Catholic population” and others of good will toward God to make an honest and impartial investigation of the facts, and in doing so they learn that Jehovah’s witnesses are telling the truth of and concerning Jehovah and his kingdom. They see that Jehovah’s witnesses are obeying the commandments of the Lord in proclaiming the message, and the people of good will turn to the Lord and serve him with joyful heart. Therefore Jehovah’s people should waste no time arguing or disputing with Satan’s religious representatives, but should be busy at all times telling the truth of and concerning the kingdom, that the people of good will may be warned, learn the truth, and find the way to life. Our commission and duty is to help the honest people who desire the truth to gain a knowledge of God’s provision for them.
•	Rahab’s words show that she had faith that the city of Jericho would be destroyed by Jehovah God, and she believed now that the opportunity was being graciously provided by the Lord for her to escape that destruction and that she might “be hid in the day of the Lord’s anger” against Jericho. Likewise the Jonadabs show that they have faith in the gracious provisions God has made for their salvation and his goodness in showing them the way they may be hid at the time of the expression of Jehovah’s anger at Armageddon. Rahab was diligent to avail herself of the opportunity of favor and protection and salvation. Likewise the people of good will in this day show their appreciation of God’s provision for them, and they hasten to put themselves in a position to receive God’s favor. Being in that attitude, Rahab said to the spies: “Now therefore, I pray you, swear unto me by the Lord, since I have shewed you kindness, that ye will also shew kindness unto my father’s house, and give me a true token : and that ye will save alive my father, and my mother, and my brethren, and my sisters, and all that they have, and deliver our lives from death.” —Josh. 2:12,13.
10	The request made by her would require real work on the part of Rahab and also on the part of her relatives, if they would receive protection and salvation from Jehovah at the time of the siege of Jericho. She would be required to ask those of her household and relatives to “come into the safety zone”, and must, of course, tell them the reason why they were urged to come. She must do that very thing whether they that were warned gave heed to the warning or not. That part of the drama shows that it is incumbent upon those Jonadabs who hear and believe the kingdom message to give warning to their relatives and others who might desire to seek the way of salvation and that such testimony
and warning they must give to others, whether the others hear and give heed or not. Rahab must prove her faith by her works. The Jonadabs must prove their faith by their works.
11	Consecration as an essential step is also shown in the drama at this point. Rahab entered into an oath-bound covenant with the representatives of Joshua, who in turn was God’s servant and represented him, by which she bound herself, and thus showed that all of the “great multitude” making a consecration to do the will of God enter into an oath-bound covenant to do the Lord’s will and then they must do it. She expected God’s executioner to slay the people of Jericho, and she asked for herself and the members of her family that they and all that they had be spared and that the Lord might “deliver our lives from death”. In order to be received into the camp of the Israelites Rahab and the members of her household must renounce the Devil religion and turn to the worship of Almighty God in spirit and in truth. Rahab was anxious to have this covenant made and bound with an oath before the day of battle; and likewise the Jonadabs are anxious and diligent to seek protection from the Lord by making a covenant for doing his will and carrying out that covenant before Armageddon. Later the Gibeonites took a similar course, and they also pictured the “great multitude” who covenant to do the will of God. Thus it is shown that consecration is absolutely essential and necessary on the part of everyone who receives God’s favor.
12	A traitor or betrayer is despicable in the sight of God, and no one who betrays one of God’s people into the hands of the enemy may ever expect to receive Jehovah’s favor; and this also is shown by the words that appear in this prophetic drama. The two spies represented Joshua, and hence pictured the representative of the Lord, and they entered into a solemn agreement with Rahab: “And the men answered her, Our life for yours, if ye utter not this our business. And it shall be, when the Lord hath given us the land, that we will deal kindly and truly with thee.” (Josh. 2:14) Those men bound their agreement with their very lives. When the police guards came in to search for the servants of Jehovah Rahab did not betray them, but, on the contrary, took what course she could to safeguard and protect them. Thus it is shown that the duty of Jonadabs is to do what they can to protect their companions. If the telling of that which actually exists would work injustice and injury to others, it is not at all displeasing to God to decline to tell the same. (A statement becomes a lie when it is made with the purpose and intention of working injury to another.) This course is fully approved by the Lord Jesus. (John 7:8-10) Those who do not show
54
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
consideration for the lives and property and wellbeing of the servants of Jehovah, and who do not therefore safeguard the interest of the kingdom of the Lord, will not have any reason to expect that they will find protection and safety at Armageddon. Betrayers will not survive. This is particularly emphasized in what came to pass upon Judas Iscariot.
14 Rahab dealt fairly and aided the spies to escape: “Then she let them down by a cord through the window; for her house was upon the town wall, and she dwelt upon the wall.” (Josh. 2:15) Had her efforts in this behalf been disclosed, she doubtless would have suffered death at the hands of the public officials of Jericho. Her acts, however, were not wrong, but were good and worked that which is good in behalf of the servants. The apostle Paul, whom the religionists and the governor and his officers sought to kill, likewise escaped by night by being let down from the wall in a basket. (2 Cor. 11:32,33) The self-righteous, hypocritical, pious clergy would say that Paul did a very great wrong; but the Lord approved what was done. All who love and serve Jehovah God are to do good unto others when opportunity is afforded, and particularly to those who are likewise servants of God or members of the household of faith. (Gal. 6:10) Anyone who does injury to one of God’s little ones need expect no consideration from the Lord. Doubtless Rahab had with her own industrious hands made the rope or cord with which she let down the men. She had the cord at hand and used it. The Jonadabs must be energetic, and not slothful, and be prepared to use the faculties with which they are endowed in behalf of the kingdom interests. Rahab, by aiding the spies to escape, was helping them to continue in the service of advancing Jehovah’s organization. The same rule, identically, applies today with reference to the Jonadabs toward the remnant.
18 Rahab used her head, showing she was alert and circumspect. Before letting the spies down the wall she further showed them how to outwit and to elude their pursuers, that they might get back and make a good report to Joshua. Her own safety would depend on the spies’ getting back over the Jordan and reporting the situation, also reporting to Joshua her agreement with the spies. “And she said unto them, Get you to the mountain, lest the pursuers meet you; and hide yourselves there three days, until the pursuers be returned; and afterward may ye go your way.”—Josh. 2:16.
“ The spies’ hiding three days would enable them at that time to get back from the Jordan to Joshua, and that would put them on the east side on the tenth day of Nisan, the day that Joshua must begin the march. By that time the pursuers would with
draw all guards from the fords of the Jordan and give up the chase. Here the prophetic drama shows the necessity of discretion and of pursuing the course of caution on the part of those who serve God. The anointed must take refuge in “the secret place of the Most High”, as commanded by Jehovah, pictured by the mountains. (Ps. 91:1) When those of good will “see the abomination of desolation” named by the prophet Daniel and Jesus, that is, “see” the combine that is determined to rule the world instead of Christ standing where it ought not to stand by assuming such authority, then it is time for the Jonadabs, as Jesus warned, to flee “to the mountains”, meaning to God and his organization under Christ. (Matt. 24:15,16) As Rahab gave counsel to the spies, so the Jonadabs are on the alert to give sound advice to Jehovah’s witnesses in harmony with God’s Word, that they might escape traps set for them by the enemies of God’s people.
18 The two spies were honor-bound and bound by their oath to do what they could for Rahab, and to her they said: “We will be blameless of this thine oath which thou hast made us swear.” That oath was made in Jehovah’s name; hence God was a party to it. The honor of his name caused him to uphold the terms of that oath-bound agreement, and he did so by miraculously saving Rahab and those of her household. The spies had an obligation to perform, and they must provide some sign or identification to be employed by Rahab which would guarantee her the protection, and so they did advise Rahab: “Behold, when we come into the land, thou shalt bind this line of scarlet thread in the window which thou didst let us down by; and thou shalt bring thy father and thy mother, and thy brethren, and all thy father’s household, home unto thee.” —Josh. 2:17,18.
17 For the honor of his name Jehovah will save the “great multitude”. But Jehovah’s witnesses must discharge their responsibility toward the people of good will who will compose the “great multitude”, so that the remnant may be blameless respecting what comes to pass upon the people at Armageddon. They too must point out the disaster that will befall all those who do not take the proper course of action, and must tell them how they may be identified and guarantee their protection from the Executioner. The line or cord “of scarlet” by which Rahab enabled the spies to escape from the wall was the same line or scarlet thread which she must fasten to her window as a means of identification. This suggests the blood of the redeeming Lamb of God and the faith of the “great multitude” therein, and in which they washed their robes, identifying themselves as servants of the Lord God, and then take their place on the side of Jehovah and Christ
February 15,1939
THE WATCHTOWER
55
Jesus to serve openly. (Rev. 7:14,15) That "cord” or rope was a sign publicly exhibited; and so God’s people must publicly acknowledge their faith in the shed blood of Christ Jesus and openly take their stand on the side of the Lord and serve, to guarantee protection at the time of Armageddon.
1S The prophetic drama here also shows the obligation laid upon the Jonadabs, who will form the "great multitude”, that they must be active in bearing the message of the kingdom to others, that others may know the way to life. Rahab was required to bring all the members of her family into her house situate on the wall if they were to expect protection and salvation, before the fall of Jericho. This shows that the members of the "great multitude” must be diligent and energetic in doing what they can to gather others who are of the “other sheep” of Christ Jesus, and such obligation on their part is emphasized by the Lord’s words at Revelation 22:17. The Jonadabs need not expect to have God’s favor and protection if they are inactive, receive the truth, and then do nothing toward making it known to others. The facts show that many Jonadabs, almost immediately after learning of the kingdom, busy themselves in taking the kingdom message to others; and this they do by going from house to house with the phonograph and literature and by informing the people who will hear of God's gracious provision for them if they give heed to his words. Their obligation toward the witness work, therefore, is clearly pointed out.
” The Jonadabs flee to God’s organization under Christ Jesus, and that they must faithfully remain under the protection thereof was also foretold by this prophetic picture: "And it shall be, that whosoever shall go out of the doors of thy house into the street, his blood shall be upon his head, and we will be guiltless; and whosoever shall be with thee in the house, his blood shall be on our head, if any hand be upon him.”—Josh. 2:19.
,0 That requirement is exactly in harmony with the law of God governing those who fled to the cities of refuge and also to the blood-marked houses in Egypt at the time of the passover. To remain inside of the Lord’s organization prior to and during the expression of Jehovah’s wrath at Armageddon means safety and preservation. To disregard God’s commandment and go outside into the world and seek the favors and protection of men means destruction. “His blood shall be upon his head.” Full protection was guaranteed to Rahab and her household if they faithfully held to the agreement and obeyed instructions ; and so it is with those who undertake to serve Jehovah God now.
11 Again the faithfulness of the consecrated to one another and to the Lord is shown by this drama:
“And if thou utter this our business, then we will be quit of thine oath which thou hast made us to swear.” (Josh. 2:20) Stated in common parlance, the remnant and the “great multitude” must be and are closely knit together with the bonds of unselfishness and they must safeguard each other’s interests. On the contrary, Delilah betrayed Samson; and such conduct will not be tolerated by the Lord among those who have agreed to do his will. Compromising or consorting with the enemy cancels all claims for protection from the Lord. This shows that those of the “great multitude” must be faithful to God’s kingdom interest and not permit anything to turn them away therefrom.
“ The oath-bound agreement made and explained and understood between Rahab and the spies, then the spies immediately went on their way to a hiding place in the mountains. Later Rahab was faithful in performance of her part of the agreement by hanging out the signal line, thus showing that she was standing firm in her faith toward God: “And she said, According unto your words, so be it. And she sent them away, and they departed: and she bound the scarlet line in the window.” (Josh. 2:21) The Jonadabs associate themselves with God’s organization; and through his organization, of which Christ Jesus is the Head, God has a clear understanding with the Jonadabs and brings them to an appreciation of their relationship to him, and shows them the place that they must and do fill. They aid Jehovah’s witnesses in making faithful report to Christ Jesus, the Greater Joshua, even as Rahab aided the spies to make a good report. At the time the Israelites moved across the Jordan the gates of Jericho were closed, and the people all inside; so no one on the city wall could see the red cord in Rahab’s window. Such were the instructions, and they were carried out by Rahab. Her acts show that the Jonadabs and Jehovah’s witnesses must deal honestly with one another, and that without fear. AU who love the Lord God will do that very thing. This also shows that the worldly people of “Christendom” under the Devil’s organization, and forming a part of it, cannot see and appreciate what the red “line” or “cord” means, that is, they cannot see that the Jonadabs are really trusting in the shed blood of Christ Jesus and are showing faith and obedience to God.
” The spies found a hiding place in the mountain west of the Jordan while their pursuers looked for them in the opposite direction, near the fords of the Jordan. On the third day the chase was abandoned; the Jordan was then very high, and, the Israelites being on the east side thereof, those of Jericho, thinking themselves in a state of peace and safety, retired inside the walls of the city and rested there.
56
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
As soon as the hunt was up the spies came out of their hiding and crossed the Jordan, undoubtedly by swimming that torrential river, even as others did later. (1 Chron. 12:15) The spies hastened to and made a faithful report to Joshua, even as Joshua and Caleb, thirty-nine years previous thereto, had made a faithful report to Moses. (Num. 14:6-10) They were sure that the city of Jericho would fall into the hands of Joshua because of the fear of the inhabitants of the city, and they so reported this with confidence to Joshua. Even so now the faithful witnesses report concerning Jehovah’s “strange work”, telling of the fear that has seized upon the enemy by reason thereof. They know that “Christendom” will fall at Armageddon, because Jehovah has declared it shall go down. The religionists, particularly, are filled with fear of what is coming, and they are so disturbed that they are not capable of seeing just what to do. Here ends another scene of the drama.—Josh. 2:22-24.
THE MARCH BEGINS
14 At this point another prophetic picture is made. It does not follow that which appears at chapter two, but is parallel to the prophecy recorded in Joshua .two. While it is true that all these things “were written aforetime . . . for our [the anointed’s] learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope”, it is also true that the record thereof furnishes the means for the aid and hope of the Lord’s “other sheep” upon whom the ends of the world are come. (Rom. 15:4; 1 Cor. 10:11) The spirit-begotten class have been actually used in the fulfillment of the divine drama, and that without their even knowing they were performing the same at the time. Now for them to be permitted to see how their course of action was directed by the Lord and that they actually had a part in the fulfillment of the great prophetic drama which the Lord made centuries ago brings increased confidence and joy to them. Their companions, the “other sheep”, learning of the means by which the Lord led his people in the fulfillment of the drama, have their hope and joy increased, and they are stirred up with greater zeal for the kingdom. These prophetic pictures show the interest of the two flocks in each other and how they must march on, working in exact harmony and doing all things to the glory of God and to his King. These prophetic pictures disclose God’s provision for the protection and salvation of the “other sheep”, which the Greater Joshua, Christ Jesus, is now gathering, and therefore will be a special aid and comfort to the Jonadabs at the present time.
14 The time to move the hosts of Israel had come: “And Joshua rose early in the morning; and they
removed from Shittim, and came to Jordan, he and all the children of Israel, and lodged there before they passed over.” (Josh. 3:1) Shittim was back some distance east of the Jordan. Joshua moved his army from that point down to the river front, where they camped during the night. Next morning, in broad daylight, they would pass over the swollen river, when all with eyes, including those people at Jericho, could behold the miracle which Jehovah God there worked to the honor of his name. Shittim or Acacia trees were so named because of their scourging thorns. Those thorny trees, therefore, appear to represent the condition of the faithful servants on earth during the year 1918 and the earlier part of 1919, when they were under great restraint, being “prisoners” “appointed to die”, and were being scourged by Satan and his religious agents on the earth. That which the enemy did to them constituted a great scourge to God’s people; and this is shown by the fact that later Joshua prophesied before the Israelites that their failure to be faithful unto God would bring upon them the enemy and that “they shall be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes”. (Josh. 23:13) The moving of the Israelites from the scourge trees would correspond to the Lord’s ‘loosening of the prisoners’ and ‘bringing their souls out of prison’. (Pss. 146:7; 142:7) The march to freedom and against struggling foes must now begin, as shown by the prophetic drama at this point.
20 The marching host that came to the Jordan found that its swift water was a real obstacle to them. Likewise in the year 1919, when the antitypical marchers were about to begin their march great obstacles were in the way of the people of God and then it was impossible for them to see just how they would get over such obstruction or obstacles. The faith of many there failed, and they fell away. Like the high flood waters of the Jordan river the flood of angry humanity, pictured by the river and its waters, was flowing high and angrily and rushing along toward the sea of the dead, that is, descending to destruction at Armageddon. Communism, the first to appear as a great monstrosity, was then young. The religious and political allies were exceedingly angry and ambitious to control the earth, Fascism and Nazism were being born, and the “great whore”, that is, the once “forgotten harlot” (the religious Roman Catholic Hierarchy), was then beginning to go about the city of “Christendom”, singing many enticing songs, as prophesied in God’s Word. (Isa. 23:15,16) Jehovah’s witnesses, small in number and weak within themselves, were in the direct course of the mighty stream of angry people. How could they ever get across that torrent alive and get into their inheritance in the kingdom and its
February 15,1939
THE WATCHTOWER.
57
service, which the Lord God had provided for them? At that time the holy spirit had not been ‘poured out on all flesh’. (Joel 2:28,29) Now call to mind what did take place, and let your hope be increased and rejoice.
*’ As Joshua was in command of the Israelites, so the Greater Joshua, Christ Jesus, was leading his people at the time above mentioned in fulfillment of the prophetic drama: “And it came to pass, after three days, that the officers went through the host.” (Josh. 3:2) The “three days” here mentioned corresponds to the three years, 1919 to 1922, during which time there was much speculation as to the meaning of God’s Word, and particularly the “elective elder” element were putting forth many prognostications. Some of the faithful ones exhorted to boldness, while others grew timid and frightened and insisted on holding back, not attempting to move forward. The Watchtower August 1,15, 1919, carried articles “Blessed Are the Fearless”, and dwelt upon Elisha’s course at the Jordan and the miracle there performed by the parting of the waters. The Cedar Point convention of that year was the beginning of the public discussion of these important questions. A special issue of the Golden Age magazine, much of the contents of which had been written behind prison walls, was published and shortly thereafter four million copies were distributed, and which exposed the religionists who had led and were leading in the opposition to the message of God’s kingdom. When that issue of The Golden Age was ready for distribution, some objected and complained against distributing it, charging that the movement was the result only of the opinion of one man and that the bold ones were following a man, whereas the objectors preferred to give heed to the one who once led them and who was then dead, and they put forth that as an excuse for doing nothing for the advancement of the work. Rather they insisted that the Lord’s people should sit still and talk about love and not attack the enemy. Those objectors at least doubted and denied that the Lord was any longer using the Watch Tower. A great shaking was the result, which well compared to the lodging overnight beside the raging waters of the Jordan with no human means of getting across. Both in the picture and in the antitype the faithful trusted the Lord. And so it is written that “the officers went through the host” at the command of Joshua; and this corresponds to A.D. 1922, when at the command of the Lord the faithful went about amongst the people of God to encourage them to become active and zealous in the service.
18 Joshua had given command to his officers, which they were obeying, even as Christ Jesus, the Greater Joshua, directed his servants in 1922. “And they
commanded the people, saying, When ye see the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God, and the priests the Levites bearing it, then ye shall remove from your place, and go after it.” (Josh. 3:3) Those organization instructions in the antitype proceeded from the Greater Joshua, Christ Jesus, and were transmitted by his servants to the consecrated people through the earth. Upon the ancient ark of the covenant rested the Shekinah light, showing the presence of Jehovah. As Jehovah is the head over Christ Jesus, the ark there pictured Christ Jesus, under the command of the Almighty.—Pss. 80:1; 99:1; 1 Cor. 11:3.
89 The substance of the message or command transmitted to the faithful was this: When you see that the Lord Jehovah God, as represented by his Messenger, Christ Jesus, is at the temple (Mal. 3:1), in the drama pictured by the ark, then is the time to move forward, and then follow the Lord’s commandment, and not man’s leading. “Follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth.” (Rev. 14:4) The Israelites on the banks of the Jordan no longer had the cloud by day and the pillar of fire by night to lead them. They must look to and follow the ark of the covenant. So with the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple, no longer did the holy spirit serve as a guide to the consecrated, but the Lord Jesus, the antitypical ark of the covenant, the representative of Jehovah, from that time onward guides and directs the movement of his people. Those who have failed to see Christ at the temple have fallen completely away.
30 The priests of the Israelites bearing the ark on their shoulders were more than half a mile ahead of the rest of Israel, and they were leading the march: “Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand cubits by measure: come not near unto it, that ye may know the way by which ye must go; for ye have not passed this way heretofore.”—Josh. 3: 4.
31 The people could see the ark, and they were following its lead. From 1919 onward Christ Jesus, the antitypical ark, then and since at the temple, by faith is seen or discerned to be there and he is guiding and leading all those devoted to him and to Jehovah God. In 1919 and thereafter Jehovah’s witnesses needed the leadership of Christ Jesus, for they were now engaged in a work that led them over untrodden paths. It was a new work, different from that of the “Elijah period” of service. It is now easy to be seen that it was hard at that time, in 1919, for some to let go the leadership of a man whom they had understood to be that “faithful and wise servant” and the “seventh messenger”. They found it difficult to let go the Scripture Studies and the Daily Manna book, and to strike out for further
58
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
work and look for a clearer revelation from the Word of God. Some tenaciously held to and contended that all the truth that is ever to be revealed had at that time been given to the man then dead, and they declared that it was wrong to look further for spiritual food. Their loss has been great. As to the others, who trusted Jehovah and willingly followed Christ Jesus, they moved forward, and they continued to do so, and great has been their blessing.
“Joshua gave further organization instructions to the people, which were transmitted to them by his subordinate officers, picturing the servants of the Lord acting under the direction of Christ Jesus: "And Joshua said unto the people, Sanctify yourselves; for to morrow the Lord will do wonders among you.” (Josh. 3:5) This meant that with the beginning of the antitypical march in 1919 those who would go forward must sanctify themselves, that is to say, set themselves wholly to the service of Jehovah, his King and his kingdom. Beginning in 1919 The Watchtower is the means employed by the Lord Jesus to transmit to his people organization instructions, and since has exhorted those who love God and his kingdom to fearlessly devote themselves to Jehovah and his work so as to be counted worthy to be used in his kingdom service. They are urged to be faithful and zealous, that they may see the wonders God now does among them and for them. Little did the Israelites appreciate the wonders God would work, and likewise little did the antitypical Israelites from 1919 onward see and appreciate the wonders God would do among them and for them and what he would reveal to them from his Word. As the years have advanced Jehovah has unfolded one prophecy after another and by the hand of Christ Jesus has led his people and opened their eyes to his great treasure house and laid before them opportunities of service and filled them with unspeakable joy. The faithful throughout the earth today bear testimony to this fact.
“ Specific commandment was then given to the priests: “And Joshua spake unto the priests, saying, Take up the ark of the covenant, and pass over before the people. And they took up the ark of the covenant, and went before the people.” (Josh. 3:6) This part of the prophetic drama shows Christ Jesus, the Greater Joshua, issuing his orders and instructions to the faithful servants from and after 1922. As the priests of Israel were carrying the ark on their shoulders, so since 1922 the servants of the Lord must bear with great joy the burden which the Lord puts upon their shoulders. They must show not only willingness in service, but great joy, and that they fully acknowledge, support and greatly rejoice in Jehovah God and Christ Jesus as the sole “Higher Powers”. This is further pictured in
the prophecy of Ezekiel one, showing Jehovah riding upon his organization. It was in the year 1922 that Jehovah commissioned the faithful servants of Christ on earth to do service by pouring out upon all of the truly consecrated his spirit, as prophesied at Joel 2:28,29. In obedience to that commission the faithful took up the work as commanded and went forth with it. This was well shown by what occurred at the Cedar Point convention in 1922. It was then that the Lord revealed to his people that Christ Jesus is at the temple, and there Jehovah's witnesses, seeing and understanding this great truth for the first time, gave increased expression of joy by moving into action. Attention was there called to the prophecy of the Lord by Isaiah (6:8), to wit: “Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send me.” In calling attention to that prophecy the speaker on the occasion said to the assembled witnesses: “Herald the message far and wide; the world must know that Jehovah is God and that Jesus Christ is King of kings and Lord of lords. This is the day of all days. Behold the King reigns! You are his publicity agents. Therefore advertise, advertise, advertise the King and his kingdom!” The response was electrical, accompanied by shouts of joy from those present, and the witnesses moved into action even as the faithful moved at the command of Joshua.
34 The day of the Lord had come. “And the Lord said unto Joshua, This day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that, as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee.” (Josh. 3:7) Thus the prophetic drama discloses that the time has come to magnify Christ Jesus the King because this is “the day of the Lord Jesus”, “the day of Christ.” (1 Cor. 5: 5; 2 Cor. 1:14; 2 Thess. 2:1) Since coming to the temple in 1918 Christ Jesus has been reigning and performing the office of Judge of the people and Vindicator of Jehovah’s name. Making this fact known is magnifying Christ Jesus in the sight of the people. With ever increasing understanding the faithful have appreciated and continue to grow in appreciation of the fact that no man, dead or alive, leads them, but that Christ Jesus, the Elect Servant of Jehovah now at the temple, is in full charge of Jehovah’s work and is leading those who joyfully serve him. The time has come for Jehovah to accomplish his work on earth by the hand of Christ Jesus, and he would have the people to understand that, as he was with Moses, so he is with Christ Jesus and with those who faithfully follow in his steps. This is further assurance that the Lord continues to use the same Society as his earthly and visible organization to
February 15, 1939	THE WATCHTOWER
59
carry on his work from 1919 onward as he did during the time prior thereto.
38 The priests of the Israelites were commanded to march right into the brink of the raging waters of the Jordan: “And thou shalt command the priests that bear the ark of the covenant, saying, When ye are come to the brink of the water of Jordan, ye shall stand still in Jordan.” (Josh. 3: 8) No one was there at that time to stretch a rod over the waters as did Moses on a previous occasion at God’s command; no “strong east wind” there to divide the waters as the Red sea divided at the Lord’s command. (Exod. 14: 21, 22) Those servants of the Lord, who had been faithful and who were brought into the temple and given instructions through Christ Jesus up until 1922, were now to obediently march right ahead into what to them appeared to be an unsurmountable barrier or stone wall, which appeared to block all progress, and which barrier would never open. What, then, were they to do? They were to stand and look to Jehovah, and not become discouraged or turned back. Nor were they to lean on some human or lean to human reasoning and advice, but were to trust solely in the Lord God and Christ Jesus in all their ways and with confidence that he would show them the way forward and how to get out. (Prov. 3:5,6) “And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, Come hither, and hear the words of the Lord your God.” (Josh. 3: 9) Likewise Christ Jesus, gathering Jehovah’s witnesses at the temple, says to them, 'Come hither, and hear the words of God.’
38 A great miracle was now about to be performed before the eyes of the faithful Israelites, foretelling that Jehovah would miraculously and victoriously lead his people on: “And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall know that the living God is among you [representatively in Christ Jesus at the temple], and that he will without fail drive out from [the kingdom territory] before you the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Hivites, and the Perizzites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Jebu-sites.”—Josh. 3:10.
87 That part of the prophetic drama foretold that the Lord’s bringing his witnesses across the antitypical Jordan is a full guarantee that he will clear out the enemy and will extend his kingdom control over all the earth. Those who witnessed or experienced the crossing of the Jordan learned that Jehovah is the Almighty God and that his purpose shall be brought to pass. Pointing to the ark of the covenant Joshua said to the Israelites: “Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth passeth over before you into Jordan.” (Josh. 3:11) Jehovah, by his Vindicator Christ Jesus, leads the way, and
the faithful fully trust in him and follow whithersoever he leads.
38 The prophetic drama here shows the rapid fall of the human race into degradation and ruin, and this must be done before the building of the “new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness”. Jordan means “descending” or “descender”. The almost identical word in Hebrew, namely, jordim, is twice used at Joshua 3:16 as applying to Jordan’s “waters”, and both times is rendered “which (or, that) came down”. Throughout nearly its entire length the Jordan is below the level of the ocean. The Dead sea, into which it empties, has no outlet. McClintock & Strong’s Cyclopcedia says: “The Jordan has two historical sources”; and these are at the base of Mount Hermon. The Americana says: “It rises from three main sources at the foot of Hermon, and these upper streams unite in Lake Huleh, the ancient Waters of Merom.” Mount Hermon of the Mount Lebanon range is thus not unlike the “mountain of God”, of which Eden was a part, and the “two historical sources” of Jordan not unlike Adam and Eve, original parents of our race. From its fountains the Jordan headwaters drop hundreds of feet and flow into the lake or “waters of Merom”. (Josh. 11:7) “Merom” means “altitude” or “elevation”, and corresponds with the fresh start of our race from Noah and his family on. From the southern end of Lake Merom the Jordan now emerges and descends, dropping more than 700 feet over a length of nine miles, to the Sea of Galilee, which is 682| feet below sea level. Here again the Jordan halts temporarily. This compares with the time of Christ Jesus, when the human family was given another opportunity through preaching of the gospel. From the southern tip of the Sea of Galilee (“circle” or “circuit”) the Jordan emerges, and then (to quote Americana) “continuing a singularly crooked course of about 65 miles direct distance, or 200 [miles] including windings, falls into the north end of the Dead Sea. . . . The valley of the Jordan forms one of the most remarkable depressions in the world, the Dead Sea being 1,312 feet below sea-level, and the total fall of the river being about 2,300 feet”. The general course of the Jordan is from the north due south. The Jordan valley attains a width of upward of twelve miles at Jericho.
89 This description of the river of Jordan well pictures the swift stream of humankind rapidly dropping down from Adam’s perfection in Eden, and the steadily disintegrating course, and the same crooked manner, hurrying on to destruction in the barren, lifeless “sea” at Armageddon, which was pictured by the Dead sea, into which the Jordan flows and finds no outlet. Giving further command, Joshua said: “Now therefore take you twelve men out of
60
THE WATCHTOWER
the tribes of Israel, out of every tribe a man.”— Josh. 3:12.
40 These twelve were to be used to picture the people of the "new heavens” and the opening of the work of 'creating the new earth' (Isa. 65:17), so that when that work has progressed to a definite point Jehovah would make the people understand and appreciate the certainty of carrying out his purpose.
41 Joshua in the picture here shows that God would reveal to Jesus Christ what he is about to do, and then later permit the members of His body to see and understand. "And it shall come to pass, as soon as the soles of the feet of the priests that bear the ark of the Lord, the Lord of all the earth, shall rest in the waters of Jordan, that the waters of Jordan shall be cut off from the waters that come down from above; and they shall stand upon an heap.”—Josh. 3:13.
48 So in the beginning of the fulfillment of the prophecy, in 1922, concerning the crossing of the Jordan, the faithful remnant, those at the temple, must step with faith and boldness right into the swift waters and there exhibit to the people the sign of the kingdom of Jehovah God and bear before them the kingdom fruits, that is to say, the kingdom message. The Watchtower for August 1919 and July 1, 1920, had called attention to the Elijah
Brooklyn, N. Y.
work and its ending in 1918 and to the period of waiting at the beginning of the Elisha work in 1919. The facts that have since come to pass definitely prove that the Elijah work ended in 1918 and that the Elisha work began in 1919, after the pause or period of waiting, and that the Elisha work must continue until Armageddon. The prophetic drama at this point marked the great miracle performed by Jehovah at the Jordan, thus foretelling the great and marvelous things to be done by the Lord Jesus Christ and who is the representative and vindicator of Jehovah, and the part that the faithful remnant plays in the fulfillment of this part of the drama. As these things are clarified before the minds of God’s devoted people they realize how marvelously the Lord has led them, shielded and protected them from the enemy, and what great things God will yet perform and in which they will find use and service. Only the unlimited power of Jehovah could take the Israelites safely over the raging waters of the Jordan. Only that same power can deliver his faithful ones now on earth and use them to perform that which will redound to the praise and glory of the Most High. That which follows in the prophetic dramas of vindication shows why the Lord has brought his people in the past few years through so many trying experiences.
[To be continued)
SECOND TRUMPET
IT "WAS when the apostle John saw the Lamb of God open the seventh of the seals that held secret the divine purpose written down in the precious scroll that he beheld the vision of seven angels to whom were given seven trumpets. The events that followed the sounding of these trumpets foretold the events of our day that would follow after the Lord came to his temple in 1918. The physical facts show that the first angel began to sound his trumpet in A.D. 1922, to convey the message summed up in the resolution entitled "Proclamation” adopted by Jehovah’s witnesses assembled in international convention at Cedar Point, Ohio, that year.
Then followed the sounding of the second angel. A convention of God’s people assembled at Los Angeles, California, on the 25th day of August, 1923, and adopted and sent forth a resolution entitled "A Warning”. The resolution was directed against those who falsely claim to represent God and Christ and who had built up a mighty organization in the earth which they likened unto the kingdom of God, and which is symbolized by “a great mountain”. The resolution warned the people against these false teachers and urged them to desert the unholy organization. And first years thereafter it became clear that the spirit of the Lord, operating by his invisible angels, directed his people on earth to take this action and that such was the beginning of the sounding of the second angel.
Revelation 8:8 reads: "And the second angel sounded,
and as it were a great mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea: and the third part of the sea became blood; and the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ships were destroyed.” Millions of copies of the above-named resolution, together with the supporting argument given in a public discourse entitled “All Nations Marching to Armageddon”, were freely distributed amongst the peoples of earth, and the "servant" class of Jehovah did the work. The resolution was not the “trumpet", but it was the tangible manifestation of God’s action by and through the members of his organization. The effect thereof is indicated by the symbolic language used in verse nine, to wit:
"And the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ships were destroyed.” Symbolically "the sea" represents the peoples of "Christendom”, so called, as a whole, which nourish, bear up and support the commercial and governing factors. (Ps. 65:7) The peoples of "Christendom" claim to represent God and Christ on earth, and taken as a whole they may be put in three separate divisions, to wit: (1) The agnostic and unbeliever; (2) fundamentalists; and (3) modernists. Of the third division are those who repudiate the blood of Christ; and to them his blood has become lifeless or dead. At that time the symbolic “mountain" of Satan, his organization, called “Christendom”, and which was “cast into the sea”, was “on fire” with the modernist and fundamentalist
February 15,1939
THE WATCHTOWER,
61
controversies, in which the politicians and financiers took part; and more particularly “on fire” with God’s indignation ; and his organization on earth emphatically expressed the will of God concerning such hypocritical organization of “Christendom”, which for a long time had deceived the people. By this resolution “The Warning” the issue was put squarely up to the people, who were called upon to decide whether or not they would withdraw from the unrighteous systems and take their stand on the side of the Lord. Said document reads as follows:
“resolution
“We, the International Bible Students in general convention assembled, again declare our absolute faith in and allegiance to Jehovah God our Father and to his beloved Son, Christ Jesus, our Redeemer and King, and our absolute confidence in the Bible as God’s inspired Word of truth given to man for his guidance and instruction in righteousness.
“As followers of our Lord who are diligently striving to be his true and faithful witnesses, we deem it our privilege and duty to call the attention of all peace- and orderloving peoples of all the nations to the deplorable conditions now existing in the world and to point them to Messiah’s kingdom as the only remedy for national and individual ills.
“We hold and declare that Jesus Christ organized his church in purity to represent him upon earth; that selfish and ambitious men, loving earthly honor and glory more than the approval of God, have brought in false doctrines destructive of faith in God and his Word; and that as a result there now exist in the various denominational churches two general classes, to wit:
“First : Those who pretend to be Christians, but do not believe in the Bible as God’s inspired Word of truth, who repudiate the doctrines of the fall of man and his redemption through the blood of Jesus Christ, which class is made up of apostate clergymen and The principal of their flocks’, who are worldly men of strong financial and political influence, which class exercises the controlling influence and power in the denominational organizations; and
“Second: That great multitude of peoples who claim •to be Christians and who hold and believe the fundamental doctrines of Christianity, namely: That the Bible is the Word of God written under inspiration of the holy spirit; that the Lord Jesus came into the world to redeem man from sin and death; that he gave his life a ransom for mankind; that he was raised from the dead and ascended into heaven and will come again and set up his kingdom, as he promised.
“The class first above mentioned are lovers of self, covetous, boasters, unthankful, unholy, fierce, despisers of those who strive to be good, heady, high-minded, having a form of godliness but denying the power thereof, and who slander, misrepresent and persecute those who faithfully try to represent our Lord. (2 Tim. 3:1-5; Matt. 24:9; Mark 13: 9) While claiming to be representatives of our Lord, they misrepresent him in this, to wit:
“(1) They have forsaken the Word of God, denied the fall of man and denied the Lord Jesus, by whose blood man must be redeemed.—Jude 4.
“(2) They have used the name of Christian and the Christian religion as a cloak to hide their unrighteousness and to enable them to deceive the people, and have committed spiritual fornication by uniting church with political and financial power.—Jer. 2:21-24; Rev. 18:3.
“(3) While posing as the representatives of the Prince of Peace, they have prepared war, openly advised, encouraged, and advocated the same, and by appealing to the patriotism of the people have induced them to engage in war; they have wrongfully preached the men into the trenches, caused them to fight and die, have filled the land with a host of widows and orphans, and thereby increased the sorrow and suffering of mankind.—Rom. 13:9; Matt. 26:52; Ileb. 12:14; Gal. 6:10; Luke 3:14.
“(4) They have with selfish design invaded the schools, colleges, seminaries and universities with their God-dishonoring doctrines of higher criticism and evolution, have led the people into gross error and destroyed the faith of multitudes in the inspired Word of God. — Jer. 12:10,12; 23:13,14; 5:25-30; 8:11; 9:8,9.
“(5) They have spurned the true teachings of Jesus and the apostles, have scattered the flock of God, have produced a famine in the land for the hearing of the Word of the Lord, and have caused the hungry and thirsty to starve for spiritual food.—Amos 8:11; Ps. 107:4, 5; Ezek. 34: 4-6.
“(6) They have hated the light and the bearers of the light (Matt. 5:14), refused to give meat to the hungry and drink to the thirsty Christian, turned away the stranger, failed to minister to the sick, persecuted and caused to be imprisoned honest and faithful Christians, resorted to deeds of violence against peaceable and order-loving Christians, and ‘on their skirts is found the blood of the souls of poor innocents’.—Jer. 2:34; Matt. 25:42,43.
“(7) They have willfully repudiated and rejected the teachings of Jesus and the apostles concerning the Lord’s second coming and the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth for the blessing of the people, and have substituted therefor a man-made, Satan-directed League of Nations, which they hail as the savior of mankind and as ‘the political expression of God’s kingdom on earth’, thus blaspheming his name and cause. They have taken counsel together against the Lord and his kingdom, which counsel Jehovah declares shall not stand.—Ps. 2:1-12; Isa. 8: 9,10.
“Furthermore, we hold and declare that of those described in the second class there is a multitude of the peace- and order-loving ones in the denominational churches, both Catholic and Protestant, who have held and yet hold to their faith, who have been kind and considerate with and respected the faith of their fellows regardless of creed or denomination, have fed the hungry and given drink to the thirsty, have taken in the stranger, clothed the naked, visited the sick and ministered to those wrongfully imprisoned, all in the name of our Lord; that these have hope in the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ and its attendant blessings; and that for such the Lord has declared his love.—Matt. 25: 34-40.
“We point to the fact that God through his Word has declared his vengeance against all unrighteousness, and particularly against the present evil [world] (Isa. 34:1-4, 8) ; that the Lord Jesus is now invisibly present judging the nations of earth; that the end of the world has come and
62
THE WATCHTOWER
the dashing to pieces of Satan’s organization will follow next (Hatt. 24:7-14) ; that all who willingly ally themselves with Satan and his organization shall suffer terrible punishment; that those espousing the righteous cause of the Lord and serving him shall pass through the trouble and receive boundless blessings (Zeph. 2:2,3; Zech. 13:8,9; Ps. 41:1,2); that the line of demarcation between the two classes of “Christendom” is clearly drawn, and that the time has come for the separation of those who prefer evil from those who love righteousness and desire the Lord’s kingdom.
“We, therefore, in the spirit of love sound the warning to all such peace- and order-loving and God-fearing ones who are associated with the denominational churches, and point them to the fact that they can have no part in nor fellowship with that class of pretending Christians who repudiate the Word of God and deny the Lord Jesus Christ and his kingdom; and we call upon them to heed the Word of God and separate themselves from the unclean thing (2 Cor. 6:17), to withdraw themselves from the unrighteous ecclesiastical systems designated by the Lord as ‘Babylon’, and to ‘come out from her, lest they be partakers of her sins and receive of her plagues’ (Rev. 18:4) ; and
“We appeal to all such to recognize Jesus Christ as King of kings and Lord of lords, and that this kingdom now at hand is the hope and salvation of the peoples; and that they individually and collectively declare themselves on the side of the Lord and in sympathy with his cause, and be ready to receive the blessings of God’s kingdom
Brooklyn, N. Y.
which he has prepared for them from the foundation of the world.”
Attention is especially called to the last two paragraphs of the resolution, which are a warning to all God-fearing people to withdraw from the unrighteous organization and an appeal to identify themselves with the Lord.
Revelation 8:9 states: “And the third part of the ships were destroyed.” A “ship” symbolically represents the commercial element using the religious and political factors for selfish purposes in carrying on their traffic. (Prov. 31:14) Modernist “ships” were busying themselves importing so-called “spiritual food” from sources other than the Word of God, which is Satan’s scheme to turn the people away from God. Those who had once received the light of revealed truth concerning Christ as the Redeemer, and then repudiated God’s Word and his Son, and used the name of Christ for commercial purposes, became as blood and died, and their opportunity for the kingdom ended. This cannot mean that the third part of the people died, but the “third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life”, that is to say, had received enough of truth that they might obtain life through Christ. Repudiating this, such favor to them ended. Since the great proclamation of the message concerning God’s kingdom throughout the earth during the past sixty years there is no excuse for anyone to pose as a preacher of God’s Word and at the same time to misrepresent him and his means of salvation; and God’s indignation is expressed against all such.
LET
RE FORBIDDING TO EAT MEATS
Dear Brother:
Answering your letter of recent date. Sorry that you have found it necessary to take issue with The Watchtower. Of course, that is your privilege, but I think your argument in the letter above mentioned is not in harmony with the Scriptures. God did not specifically name to Noah the animals that are clean and unclean. Referring to paragraph 12 of The Watchtower of December the 1st, which cites Leviticus 22:3,8,9: Neither that paragraph nor the text specifies specific animals that are clean and unclean, but does specify that a beast that dieth of itself or is torn by another shall not be eaten, for the manifest reason that the blood is not poured out. The weight of all the argument about these texts is that the life is in the blood and that the blood must not be eaten. That would be true of a clean animal or an unclean one just the same. While it is true, as stated in Genesis 8: 20, that Noah offered up the clean beasts and clean fowls as burnt offerings, no specific animal or fowl is there indicated. Therefore it would not be for us to determine what animals he did offer. The Lord left it to him evidently to judge as to what was clean and unclean. That was long before the law covenant was made.
Referring to your objection to what is stated in paragraph 28 of that Watchtower article: That has reference exclusively to wild beasts or wild fowls, and the point is that these may be taken for food when needed, but that no one consecrated to the Lord would indulge in chasing beasts or fowls merely for sport.
I quote from your letter: “One of the brethren stated that these laws of the law covenant applied only to the nation of Israel. I emphatically disagreed with his thought.” You also disagree with the apostle Paul, and I must take it that the apostle is right and you are wrong. God gave the law to his covenant people, the Jews, and to nobody else. He specified certain animals that were clean
'ERS
and unclean. That applied specifically to the Jews and not to anyone else. At Ephesians 2:15 the apostle declares that the Lord Jesus abolished in his flesh the enmity, the law and commandments contained in the ordinances. In 1 Timothy 4 the apostle, addressing all who are consecrated to do God’s will, said: “Now the spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a hot iron; forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth. For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: for it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer.” Again the apostle, addressing Christians, says of Christ that he ‘blotted out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross’. Further speaking of the terms of the law covenant the apostle said: “Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath days: which are a shadow of things to come; but the body is of Christ.”—Colossians 2:14,16,17.
You fail to see the importance of God’s commandment which was announced at the time of the making of the everlasting covenant, that “the life is in the blood” and if an animal is killed and the blood not poured out, but eaten, then the man who does it is guilty of death, for the reason that no man shall drink blood without dying. “For the life of the flesh is in the blood; and I have given it to you upon the altar to make an atonement for your souls: for it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul. Therefore I said unto the children of Israel, No soul of you shall eat blood, neither shall any stranger that sojoumeth among you eat blood.” (Lev. 17:11,12) You will see that while the strangers
February 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER,
63
were not under the law covenant at any time, they were forbidden to eat blood, which makes a clear distinction between the Jews under the law covenant and the world in general. The eating of blood and the eating of swine are entirely different propositions. I see no reason why anyone should hold that ham and bacon are unclean, because there is no scripture applying to Christians making it such, and, of course, the same rule applies to the Jonadabs. If, therefore, you are still of the opinion that it is wrong to eat pork, ham or bacon, I wouldn’t do it. It would not be well to violate your conscience by partaking of such kind of food. I am sure you are not violating the commandment of the Lord.
With much love and best wishes, I remain
Your brother and servant by His grace,
J. F. Rutherford.
JEHOVAH’S PROVISIONS FOR HIS PEOPLE
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Jehovah’s provisions for his people and the manifestation of his abotmding love fill our hearts with gratitude. We, the company of God’s people and witnesses of Jehovah to the number of 250, assembled for the first time at St. Louis, this 2d day of October, according to the new organization instructions of Jehovah’s theocratic government, recognize our obligations and privileges and rejoice that the way has been opened up for us to declare our Almighty God’s most worthy name among the people.
Brother Rutherford, happy is our privilege to be fighting shoulder to shoulder with you in the mighty army of our Lord, under the Valiant Warrior, Christ Jesus. Joyful indeed to participate in his organization, now more closely-knit and better equipped to ‘carry the battle to the gate’.
Your recent talks are so clear-cut and positive a determination of your stand for Jehovah and his kingdom, and thus enthuse us as we see the unfolding drama leading to the finality of the vindication of the name of Jehovah. We thank and extol him who blesses us so! Likewise your denunciation of the present-day wicked monstrosity fills us with righteous indignation, a “perfect hatred” of this “totalitarian-state religion”. Praise God that soon it shall fall, nevermore to rise!
We, therefore, rejoice to have a part in the service of Jehovah’s kingdom, and desire that ‘of the increase of our portion therein, there shall be no end’. That this may be so under the approval of our God, we each pledge to him to avail ourselves of all the opportunities to serve him, henceforth even for ever!
Jehovah sustain and comfort you increasingly in his love, is our prayer. Be assured always of our deepest love for you.
Jehovah’s witnesses of Missouri Zone No. 2
RESOLUTION
Dear Brother Rutherford:
In order that our spirits may be more firmly knit together in united service to our King, the following resolution was proposed and unanimously adopted at the instance of our first meeting as a separate unit.
RESOLUTION
We, the Brooklyn Colored Unit of Jehovah’s witnesses, having met in our first service assembly, and having together considered Organization Instructions of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government, hereby pledge and declare—
That we recognize Jehovah as the Supreme One who directs all the forces of his organization to the accomplishment of his own will, and regarding our kingdom interests as above every other issue in life, we now solemnly rededicate ourselves to the full and unreserved devotion to his service, and, by his grace, to render unfaltering obedience to all instructions of the Society;
That we shall for ever put aside all selfishness or personal feelings in any matter, to the end that we may in unity and peace diligently care for and safeguard the interest of the Kingdom committed to us;
That in our assigned territory we shall faithfully execute our responsibility of delivering Jehovah’s message of warning, and shall endeavor to so labor that we may be as a ‘city set on a hill’ serving as a beacon to direct the “other sheep” to the kingdom;
That in the fight in which we are now engaged we shall fully trust in the Lord for strength and courage to boldly press the battle to the finish of the enemy.
Resolved, that a copy hereof be forwarded to Brother Rutherford with the expression of our love because of his courageous stand against the enemy, and noble example of faithfulness.
PROVISION JEHOVAH HAS MADE
Dear Brother Rutherford:
The Youngstown [Ohio] company of Jehovah’s witnesses assembled at their regular service meeting, desire to convey to you their Christian love and express their appreciation and enthusiasm for the provision Jehovah has made in his Theocratic Government under the new zone arrangement.
A very noticeable increase in zeal, enthusiasm, service activity, and attendance at the meetings, has been apparent since the introduction of this new arrangement; and we look forward with anticipation to a great influx of people of good will in the coming months.
Praying that Jehovah’s rich blessing may be upon you, and assuring you of our wholehearted co-operation, we remain
Yours in Kingdom service,
Youngstown [Ohio] company of Jehovah’s witnesses.
(Continued from page 50)
tower appears, at its regular magazine rate; hence this four-month campaign is a world-wide one. Every reader of The Watchtower who appreciates its real value and the dire need of all people of good will today for its spiritual food will without urging desire to take part in this campaign. If not already in touch with the Society’s service organization, write this office and make arrangements for the campaign. A monthly report is expected of each publisher. Consult the Informant for all details hereon.
YEAR BOOK FOR 1939
The Year Book for 1939 is not only a detailed and comprehensive record of world activities of Jehovah’s witnesses during the past year, but also a compendium of information of the most up-to-date development, and hence useful and necessary for all active publishers to have as a ready reference now. This has all been prepared by the president of the Society. Also, there is his comment on the 1939 year text, and a daily text and comment for
every day of the year, said comments being drawn from The Watchtower. Every active Kingdom publisher and all seeking the way to Zion should be equipped with this new Year Book. As the edition is limited, thus enhancing the cost of production, the contribution of 50c is asked for per copy.
1939 CALENDAR
The year text for 1939 is timely: “But they shall not prevail against thee.” (Jer. 1:19) That those on the side of Jehovah and his King and kingdom may conveniently have this strengthening promise daily before their attention during 1939 this text is featured on the Society’s new calendar and accompanied by a beautiful three-color picture showing in symbolic style the thrilling fulfillment of the promise to the modern Jeremiah class and their companions. Underneath appears the president’s letter setting out the united service periods for 1939, a ready reference for kingdom publishers. The calendar pad shows the dates thereof. Remit, with order, at 25c each, or $1.00 for five to one address.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
PHONOGRAPH LOANING
"The following experience lays emphasis upon the importance of following the oft-repeated suggestion of the Informant, that a phonograph and discs be loaned to interested persons, so they may play the talks at their own convenience for their family and invited guests. Immediately after beginning the recorded lecture series ‘Hypocrisy Exposed’ more than a year ago, one of the meetings arranged in the Greater New York territory was attended by a man whose avocation now happens to be operating a gas station. Subsequently a kingdom publisher called upon him in following up a reference, and he gladly consented to accept the proffer of the loan of a machine and a supply of records, to use whenever suitable to play them to persons that came to the station and remained for any length of time. He had many interesting experiences. Result: One member of that phonograph ‘audience’ at the gas station is now a full-fledged publisher himself, and regularly uses a phonograph of his own in house-to-house work and on back calls. However, the present circumstances of the gas-station operator still confine his own activities with the phonograph to the numerous opportunities he has to use it for those who make up his ever-changing audience at the gas station. During the past week he played ‘Face the Facts’ to 21 persons.”
DOG GOES ROUND THE CITY NEAR TRIPOLI
"Sunday the 31st of October we went in the service to the village of Minzara, accompanied by the sound truck which we have acquired lately, and in the usual manner the friends were scattered through the town. Some of the friends met the bishop and his retinue in one of the houses, and, of course, the message was given to all present, including the bishop. In the course of conversation the bishop remarked: ‘May the Lord enlighten you.’ The friends went out, and after a little while we met an official who has a certain right of collecting a certain percentage of everything sold in that town. He thought our work was a commercial one, so he insisted on holding up the work or our paying the amount due him on the price of the books. So we insisted on seeing the chief, because we told him that our work is preaching the gospel and does not come under that category. On our facing the chief, he said, ‘I understand that you sell books in the town.’ But we convinced him to the contrary. In an antechamber the bishop was hiding. The chief asked and said: ‘Is it true that you give these books free and without sale to everyone who is unable to procure it with money?’ We said, ‘Yes.’ So he said, ‘I am poor and unable to contribute for one; may I have one?’ We gave him a book upon request. When that was done, he said: ‘That is all. You may go.’ We then went out and completed our work. We were informed by others afterwards that the bishop was the instigator of all this. Since the Devil is the god of this world, it matters not whether in America or in Lebanon, his work is one, namely, to frustrate the Lord’s work. Thank the Lord, that is impossible!”
PATIENCE IN BACK-CALLING REWARDED
"One woman took six bound books during that special period [August-September]. Later she attended our meeting ; after which I did not sec her again; although I repeatedly called at her home, I was never able to meet her. Finally, last week, 1 found the place empty, inquired of her
neighbors, was told she had been sick, was evicted, but had left her address. Yesterday I called at new address and found her at home, and reading the books. Mentioning to her that I was specially anxious to see her, as I heard she had had much trouble, she told me: ‘Yes, I surely have had plenty of trouble, and if it had not been for those wonderful books I do not know how I could have gone through it all. These books contain the truth, and the Lord sent them to me just on time. I am through with religion and will follow the truth now.’ This experience teaches me that it pays to have patience in following up back calls.”
WITHIN LITERAL PRISON WALLS
"On the 15th [of November] we had the privilege of telling the glad message of the kingdom to some prisoners in the Arizona state prison. There were 38 prisoners and two officials of the prison present. . . . The warden told us we would have to take up the matter of holding a service in the prison with the chaplain, who is the minister of the Christian church. We were very much surprised to find that man, (Rev.) -------, very open-minded, and he gladly
made arrangements for us to hold a meeting in the chapel. We went to the prison about an hour earlier than they expected us, and during that time I talked to the librarian about placing a set of our books in the prison library. He discouraged that idea for the reason, so he said, that the prison financial condition is bad, and he could not get appropriations for school books for the prisoners. Well, in the course of my talk with him, he told me that he is a Presbyterian minister. He asked me what Brother Rutherford teaches regarding immortality of the soul. I told him that Jehovah’s witnesses teach just what the Bible tells us to teach, and that Brother Rutherford, as one of Jehovah’s witnesses, is bound to teach the truth according to the Bible. Mr.-------then asked me why it is that we do not
teach the same as the clergymen of all the denominations do, naming about half a dozen of them. I then asked him if the mere fact that the preachers all teach the immortality doctrine is proof that such doctrine is true. He made no reply. He later attended the meeting, during which two records were played. . . . Several of the prisoners expressed their appreciation of the talk. One man in particular was deeply interested, and seemed to be as well acquainted with the Scriptures used as I was. Another man, sitting near the first, was busy writing down on a piece of wrapping paper the scriptures used. Another came up after the talk was finished and expressed his appreciation of the message very enthusiastically. Another asked if ‘those books are in the library now’. (I had, after being turned down in my attempt to have the State pay for the books, presented the librarian with 12 of them: 11 English, and 1 Spanish Riches.) I told the man that they were already in the library, and he was overjoyed to learn that and headed for the library right away. Both the wardcu and his assistant treated us kindly, as did both the preachers, the prison chaplain as well as the local Christian minister, and the librarian; also the inside guard captain, the man who took us into the prison and stayed with us during the meeting. I am not sure whether the Catholic pulpit worm knows about us, but he sure does look cross whenever I meet him on the street.”
CT
IW

V: •(•/','
iitf
v tV ‘ W? ” •'' ’
r >	*-'•	A-1-*''J
^W*»3
!•**’><,z '’*- ?r«rincy<r^n'»,<*y^JhJ'/*TA3«
rn&t’ 4^



^iSSil





s

%

JayjS-AM,







;w^


H»Bg8aSatsaS2etf» »<	* • ih£n
■WATCHTOWfp.
2^


!*«;
F
4i
z- ^SzgrS'1
RWIMtat
KWiW
iMi
aSfefcO
sox-X
K3!
«PJ
•P-K
>«S
They shall know that lam Jehovah.”
-Ezekiel 35:15.
Vol. LX
Semimonthly
No. 5
*»#

4
1

%&
r^t
J M

X
SH£

! j



I
2
■r
?«$
MARCH 1, 1939
w
&
CONTENTS
&
■fflg
ft >
't:,
£
I

I




aga-r*
gw
jj’

.f?
4$

Drama or Vindication (Part 3) His Witnesses................
Witness Work_______________
Another Witness___—________
Laws_________________________
67
71
72
74
77
<4’
Kingdom Blessings Manifold (Letter) .... 79
fc £

i >•' ,‘. f
it
MS
r

uh'

f.
</
Field Experiences.............
“New Heavens” Testimony Period “Fascism ob Freedom"__________
“Watchtower” Studies__________
Memorial______________________
“Watchtoweb” Campaign_________
“Watchtower” Binder___________
...80 ... 66 ...66 ... 66 ...66 ... 79 ..79
&
?
.1
•t



5
gg
&
Ui
mmeri

THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street »	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
officers
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburoh, Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13-
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS Journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction speclllcnlly designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. AtneriCHn remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ..................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian...................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian............ 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African .........._......Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please addiess the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with tlio journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1819.
“NEW HEAVENS” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The “New Heavens” Testimony Period will cover April, the final month of the current “Watchtower” campaign. A special feature of this period will be the release of the new booklet Fascism or Freedom. The details regarding the extensive worldwide campaign therewith will appear in the regular service paper Informant, to guide you in your plans for as large a part as possible in the special activities of this period. All persons not already in active co-operation with the service organization but who are interested in the proclamation of the kingdom of the heavens are invited to write the Watch Tower for information about the local company organization of Jehovah’s witnesses.
“FASCISM OR FREEDOM”
In a world threatened by the totalitarian monstrosity and blinded to the rightful theocratic government, this new booklet, Fascism or Freedom, appears as most timely information for all people of good will. Under a forceful cover illustration the 64 pages of this booklet set forth the nationally broadcast speech by Judge Rutherford at his last public appearance in New York city, together with a masterly article on “Theocracy”. You may obtain your personal copy now, on remittance of a contribution at 5c
a copy. Time of release of Fascism or Freedom for general distribution is announced elsewhere.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of April 2: "Drama of Vindication," (Part 3) fl 1-16 inclusive, The Watchtower March 1, 1939.
Week of April 9: “Drama of Vindication,” (Part 3) fl 17-34 inclusive, The Watchtower March 1,1939.
Week of April 16: “Drama of Vindication,” (Part 3) fl 35-55 inclusive, The Watchtower March 1,1939.
MEMORIAL
For the year 1939 the date for the feast in celebration of the name of Jehovah and to the sacrifice of his Vindicator, Christ Jesus the Lamb of God, is Tuesday, April 4, after six p.m. Let each company, therefore, assemble after six p.m. of April 4, and the anointed thereof celebrate the Memorial, their companions the Jonadabs being present as observers. The emblems should lie unleavened bread and real red wine. The Lord and his apostles used real red wine in symbol of his blood, and the anointed remnant (Continued on page 79)
ANNOUNCING
You LX
JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
March 1, 1939
No. 5
DRAMA OF VINDICATION
PART 3
"Fear not; for 1 have redeemed [delivered] thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine." —Isa. 43:1.
TEHOVAH had expressed Lis purpose to have his I name declared throughout all the earth before J exercising his power to destroy the enemy. (Exod. 9:16) His purpose must be performed in due time. It is to be expected that Jehovah will select his witnesses and use them to declare his name throughout all the earth and that such selection would be done and the witnesses would be given their proper name by Jehovah before beginning the final witness just preceding the fall of Satan’s organization. In the drama of vindication there was done at the Jordan river a miraculous thing showing that Jehovah selects his own witnesses, gives them their new and proper name, commissions them to do their work, and sends them forth to perform the work previously purposed by him. After this is done, the revelation of these great truths to his people is another means of giving them strength and further shows that “whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope”. (Rom. 15:4) These great truths now revealed to the remnant not only give them great comfort and joy, but also furnish food from the table of the Lord to the Jonadabs, who will compose the “great multitude”, and upon which food they must now feed while they sing the praises of the Most High and his King. The Jonadabs are now seeing and appreciating these truths and greatly rejoicing. All the witness work must be done without reference to fear of man or any creature.
*	The Israelites, in obedience to the command of the Lord given to them by their visible leader Joshua, had left their tents and had lined up for the march to the waters of the raging Jordan. It was the harvest time, and the Jordan was full. The Israelites must be very courageous and faithfully obey instructions. “And it came to pass, when the people removed from their tents, to pass over Jordan, and the priests bearing the ark of the covenant before the people.”—Josh. 3:14.
*	Referring now to the fulfillment of this part of
the drama: It was in the year 1922 that such fulfillment began. Preceding that time God’s covenant people were in a state of comparative inactivity in the service of the Lord, and that was pictured by the typical people of God resting in their tents just preceding receiving the order to move from their tents toward the Jordan. Leaving their tents “to pass over [the] Jordan” foretold that Jehovah’s modern-day servants must enter upon their heritage, that is, must promote the kingdom interests and must go out after the enemies of the Lord and wipe out their religious domination of the promised kingdom, which the religious institutions wrongfully claim; that they must meet all opposition, exercising full faith and confidence in the Lord Jehovah and his King. There was an assembly in convention of God’s covenant people at Cedar Point, Ohio, in the year 1922, which marks the beginning of the energetic activity of those fully devoted to God and his King, and which marks the beginning of the march to the Jordan antitypically.
*	The priests of Israel, performing their part in the drama, carried the ark of the covenant upon their shoulders to the Jordan. They advanced to the point on the banks of the Jordan doubtless at the same location where later Elisha with the mantle of Elijah smote the waters of that river and was then miraculously taken over the river. When the Israelites moved to the Jordan it was the harvest time and the river was very high, as is usually the case at that season of the year. Its waters were rushing madly down to the Dead sea. “And as they that bare the ark were come unto Jordan, and the feet of the priests that bare the ark were dipped in the brim of the water, (for Jordan overfloweth all his banks all the time of harvest).”—Josh. 3:15.
8 In the fulfillment of this part of the drama, as it appears from the well-known facts, the point of peculiar interest was reached on September 8, 1922, when the announcement was first publicly made that the Lord Christ Jesus was at his temple, and that the time had come when his servants must advertise
68
file WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the King and the kingdom. (Mal. 3:1; Isa. 6:1-8) It was a time of great joy and manifested zeal on the part of those there assembled. It was a turning point in the events of their march to the kingdom.
• The dramatic picture shows the priests of Israel bearing the ark of the covenant upon their shoulders, and there at the river their bare feet “were dipped in the brim of the water”. The fulfillment of this part of the picture occurred when God’s people, assembled in convention, as above stated, responded to the call to advertise the King and his kingdom, and with a shout said, in effect, “Here am I; send me.”—Isa. 6: 8.
’ Promptly thereafter the zealous ones went forward right in amongst the people (pictured by the waters of the river) and, as publishers of Jehovah’s kingdom by Christ Jesus, they began the work of advertising the kingdom and its King. It was at that time that the message, which proved to be the first of the “seven last plagues”, in the form of a proclamation known as “The Challenge”, was adopted. The fact that the Jordan river was full up to its brim, or top of its banks, is significant. The waters were swift and deep, which would make it appear to be impossible to cross the river at that point, there being no bridge or ferry. Added to the thrill that this situation would produce we must have in mind that the watchmen on the walls of Jericho could plainly see the approaching Israelites and therefore the enemy, seeing the high river between them and the Israelites, would feel safe from any possible attack that could succeed. That part of the dramatic picture, which the facts clearly show, was also fulfilled on time. It was in 1922 that Ratti became Pope Pius XI; that Fascism was in control in Italy; that the Union of the Soviet Bolshevik Republics was being completed; that democracies were disappearing from the earth; and that economical conditions continued to grow worse; the time that the “evil servant” class became active against the faithful servants of the Lord; and that all these elements here named were against Jehovah’s witnesses. All these people, like the raging waters of the Jordan, confronted God’s people. It was the time to go amongst the people and boldly give the witness to the kingdom. Although such work seemed to be practically impossible, it was a time particularly to go to the people with the Lord’s “seven last plagues” contained in the “seven golden vials full of the wrath of. God”. (Rev. 15:1,7,8) It was God’s due time for the work to be done, and it must be done in the midst of much opposition and hindrance. Jehovah had foretold the time in the prophetic drama, and his faithful servants must act, relying entirely upon the Lord. Thus it is seen that great faith was required of the Israelites to
march to the Jordan, and likewise full faith and confidence in Jehovah and his King must be had and exercised by his faithful servants in the fulfillment of this part of the drama in going amongst the people with the message of the kingdom then due. There the Israelites could not possibly know that Jehovah was about to perform a miracle in taking them across the raging waters of the Jordan. Likewise in the fulfillment, the faithful servants of God could not possibly know what would be the result to them when engaging in the campaign against the entrenched enemy, particularly the religious elements angry against them, and their anger supported and indulged in by the political elements of the world. Jehovah had told Joshua to be “very courageous”, and Joshua had said to the people: “The Lord will do wonders among you.” Likewise Christ Jesus had said to his followers concerning the enemy: “Fear them not.” The League of Nations had been formed, and the Devil had taken advantage of the fear of men to form the same. God had said to his people: “Neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid. Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread." (Isa. 8:12,13) In 1922 the antitypical march to the antitypical Jordan began, and from 1922 to this day those who have fully trusted in the Lord have gone forward without fear of man or devil, fearing only God, and trusting implicitly in him and in the Greater Joshua.
8	The priests of the Israelites with the ark of the covenant were on the east side of the Jordan, and the waters flowing down came from the north, or on the right side of the priests. “And it came to pass . . . that the waters which came down from above stood and rose up upon an heap very far from the city Adam, that is beside Zaretan: and those that came down toward the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, failed, and were cut off: and the people passed over right against Jericho.”—Josh. 3:14,16.
9	Jehovah then and there performed a great miracle, holding back the swift waters of the Jordan so that the water above the priests stood up beside Zaretan, which was approximately two thousand cubits or more than a half a mile north or on the right of the priests, and thus allowed a very broad and liberal space for the people of Israel to pass over and cross the river-bed, which now was made dry. The waters coming down from the north, and caused by the Lord to stand up in a wall, pictured the people of good will who hear and give heed to what the Lord is doing. In the fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama, also, Jehovah performs a miracle. War began in heaven and on the earth in 1914. (Rev. 11:17,18; 12:1-12) Those days of
March 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
69
tribulation Jehovah shortened by an enforced peace period in the middle of the trouble. None of the nations knew why the Lord stopped the war, in 1918, but the Lord knew. He was performing a miracle which was foreshadowed by the miracle made at the Jordan. In that period of peacetime or cessation of hostilities the Lord, by sending forth his message of warning to the people of good will, held them up or held them back from the irresistible rush of distressed humanity rushing toward the Dead Sea of Armageddon. Except for that great miracle, as Jesus stated, “there should no flesh be saved; but for the elect’s sake those days shall be [were] shortened.”—Matt. 24:22.
10	The miracle was provided that the faithful remnant might be permitted to carry Jehovah’s message to the people of good will, which people of good will alone shall survive Armageddon. Thus Jehovah performed that miracle “for the elect’s sake”, that they might prove their integrity by carrying his message to the “other sheep” of the Lord. To those of good will toward God there was afforded the opportunity of turning away from being swallowed up in the sea of destruction that was pictured by the Dead sea, which represents Armageddon. The priests were carrying the ark of the covenant on their shoulders. The waters of the Jordan (picturing the people) were separated on the north, or on the right side of the priests and of the ark of the covenant, which represented the presence of Jehovah. That ark of the covenant was the throne for the “Sheki-nah light” of Jehovah, when in the tabernacle or temple. Now on the shoulders of the priests in the bed of the Jordan river it pictured favors for the Lord’s “other sheep”, who will compose the “great multitude”. (Rev. 7:9-17) The presence of the Lord was there manifested for their good as well as for the elect’s sake.
11	The miracle further shows that only those of good will and who will compose the “great multitude” will survive Armageddon, in this, as it is written: “And those [waters, picturing people] that came down toward the sea of the plain, even the salt [Dead] sea, failed, and were cut off”; thus picturing the “goat” class of the people, which Jesus has declared shall be everlastingly cut off at Armageddon. (Matt. 25:46, Diaglott) The waters, standing on the north and forming a great wall of protection, shows the people of good will that are spared at Armageddon; while the waters on the south of the priests, which disappeared and were completely swallowed up in the Dead sea, show that those who fall into Armageddon go into a place where there is no life. Thus it is shown that the great mass of humanity rushes unhindered and unchecked and entirely heedless to all warning, down the great broad
way, and the end of which is everlasting cutting off, the fate previously decreed by the Lord concerning the “goat” class. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the leading institution under the sun, is particularly shown here.
12	The point of crossing of the Jordan is of great interest to those who love God. The location was called Beth-barah (Judg. 7:24), and means “House of the Ford or Passage”. It was on the east side of the Jordan at this point that John was baptizing the repentant Israelites. “These things were done in Beth-abara beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing.” (John 1:28) It was there, when baptizing, that he saw Jesus coming and said: “Behold, the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world.” Doubtless there is where Jesus was baptized and where the holy spirit descended upon him like a dove and a voice from heaven announced him as well-pleasing to Jehovah. (Matt. 3:16,17) There the baptism of Jesus symbolically said that for the vindication of Jehovah’s name and for the redemption of the obedient ones of mankind he sacrificed every human thing or interest and that those of good will toward his Father Jehovah might find life; and that those who would refuse to give heed to the warning, and who spurned Jehovah’s gracious provision, should never see life.—John 3:36.
13	The name Beth-barah or “House of Passage or Ford” evidently means that at times the river Jordan, at this point, was fordable. It may be that this indicates that from the time of the apostles until the coming of Christ Jesus, the King, those faithful unto death would pass unhindered over the Jordan, escaping destruction, and, like Paul, wait for the coming of the Lord, when he would receive the crown of life. (2 Tim. 4:8) But at the coming of the Lord to the temple the waters of the Jordan (that is, the people), full to the brink, would be rushing madly on in disregard of and in defiance of Jehovah God and his provisions for them; that there and then the faithful remnant would pass over the Jordan into the kingdom conditions only by the miraculous grace of Jehovah God, and that the “great multitude”, made up of those of good will toward God, fully trusting in the shed blood of Christ Jesus and devoting themselves to God and his King, would be shielded and protected, and would find life, while others of the human race rushed on to Armageddon, the sea of the dead and destruction.
14	The city of Jericho, the fortified abode of the enemy, was only about six miles west of the banks of the Jordan. Those on the walls of the city, looking eastward, could without doubt see across the plain and observed the miraculous crossing of the river by the Israelites. They would know that only
70
THE WATCHTOWER.
by the power of Almighty God was it possible for the Israelites to cross dry-shod over that river-bed. That miracle would strike terror into the hearts of the enemy as they watched from the walls, and their fear would be transmitted to the people beyond the walls waiting for the oncoming attack. Likewise in the fulfillment of this part of the drama since 1922 the miraculous blessings bestowed by the Lord upon the faithful witnesses and the boldness and fearlessness of that faithful servant class in going forward with the message of the kingdom have greatly astonished the entrenched enemy, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and have struck terror into their hearts. Never before have men made such a determined and continuous witness against that wicked religious organization as has been given since 1922 against the Devil’s chief representative on earth, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. The words of the apostle seem peculiarly fitting just here, namely: “Never for a moment quail before your antagonists. Your fearlessness will be to them a sure token of impending destruction, but to you it will be a sure token of your salvation—a token coming from God.”—Phil. 1:28, Weymouth.
” Rahab, because of her faith in God and in her agreement with the spies, would be watching from her house on the walls of Jericho, hoping that the coming of Jehovah’s covenant people would mean deliverance and salvation for herself and those of her household. Her hope was realized. Rahab pictured those persons of good will who sigh and cry because of the abominations that they have long observed in the religious organizations, particularly in the Roman Catholic institution, and who have looked with hope for deliverance and salvation with the coming of Jehovah’s anointed.—Ezek. 9:4.
16 Furthermore, concerning the fulfillment of the prophetic drama, the crossing of the anti typical Jordan by the faithful servants of Jehovah God, which began in 1922 with the convention at Cedar Point, Ohio, was also the time when Jehovah's spirit of anointing was poured out on all flesh. (Joel 2: 28) There the anointed were commissioned by the Lord as his witnesses to begin the pouring out of the “seven last plagues” upon the enemy, and which poured-out messages have frightened and tormented the enemy, particularly the religious element, since that time, the same being to them a token of impending destruction, and concerning which they have howled and cried out: “It shocks our religious susceptibilities.” Conditions existing among the religious and political rulers of the earth fully support the foregoing conclusions; and here a statement published at that time by the public press is of interest: “With Mustapha Kemal thundering at the gates of Constantinople, demanding the return
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of the Dardanelles’ control to Turkey, while the British lion is rushing her warrior breed to the Golden Horn, with the revolutionary spirit of ‘red’ Russia threatening to Bolshevikize all Europe, with the American public murmuring fiercely at atrociously high prices of coal and other necessities caused in part by two costly national strikes, it is interesting to note what one of the largest and most active Christian organizations in the world thinks of this crisis in history. Upwards of 20,000 ardent churchmen attended the meetings of the International Bible Students Association at Cedar Point, Ohio, during its recent convention. That they are disgusted with the morals and spirit of our world, statesmen and even the ways of the League of Nations is obvious in their unanimous resolution on world affairs. We submit that, regardless of what the individual reader may think of its philosophy, the ensuing resolution deserves incorporation in history as a vivid reflection of what many of our churchmen think of these times. What a documentary study it affords for psychologists—this modern discourse on that eternal duel between God and Satan! How we would like to note the expressions of Lloyd George, Clemenceau, Venizelos, Lenin, Hughes or Root could we but see them reading the resolution.” (The Bridgeport, Connecticut, Herald) Although the religionists as well as others of Connecticut have been duly warned, they rush on with increased madness toward Armageddon, indulging in more rabid action toward the servants of Jehovah God.
” The Israelites were God’s covenant people, and the priests that served in the office were the servants of Jehovah by his appointment. (Lev. 7:35) Bearing the ark of the covenant on their shoulders, they represented Jehovah God’s presence amongst his covenant people. To be faithful, they must trust Jehovah implicitly and be obedient to his commandment given to them through Joshua, and so they must march into the middle or bed of the river and there stand firm. “And the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord stood firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan, and all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people were passed clean over Jordan.”—Josh. 3:17.
18 After the priests reached the river and dipped their feet into the water (the river was then raging and it could not be forded by them), Jehovah then made the waters separate and the priests marched into and stood in the midst of the river on dry ground, while there stood above them a great wall of water held back by the miraculous power of Jehovah. There they must be faithful. Exercising full faith in the continuing restraining power of Jehovah, they must know that the
March 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
71
flodd waters of the Jordan river could never overwhelm God’s ark of his presence, and, believing and knowing this, there they firmly stood while the hosts of Israel marched over the bed of the river between them and the wall of water. All of the Israelites, crossing the Jordan under those conditions, must exercise full faith in the power of Jehovah God. The Jordan valley, with its waters above standing in a great wall, well pictures the valley of the shadow of death through which God’s covenant people thereafter must pass: “Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death [by Satan and his servants], I will fear no evil; for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.”—Ps. 23:4.
HIS WITNESSES
12	In the fulfillment of the prophetic drama at this point, mark Jehovah’s faithful servants beginning their march over the bed of the river in antitype, and which began in the year 1922. How truly the words of Jehovah apply to them at this point! “Fear not; for I have redeemed [delivered] thee. I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. For I am the Lord thy God.”—Isa. 43:1-3.
20	In the fulfillment Jehovah was bringing his covenant people across the Jordan into the kingdom conditions, there to be his witnesses and to declare his name and his kingdom before Armageddon; and to them he further says: “Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant, whom I have chosen; that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he; before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me. I, even I, am the Lord; and beside me there is no saviour. I have declared, and have saved, and I have shewed, when there was no strange god among you; therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, that I am God.”—Isa. 43:10-12.
21	The miraculous deliverance of the Israelites from the flood waters of the Jordan made a name for Jehovah, and to them his name therefore was famous. Likewise the bringing of his “faithful servant” class across the antitypical Jordan into the kingdom conditions, and anointing them as his witnesses, made famous the name of Jehovah amongst those who believe on him. To his faithful servants he gave a “new name”, as he had promised: “And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory; and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name.” (Isa. 62:2) And that name is “Jehovah’s witnesses”.
Thus Jehovah does to “make himself an everlasting name”.—Isa. 63:12.
22	It appears that practically the entire day was occupied in taking the multitude of Israelites across the river; as it is written: “And all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people were passed clean over [the] Jordan.” That would include the “mixed multitude” (Exod. 12: 37, 38), all of which God took over or across the Jordan, before sundown, on the tenth day of Nisan. In the fulfillment of this part of the prophetic picture that “day” covered a much longer period of time. That period of time in the fulfillment began in 1922 and continued until the end of the year 1931 inclusive, by which time all the faithful servants of the Lord, that is, the “laborers” in the Lord’s “vineyard”, had been brought into the service among the people (pictured by the Jordan waters), and these servants were there paid the “penny” by receiving at the hands of the Lord the “new name”. (Matt. 20:1-16; Isa. 62:2) Experiencing the miraculous protection of Jehovah in bringing them through the waters alive, they were then Jehovah’s witnesses and to them Jehovah said, and still says: “Ye are my witnesses ... that I am God.” From that time on they must fulfill their commission by bearing testimony to others of and concerning Jehovah, his name, his purpose, his King, and his kingdom.
23	The “mixed multitude” had been marching with the Israelites, which included the Midianites, Moses' father-in-law and others. (Num. 10:29-32; 11:4) That “mixed multitude” must have been with the Israelites at the Jordan, since it is written that ‘all the people crossed clean over the Jordan’. The “mixed multitude” must have gone over with the others. That “mixed multitude” pictured those who compose the “great multitude”, which began to be made known first in 1931. It was in that year at the London convention, and at the Columbus (Ohio) convention the same year, that the Lord caused his people of good will to be identified as those described in the ninth chapter of Ezekiel as the ones who must be marked in the forehead that they might be spared at Armageddon, which marking the remnant must do. This seems clearly to indicate, as to the fulfillment, that the remnant of spiritual Israel had by the latter part of 1931 gotten clear and safely over Jordan by proving themselves faithful to Jehovah up to that point, and this they did by their faithful, true and zealous service of the King and kingdom. The sign of their approval was the revelation to them of the “new name”, that is, the paying of the “penny” which Jehovah had given them. (See The Watchtower 1931, page 279.) All of such now, who had passed over the antitypical Jordan, must be witnesses to the name of Jehovah.
72
THE WATCHTOWER,
WITNESS WORK
24	As appears from Joshua 3:12, Joshua, under the direction of the Lord, had selected twelve men to perform certain duties, and while the host of Israel was passing over the Jordan those twelve men were, together with the priests bearing the ark of the covenant, standing in the midst of the river-bed, the twelve men standing at a respectful distance behind the priests. The priests must stand firm on dry ground in the midst of the river-bed, and the twelve men at their position there were awaiting orders from Joshua. And now the time had come for these orders to be given and executed. “And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over Jordan, that the Lord spake unto Joshua, saying, Take you twelve men out of the people, out of every tribe a man.”—Josh. 4:1, 2.
24	There were twelve tribes of the Israelites, and the twelve men there selected for special service represented the twelve tribes respectively; hence all the tribes of the Israelites were represented. At Jehovah’s command Joshua must deliver the order: “And command ye them, saying, Take you hence out of the midst of Jordan, out of the place where the priests’ feet stood firm, twelve stones; and ye shall carry them over with you, and leave them in the lodging place where ye shall lodge this night.”—Josh. 4:3.
26	The miracle performed by Jehovah in holding back the waters, and where the river-bed remained dry, made it possible for this order to be carried out by picking up from the river-bed, at the very deepest part thereof, twelve big stones. Such a thing would be impossible when the water was rapidly flowing down at that point. To pick up those big stones and carry them out of the river-bed required some real labor, which pictured some real zeal and work that must be done by Jehovah’s witnesses after they came into the condition of their kingdom inheritance. Those twelve big stones must be carried out and piled up in a place where the Israelites were lodged that night, which place was called Gilgal, and which place Joshua afterwards used as headquarters during the conquest of Canaan. The twelve stones embraced in this command had a particular significance, which is shown by the use to which the stones were put.
2T	Since the entire number of each of twelve tribes was shown representatively in the twelve men, this shows that all of the anointed of the Lord must participate in his witness work: “Then Joshua called the twelve men whom he had prepared of the children of Israel, out of every tribe a man : and Joshua said unto them, Pass over before the ark of the Lord your God into the midst of Jordan, and take you up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder, accord
Bbooklyn, N. Y.
ing unto the number of the tribes of the children of Israel.”—Josh. 4:4,5.
28	The fact that each man had to carry a stone on his shoulder shows that they were large stones requiring real work. Had they been small stones they would have carried them in their hands. The carrying out of those stones pictures the activity or work of witnessing that was performed by the remnant during the years 1922 to 1931 inclusive, and which witness work was done at the command of the Greater Joshua, Christ Jesus. God’s faithful and zealous witnesses during that period of time can all bear testimony to the fact that their witnessing work has been strenuous, requiring zeal and energy; which is illustrated by a heavy stone on the shoulder.
22	Jehovah’s miracle performed that permitted the crossing of the Jordan, being of great importance, must not be left without a visible proof thereof, and hence there must be a lasting and authentic record made and kept of the same; and therefore the purpose the stones performed in this picture is shown by the following, to wit: “That this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean ye by these stones? then ye shall answer them, That the waters of Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of the Lord; when it passed over Jordan, the waters of Jordan were cut off; and these stones shall be for a memorial unto the children of Israel for ever.”—Josh. 4:6,7.
80	God’s kingdom is symbolized by “The Stone”, Christ Jesus the King. The remnant are in line for the kingdom, and by the Word of God they are designated as living stones. (1 Peter 2:5) The pile of twelve stones taken from the bed of the river and piled up at Gilgal constituted “a sign among you”, that is, in the fulfillment, to the remnant, to wit, (1) testifying of their engagement in active service in the years 1922 to 1931, which service required great zeal and was fraught with much danger; and the fact that the Lord brought these faithful ones through alive, and that they are still faithful, is a witness to his name. Therefore Jehovah’s witnesses, the faithful remnant, are themselves collectively a visible, tangible, and undeniable sign or monument of Jehovah’s miraculous work in protecting and preserving them over the Jordan, the antitypical flood, while the witnesses engaged in pouring out the Lord’s “seven last plagues”, each one of which was done in its respective year, and then pouring them all out in a compact form by setting them forth in the two books Light, published in 1930, and which books were widely distributed in 1931 and thereafter. In addition to those proclamations the remnant, in the year 1929, firmly took their stand and
Mauch 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
73
publicly declared themselves wholly for Jehovah God and Christ Jesus as the “higher powers” and, by proclamation, made it clearly to appear that the political, religious rulers of this world are not the “higher powers” mentioned in Romans 13:1. That testimony, given by Jehovah’s witnesses, put them squarely for God and his kingdom and against the Devil’s rule, and left no doubt as to their position. In addition thereto their activity was also increased in the year 1927 by the beginning of the house-to-house witness work on Sundays, which work further enraged the antitypical Jordan waters against them. In that year the arrest of Jehovah’s witnesses for preaching “this gospel of the kingdom” became general in Germany. In 1928, the year following, the arrest and persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses at the instance of the angry religious “waters” began in the United States, particularly in New Jersey, and has continued since. All these things make Jehovah’s witnesses, pictured by the pile of stone, a record and monument to the name of Jehovah. And (2) Jehovah’s witnesses not only came out of the persecution which was heaped upon them by the angry religious waters still alive and still going on in 1931 and thereafter, but brought out with them “twelve stones”, that is to say, the records made for them and against the enemy in the courts and in the legislative bodies, and in the public newspapers, which records shall stand for ever against the enemies of God and his kingdom. (Mark 13:9) The Lord has maneuvered the enemy so that they have made criminal records against his faithful witnesses, and which records stand as a monument against the enemy. The publication of the Tear Book of Jehovah’s witnesses began in 1926, and thereafter it contains records of the activity of Jehovah’s witnesses and their persecution and suffering for righteousness’ sake. All of this information served as a “sign” or lasting record, pictured by the twelve stones carried out of the river and piled up, and which public records in the antitype can be seen and consulted at any time, and which the enemy cannot now wipe out. Let no one mistake the fact that the Lord will keep a record of the persecution of his people which shall stand against the persecutors.
81	As the children of the Israelites kept alive the generation of that nation, likewise as long as Jehovah’s witnesses continue their activities on earth the record of their activities under adversity and cruel conditions forms a constant reminder to them that they are servants of the Lord. Like a pile of stones that enduring record, published of and concerning Jehovah’s witnesses, is repeatedly considered and viewed by Jehovah’s people, and the Lord causes them to go over these facts from time to
time by repeatedly revealing to them his prophecies showing that they have been permitted to have a part in the fulfillment thereof. It has been and is observed that many of the prophecies now being revealed to God's faithful people foretell the experiences through which the consecrated have passed and are passing while engaged in the witness work assigned to them. It is therefore seen that the prophetic dramas long ago performed and recorded are now revealed to the people of the Most High that they may be constantly reminded of the goodness of the Lord and of his miraculous protection and deliverance of those who love and serve him.
82	From time to time those newly interested in the Lord’s Word come to a knowledge of the truth and inquire about the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses. The Lord foretold this and directed what answer should be given to them, to wit (Josh. 4:7): “That the waters of Jordan [the angry people] were cut off before the ark of the covenant of the Lord.” Those angry people, led by religionists and fanatics, have been held back from destroying God’s people until the witness work is done, while amongst those waters held back are those of good will who find the way to protection and life. That record will be a witness until and during Armageddon that God has miraculously preserved and delivered for himself his people that maintain their integrity toward him. The miracles both in the prophetic drama and in the fulfillment thereof were performed, not to exalt any creature, but for the sake of Jehovah’s name. No creature can ever wipe out that memorial record to the honor and name of Jehovah God. It stands regardless of the efforts of the enemy.
88	As each tribe must be represented in the twelve men aforementioned, every person who is a witness for Jehovah must have a part in the work, and this is emphasized by what was done: “And the children of Israel did so as Joshua commanded, and took up twelve stones out of the midst of Jordan, as the Lord spake unto Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the children of Israel, and carried them over with them unto the place where they lodged, and laid them down there.”—Josh. 4:8.
84 They took these stones with them and piled them up at Gilgal, which name means “a circle”, which is endless, and suggests that the testimony to Jehovah’s name does not have an end and that this monument testifies and serves as a guaranty from Jehovah that his people still enjoy prosperity by God’s grace. The public record made by the activity of God’s faithful people, culminating in the bestowing upon them by Jehovah of their “new name” and the revealing the same to them, in 1931, is clear and positive proof that now God’s faithful
THE WATCHTOWER.
74
remnant are in the kingdom land or condition and that the kingdom is here, and that the enemies thereof shall be put under as a footstool and that the Lord shall triumph.—Ps. 110:1,2.
ANOTHER WITNESS
” The divine record discloses that Joshua, representing Christ Jesus, made another record in the midst of the river Jordan and, in doing so, no doubt he used the same twelve men as representatives of the twelve tribes of Israel; and concerning this it is written: “And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan, in the place where the feet of the priests which bare the ark of the covenant stood: and they are there unto this day.”—Josh. 4:9.
•• Those stones Joshua caused to be piled up right in the very middle of the bed of the river Jordan. They must have been large stones and doubtless too heavy to be carried out. When the river was at normal stage that pile of stones in the midst of the river no doubt could be seen rearing its topmost part out of the water’s surface. There were then two witnesses to Jehovah’s miracle in delivering the Israelites across the Jordan: one pile of stones at Gilgal and one in the very middle of the river-bed. This further supports the announcement by Jehovah God that at the mouth of two witnesses shall the matter be established. (Dent. 19:15) This latter testimony, pictured by the pile of stones in the river-bed, symbolically says that in this place where the feet of the priests stood, in the very midst and depths of tortured humanity, the presence and name of Jehovah God is declared by those whom he faithfully commissions to testify to his name. In fulfillment of that particular part of the drama, thus giving testimony is the vast pile or mountain of literature God’s faithful servants have piled up and delivered to the people during the years in crossing the antitypical Jordan. They have left behind them a vast heap or pile of literature which declares the name of the Most High, and these are right in the midst of the people, and the people of good will toward God have profited thereby when they see that the witness work is done not for selfish purposes but to the honor and glory of Jehovah’s name. The Year Book for 1932, pages 36 and 37, shows that during the years from 1921 to 1931 Jehovah’s witnesses had piled up a great heap to the number of 110,565,401 books, small and large, by placing them in the hands of the people; and that great number does not take into account millions of free tracts and magazines published and placed in the hands of the people. That pile of literature bearing the message of the kingdom, like the stones in the bed of the Jordan river, is “there unto this day”, although the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other
Brooklyn, N.Y. so-called “preachers” have repeatedly had public book-burnings and Hitler, the fanatical dictator, on one occasion caused fifty thousand volumes of Jehovah’s books to be publicly burned at one time. In spite of all the efforts of the enemy to destroy this monument of literature, it stands right in the midst of the people. As the waters of the Jordan went down lower from its banks the pile of stones in the midst of the river would be noticeable and the waters of the river would have to run around them and could not get them out; and this witness, or pile of literature, continues to be a testimony. As this is now being prepared for publication in The Watchtower, books, small and large, of the Watch Tower publications now in the hands of the people, and which contain the message of God, His King and kingdom, number more than two hundred and seventy million, in 78 different languages. Those books, placed in the hands of the people, are not there to honor creatures, but for the sake of Jehovah’s great name. The religionists, therefore, can never say that they had no opportunity to learn that religion is a fake and a snare of the Devil, and that God’s theocratic government is the only hope of the world. Thus is shown one reason, at least, why Jehovah has permitted such a wide distribution of the literature published by the Watch Tower during the past few years. That pile, pictured by the stones in the middle of the river, continues to rear its head and proclaim the honor and the name and the power of Jehovah God and his King. The same should be and is a great encouragement and comfort, both to the remnant and to the Jonadabs.
37	Jehovah made it clear that he is the power that saved the Israelites. No human power could have caused that wall of the river to stand up there until they got across, and this is shown by the following: “For the priests which bare the ark stood in the midst of Jordan, until every thing was finished that the Lord commanded Joshua to speak unto the people, according to all that Moses commanded Joshua; and the people hasted and passed over.”—Josh. 4:10.
38	The priests remained standing in the river-bed with the ark of the covenant on their shoulder until all the people had passed clear over the river. The ark of the covenant testified the presence of Jehovah God and that he was the One that was holding back the destructive forces until his covenant people should be safely across: “And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over, that the ark of the Lord passed over, and the priests, in the presence of the people.”—Josh. 4:11.
39	When the people had passed safely over, then the ark was carried up out of the river-bed by the priests, showing that Jehovah and Christ his King served as the protection of God’s people, both in
March 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
75
the front and in the rear: “For the Lord will go before you; and the God of Israel will be your rereward.” (Isa. 52:12) This means that the Lord God wards off the enemy and guards and protects his people from the rear, as well as in the front; that they are under the shadow of His hand, and that they represent him, and no power can resist him or snatch his servants from his protection.
40	An armed division of the Israelites went over first: “And the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and half the tribe of Manasseh, passed over armed before the children of Israel, as Moses spake unto them.” (Josh. 4:12) The country lying immediately east of the Jordan was conquered territory, and there the “armed” men left behind their wives and little ones while they preceded in the van of the marching forces that were crossing the Jordan. The two and one-half tribes mentioned must fight with their brethren until God gave rest to all the tribes, and they must not rest until then. In the fulfillment of this part of the picture the fight of God’s people must continue to the end; as it is written : “Let not thine hands be slack.”—Zeph. 3:16.
41	To his servants Jesus, the Greater Joshua, now says, “He that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.” (Matt. 24:13; 10:22) All Israel was then in unity, and it must be so now with spiritual Israelites. “About forty thousand prepared for war passed over before the Lord unto battle, to the plains of Jericho.” (Josh. 4:13) While the facts show that, in the fulfillment of the crossing of the antitypical children, this was accomplished in 1931, that marks really the beginning of the fight which began in a more marked degree in 1933. In that year the Papacy and the Nazis, acting together, took charge of Germany and began a cruel persecution of God’s faithful people, Jehovah’s witnesses. In that year the pope proclaimed the same a “holy year”, and the same year Roosevelt became the president of the United States, and concerning his official position it was announced that he was acting with the Vatican in urging matters for a dictatorship in America, which is now nearer than ever before, even though the Hierarchy, in their efforts to deceive the people and lull them to sleep, announce that they are for democracy. Like their father, they continue to be the most fertile liars on earth. There has never been, during the past 1500 years, any act of the Hierarchy that has had the least semblance of favoring democratic principles. The leopard does not change its spots. (Jer. 13: 23) The records of the Hierarchy for centuries past are written in human blood, persecution and extreme cruelty, which regiments the people and denies them all liberty.
41	In crossing the Jordan Jehovah was giving evi
dence to fully convince his covenant people that he is the Almighty God; and others, looking on and seeing the miracle, if of good will, would also be convinced of that fact. The time had come to cease exalting men, and this the Lord demonstrated. “On that day the Lord magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel; and they feared him, as they feared Moses, all the days of his life.” (Josh. 4:14) Again in the fulfillment God uses The Watchtower to inform the people in this regard. The February 15, 1927, issue of that publication clearly pointed out the Scriptural evidence proving that the “faithful and wise servant”, to whom the Lord commits all his goods and makes him ruler, is not any individual man on the earth, and never was, but that Christ Jesus himself, pictured by Joshua, is the head of the “faithful and wise servant” class. (Matt. 24:45-47) Then in the May 15, 1933, issue of The Watchtower there is set out the Scriptural evidence that Jesus alone is that great prophet typified by Moses, whom all spiritual Israel must now hear and obey if they would continue to live. (Acts 3:20-23) The exaltation of men is religious and is entirely anti-God and anti-God’s kingdom.
43	The year 1931 now appears to be a marked year of importance. It was in that year that the Lord called and brought forth from amongst the turbulent waters (the enraged people) the faithful priestly remnant and paid them their “penny” in recognition of their faithful devotion to him, which payment was made by revealing to them the “new name”. At the command of Jehovah, the Greater Joshua called his people out (Josh. 4:15-17), saying: “Come ye up out of [the] Jordan.” That was a command to enter into the promised land, the heritage of God’s people, taking the “new name”, and henceforth leaving all other names behind, and openly, publicly and joyfully bearing the name “Jehovah’s witnesses”.—Isa. 43:10-12; 62:2; 65:15.
44	Another prophetic picture was fulfilled in that year 1931, to wit, Joseph’s making himself known to his young brother Benjamin and his ten half brothers. (Gen. 45:1-15) In that year the “Mordecai and Esther” prophetic drama was made clear to the people of the Lord, showing that Jehovah’s witnesses must ‘stand for their lives and fight’. (Esther 8:11) The barrier of the antitypical Jordan having been passed, the anointed now came face to face with their enemies. The bringing of the ark of the covenant up out of the Jordan at God’s command to Joshua served to foretell the command of Jehovah to his people to be “up and at the enemy”, who were and still are wrongfully trying to hold in possession that which is not their own, that is to say, the right to rule the world, and standing where they ought not to stand, and thus constituting (as
76
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the enemy is) “the abomination that maketh desolate”.—Mark 13:14.
48 The priests of Israel stepped out of the Jordan bed and up to the dry land of Canaan, bearing the ark on their shoulders, and that was in symbol or picture saying that Jehovah God had now entered with his covenant people into the promised land and would thereafter be with them in the fight against the enemy, and such assurance would make his people very courageous. God had promised Abraham to give to him the land and to his seed after him; and that prophetic picture was thereby fulfilled in 1931, when God’s people were fully aware that they were entirely separate and distinct from the world and wholly and unalterably devoted to Jehovah, serving him in the warfare. The picture continues: “And it came to pass, when the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord were come up out of the midst of Jordan, and the soles of the priests’ feet were lifted up unto the dry land, that the waters of Jordan returned unto their place, and flowed over all his banks, as they did before.”— Josh. 4:18.
48 The turbulent waters rushed on to the Dead sea. When Stephen made his final speech before that bunch of religious murderers he said to them (and such is in corroboration of what is stated in the foregoing verse eighteen): “Our fathers had the tabernacle of witness in the wilderness, as he had appointed, speaking unto Moses, that he should make it according to the fashion that he had seen. Which also our fathers that came after, brought in with Jesus [Joshua] into the possession of the Gentiles, whom God drave out before the face of our fathers, unto the days of David.”—Acts 7:44,45.
4T The enemies of God then inhabiting Canaan were practitioners of the Devil religion, and Joshua was there to drive them out. Even so today, the practitioners of the Devil religion, claiming the right to rule the world, are where they have no right to be, and the Lord Jesus Christ, the Greater Joshua, has given the command to oust them completely. From the beginning till now murderers have been religionists, even as Stephen told the clergy or religious leaders, when he said to them: “Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they have slain them which shewed before of the coming of the Just One; of whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers; who have received the law by the disposition of angels, and have not kept it.” —Acts 7:52,53.
48 Jehovah released his power over the Jordan, and its waters plunged on down to the Dead sea, picturing the mass of the people of the world madly rushing on to destruction. But mark this, as those waters of the Jordan flowed on down they had to
flow past or around that heap of stones which Joshua had piled up in the river-bed. So now the mad rush of the people must flow around and pass the heap or pile of God’s message in the form of literature piled up amongst them as witnesses to the name of Jehovah and as witnesses against the enemies of God. No more can the clergy and their allies in the world say that they have had no notice of warning from Jehovah before they rush pell-mell into the sea of Armageddon, where their existence ends. Now the Lord permits the nations to madly rush on to Armageddon, as if suddenly released. It was on September 14, 1931, that the official ruling element of the nations were served with notice that God’s kingdom is the only hope of the world. On that day began the distribution of the booklet The Kingdom, The Hope of the World, and the rulers of the English-speaking world, as well as other nations, were served. Thereafter the nations were let go by the Lord to proceed on their downward course. The “strange work” of Jehovah had begun, plainly warning them. Then on June 26,1932, the speech on the subject, “Can the American Government Endure?” was broadcast by radio from Brooklyn, New York, over a chain of radio stations, and the Scriptural answer at that time to the question propounded was, “No.”
49 Were the acts performed and the experiences had by Jehovah’s witnesses from the year 1922 to 1931, as above related, prearranged by man? and was the significance thereof known to any man at the time? Certainly not. Jehovah long ago promised his people that he would guide them in judgment, and the facts show that he has done that very thing and continues to do so. (Ps. 25:9) The significance of the prophetic drama performed by the Israelites under Joshua is now made known by the Lord and understood by his people for the first time. All this is to the praise of the name of Jehovah, and not to any man. The remnant rejoice to take note of these facts today. The people of good will, seeing how the Lord has so marvelously protected and guided and delivered his people, likewise rejoice, and their faith in God is made strong. These people of good will now clearly see that religion is of the Devil and only those will receive the lasting blessing who flee from religion and devote themselves to Jehovah and to Christ Jesus, the King, and obey the commandments of the Lord. It is now discerned that these great truths of Jehovah were recorded long ago for the comfort of those on earth who now love and serve him, and so the Jonadabs join with the remnant in rejoicing over these revealed truths and their zeal for the Lord is increased.
80 That tenth day of Nisan was a great and mem
March 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
77
orable day for the Israelites. At the end of the day they were all in the land of Canaan, but there was still something for them to do before the day completely ended. “And the people came up out of Jordan on the tenth day of the first month [Nisan], and encamped in Gilgal, in the east border of Jericho.”—Josh. 4:19.
•’ It was exactly forty years to the day from the time the Israelites chose their first passover lamb down in Egypt preparatory to celebrating the first passover supper, immediately preceding their march out of Egypt, that they now arrived at Gilgal. Now they were encamped near Jericho, where the enemy was holed up behind walls. Immediately after pitching camp at Gilgal and before sundown on that tenth day of Nisan, in keeping with the commandment of Jehovah God previously given (Exod. 12:1-6), each family selected from their flocks a passover lamb, which they had not done, as it appears, for thirty-nine years, the last previous celebration of the passover as recorded being in the second year after they left Egypt. (Num. 9:1-5) Jehovah timed the movements of the Israelites that they arrived at Gilgal exactly on time. He is timing the movements of his faithful witnesses now with equal certainty. God’s anointed people having come out of and across antitypical Jordan in 1931, it was fitting that the Lord should arrange for them a convention, at Columbus, Ohio, in that same year, and there for the first time reveal to them their “new name”, which he had given them. At that convention a public address was delivered, and broadcast by a network of 163 radio stations, on the subject “The Hope of the World”, and the next day thereafter the publication of the booklet containing that speech was released for a wide distribution and the distribution proceeded.
“Again is emphasized the fact that the purpose of the prophetic drama was to foretell the vindication of Jehovah’s name; hence it is a drama of vindication. Always keeping in mind that the vindication of Jehovah’s name is the important matter, the Scriptures have to us a clearer meaning. At Gilgal, from which point action would thereafter be taken by Joshua, there must be a monument built to the memory of Jehovah: “And those twelve stones,
which they took out of Jordan, did Joshua pitch in Gilgal.”—Josh. 4:20.
63	That pile of stones must ever thereafter be a testimony to the name of the Almighty God and there remain, and must be explained to others. “And he spake unto the children of Israel, saying, When your children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean these stones? Then ye shall let your children know, saying, Israel came over this Jordan on dry land. For the Lord your God dried up the waters of Jordan from before you, until ye were passed over, as the Lord your God did to the Red sea, which he dried up from before us, until we were gone over.”—Josh. 4:21-23.
54	The children must be told the meaning thereof. Likewise the people of good will must now be told the reason thereof, and those of good will toward God will profit by that information and find the way to safety and to life. The world must have notice of warning also: “That all the people of the earth might know the hand of the Lord, that it is mighty; that ye might fear the Lord your God for ever.”—Josh. 4:24.
55	The prophetic drama at this point has been fulfilled, and explains why God brought his faithful witnesses through the antitypical Jordan and preserved them until 1931. The same is a witness to them, that their faith must be unchangeable and that their hope must be strong, and for that reason they must continue to recount to themselves these facts and amongst themselves they must speak thereof and to those of good will amongst them; that also they must continue to be faithful witnesses to the peoples of the world, that such may have notice of warning of God’s purpose to destroy all the enemy at Armageddon. Jehovah has given his people his name, to them their “new name”, and this “that ye [all consecrated to do the will of God] might fear the Lord your God for ever”. Those who do thus fear him will be diligent to obey the commandments of the Most High. All such will continue to faithfully bear testimony to the name of Jehovah and his kingdom. The prophetic drama shows that there is still much work to be done before Armageddon.
(To be continued)
LA
JEHOVAH’S “royal priesthood”, of which Christ Jesus is the High Priest, must be governed by his law, and not by the whims or ideas of prudes or extremists or by other unreasonable and hypocritical rules, such as are practiced outwardly among those of “organized Christianity”. (1 Pet. 2:5,9) Any course of action that is extreme or excessive is displeasing to Jehovah. Among numerous
ws
instructions given by Jehovah to Ezekiel when shown a vision of God’s royal house was that pertaining to the drinking of wine: “Neither shall any priest drink wine, when they enter into the inner court [of the temple].” (Ezek. 44:21) God’s law directed that the Jewish priesthood, of which Aaron was the first high priest, should not drink wine when they went into the tabernacle, but that does
78
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
not mean that they might not drink wine on other occasions and in moderation. The very language of the scripture implies that it is proper to drink wine at certain times, and then moderately. (Lev. 10:9) “And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the spirit.” (Eph. 5:18) The spirit of a sound mind must be maintained while in God’s direct service. One’s best mental and physical abilities should be employed in the service of Jehovah. Any attempt to serve Jehovah in a loose, indifferent and shiftless manner is displeasing to him. Our very best should be given to Jehovah. We should be diligent and strive to be very accurate in our work and give great care to see that it is done right and to his honor.
We should not be man-pleasers, but should strive to please God. One with an unbalanced head, sleepy, slovenly, slothful and indifferent, whether that be caused by wine, excessive eating or anything else, is certainly displeasing to Jehovah. Excessive indulgence in wine or wholesome food is very injurious, yet “a little wine for thy stomach’s sake” is advisable, and a reasonable amount of wholesome food is also necessary.—1 Tim. 5:23.
Those of the royal priesthood are not under the terms of Israel’s Law Covenant, nor are they under any law that is contrary to God’s law. “Neither shall they take for their wives a widow, nor her that is put away [typical Israel’s organization] ; but they shall take maidens [virgins] of the seed of the house of Israel, or a widow that had a priest before.” (Ezek. 44:22) God’s spiritual people “put away” the Law Covenant, which was made with the Israelites according to the flesh, just as truly as Abraham sent Hagar away. (Gen. 21:14; Gal. 4: 21-30) Neither may God’s faithful remnant now presume to do that which is called “the Elijah work”; for that work is as a widow since ‘Elijah is taken away’, or since A.D. 1918. Paul must have had this prophecy in mind when he wrote that the followers of Christ should marry “only in the Lord”. (1 Cor. 7:39) Marrying in those days, however, was for the purpose of bringing forth children. To God’s remnant now this instruction to Ezekiel would mean that they are not to unequally yoke themselves with unbelievers who have no belief in the present-day work of God’s organization on earth, but that they espouse and join themselves only to that which God authorizes.
The priesthood are to instruct. “And they shall teach my people the difference between the holy and profane, and cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean.” (Ezek. 44:23) This the “evil servant” class has refused to do. (See Ezekiel 22:26; Vindication, Book One, page 299.) Christ Jesus is teaching the remnant the difference between the holy and the profane things, and it is the duty of the members of the remnant to so teach others who are consecrated to Jehovah. Those of the remnant clearly see the distinction between Satan’s organization and Jehovah’s organization and devote themselves wholly to Jehovah God and his work. The “evil servant” class refuse to make distinction between the two organizations.
The purpose of the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple is for judgment. (Mal. 3:1-3) The underpriests have something to do in this connection because it is a time for judgment. (1 Cor. 4:5) “And in controversy they shall stand in judgment; and they shall judge it according to my judgments : and they shall keep my laws and my statutes in all
mine assemblies; and they shall hallow my sabbaths.” (Ezek. 44:24) The judgment work is now being executed by Christ Jesus, the great High Priest, concerning such matters as the “wicked servant” class, totalitarianism, League of Nations, voting, militarism, flag salute, etc. The remnant judge the issue only according to the judgment of Jehovah God, which is already written. They call attention to such judgment. Also when God’s people are assembled, such as at a convention, the remnant observe God’s law and statutes and carry out his commandments by calling attention to Jehovah’s commandments and his judgments and by giving warning to the rulers of the nations even as he has commanded. Jesus also used the sabbath day to proclaim the kingdom, and the remnant now use the day which is called ‘the sabbath’ to declare the message of God’s kingdom. In fact, every day with the remnant is a sabbath day. The entire company of anointed ones is now assembled at Mount Zion and is keeping the sabbath feast together.
These instructions show that the remnant must do what Jehovah commanded, and do it as a body of devoted creatures. “And they shall come at no dead person to defile themselves: but for father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter, for brother, or for sister that hath had no husband, they may defile themselves. And after he is cleansed they shall reckon unto him seven days.” (Ezek. 44: 25, 26) At no time and under no conditions may the remnant properly join forces with the sin-dead, Devil-ruled world in any of its movements of reform or any other claimed efforts to make the world a desirable place in which to live. Jehovah’s witnesses must keep themselves separate from the world.
Even in the case of his closest relationship after the flesh the priests could not come in contact with dead bodies without thereafter having to be specially purified by the sprinkling of water mixed with the ashes of the red heifer and by refraining from the temple service for seven days. (Num. 19:1-21) This shows.clearly that in the modern fulfillment the remnant may not defile themselves with the dead world for anyone’s sake, not even for* their dearest or closest relatives after the flesh. That means that they must not participate in any of the worldly schemes even though it would be advantageous to some near relative. Jehovah’s remnant must be wholly devoted to him and his service. During the thousand-year reign of Christ (Rev. 20:4) the priesthood will not be dealing with the dead world, for the reason that the people then redeemed will be on the way to life, and, trusting in the Lord Jesus and his redemptive blood and his saving power, the people will be on the way to justification.
The law of Jehovah is unchangeable. “And in the day that he goeth into the sanctuary, unto the inner court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shall offer his sin offering [to complete his cleansing from death’s defilement], sailh the Lord God.” (Ezek. 44:27) God did not hold the priest for a clean priest if he put himself in contact with dead bodies, even of his most intimate relations on earth. Neither could Jehovah hold guiltless, and for clean, any of the remnant in this day of judgment who put themselves in contact with anything of the dead organization of the wicked world under Satan. The priests must “keep [themselves] unspotted from the world”.—Jas. 1: 27.
Those who are elevated to the royal priesthood do not serve God for any earthly reward. To lay up a treasure on
March 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
79
the earth militates against one who is trying to follow in the footsteps of Jesus Christ. All of one’s substance should be used to the glory of God, and therefore in accordance with the instructions given in the Scriptures. “And it shall be unto them for an inheritance; I am their inheritance: and ye shall give them no possession in Israel; I am their possession.” (Ezek. 44:28) It is also true that one cannot serve Jehovah for the purpose of a heavenly reward except that he might inherit and possess Jehovah through Christ Jesus. This scripture shows that the faithful priesthood of the royal house will come into the inheritance and possession of the divine life, which God gives only to his royal house. As to what God does allow these priests on earth appears at chapters forty-five (verses one to four) and forty-eight (verses ten to twelve) of Ezekiel’s prophecy.
The priesthood is given the things necessary. “They shall eat the meat [meal] offering, and the sin offering, and the trespass offering [guilt offering]; and every dedicated [devoted] thing in Israel shall be theirs.” (Ezek. 44:29) He who works must cat. “The workman is worthy of his meat,” says Jesus. (Matt. 10:10) This proves the rule that the members of the remnant are justified in accepting a nominal sum of money for their service, which is God’s provision for them to eat and be clothed with things necessary.
God’s faithful witnesses are not a public charge, but they are entitled to eat. “And the first of all the firstfruits of all things, and every oblation [heave offering] of all, of every sort of your oblations, shall be the priest’s: ye shall also give unto the priest the first of your dough, that he may cause the [a] blessing to rest in [on] thine house.” (Ezek. 44: 30) The people of good will now on earth must be taught to appreciate the fact that God’s cause comes first and that Jehovah’s witnesses or servants are serving that cause and, therefore, that the people do God’s pleasure by giving a small sum of money toward publishing literature and books for their instruction. The people therefore have a part in providing the things needful for themselves. Their instruction is exceedingly needful. Doing so because it comes from Jehovah will bring to the people some measure of blessing even now, and a greater blessing later. (Matt. 10:12,13; 25: 34-40) When glorified in heaven the priests could not live off the offerings of the people of good will on earth; hence the rule must be applied now.
“The priests shall not eat of any thing that is dead [that dieth] of itself, or torn, whether it be fowl or beast.” (Ezek. 44:31) They must subsist, not on distorted and unscrip-tural teachings, but upon truth that is found upon Jehovah’s table and which he has provided for them.
JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM BLESSINGS MANIFOLD
Dear Brother Rutherford:
‘Jehovah is my shepherd and I shall not want,’ states the psalmist; and how the present-day lovers of righteousness thrill to all the promise contained therein 1 For they can view the gathering of the “other sheep” to the one fold, so that all who love the Lord serve him unitedly in the theocracy. Being assembled here at Gillespie, Ill., at the first zone meeting for the consideration of the ways and means whereby we may have an increasing portion in the service of our loving heavenly Father, we praise and honor him who has blessed us so.
Jehovah’s kingdom blessings are manifold, and indeed the new arrangements additionally make clear his love for his covenant people through the provisions he makes for their joy. No other people have such constant care and love showered upon them. Our hearts are filled with gratitude; for ‘our cup runneth over’ from his rich favors. May we indeed be continued in his love and favor, to serve and glorify and magnify his most worthy name.
Your labors of love are ever before us as a stimulation to
increased zeal on our part. We thank Jehovah for your steadfastness in faith, for the courage before the enemy which you, Brother Rutherford, have so convincingly shown in these recent months all over the world, and further carried to the uttermost places by means of the masterful exposure of the Hierarchy’s duplicity, through your radio addresses.
Discerning the privileges as well as the obligations granted to those ‘who do the will of the Father in heaven’ and recognizing that it is a great favor from on high, individually as well as collectively, we, the company of God’s people assembled here to the number of 103 send you our love, and rejoice to be with you shoulder to shoulder in the army of Jehovah under the leadership of the Field Marshal Christ Jesus! Our heart’s desire is to be granted an increasing opportunity in his service, and to serve alertly and promptly.
Our prayer is that Jehovah keep you, and shine his face upon you in the richness of his all-encompassing love.
Jehovah’s witnesses Illinois Zone No. 5
(Continued from page 66)
should follow their lead. A report on the celebration should be made to the Society as instructed in the Informant. In preparation therefor the article “Memorial” in The Watchtower March 1, 1938, will be studied with profit.
"WATCHTOWER” CAMPAIGN
Four full months of 1939, January to April inclusive, have been set aside for the biggest, if not most important, yet of the campaigns to publish Jehovah’s kingdom. It is designated the “Watchtower” campaign because of the special offer made, agreeable to arrangements of the Society, to wit, a full year’s subscription for the magazine The Watchtower together with the book Enemies or any other one desired of the bound book series and a copy of the new booklet Face the Facts, on a $1.00 contribution. A like combination is made in every language in which The Watch
tower appears, at its regular magazine rate; hence this four-month campaign is a world-wide one. Every reader of The Watchtower who appreciates its real value and the dire need of all people of good will today for its spiritual food will without urging desire to take part in this campaign. If not already in touch with the Society’s service organization, write this office and make arrangements for the campaign. A monthly report is expected of each publisher. Consult the Informant for all details hereon.
“WATCHTOWER” BINDER
The improvements in make-up of The Watchtower, beginning January, 1939, necessitate a new binder for those who desire to preserve their copies of the magazine. Such a new binder is now on supply, clothbound, new blade-style, at $1.00 each. Those associated with companies should order binders through their respective company servant. Remittance should accompany order.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
UNEXPECTED RESULT OF A VISIT
“I am a new student, and enjoy the Bible study in my home so much, and would go out now and witness, only I get a little puzzled yet on certain questions asked me by my friends. I have had four studies in my home now. Of course, the light on the Scriptures did startle me, but I can see the truth in such an understanding way, and I feel so glad to have been so fortunate as to have these good people help me to see and believe God’s Word instead of the teachings of men. Two preachers told me your teachings were false, and I almost burned the books anf} forgot you, if I had not written to Mr. L---- (North L.iit) in
Chicago. I was secretary for the ‘American National Action Party’. They also support Mr. Dies’ (from Texas) investigating committee. I wanted Mr. L---to get Jehovah’s witnesses to join me in my fight for decent government. What a surprise I got when Mr. L----- talked to me, you can
well imagine. But instead of my getting members for my organization, Mr. L---got a new witness. Back went my
resignation and literature to New York. And now that I am of Jehovah’s own organization I am still looking for people who will help in vindicating Jehovah’s name and be partakers in life everlasting. Now I want to ask you if it is possible for you to arrange for someone in New York or Long Island to visit or talk to a dear friend of mine there.”
JONADAB “TURNS ON THE HEAT”
“We are using our new series ‘Face the Facts’ and ‘Fascism or Freedom’. We wish to express our thanks to Jehovah for the wonderful help these series are to aid the pioneers. To date I have played them 43 times (one day I had 6 full one-hour lectures). We play the series through without interruption on two phonographs; then answer questions at the end of the lecture. For the aid of the goodwill, the hottest records get the best results. To ‘quiet’ the message by using some of the older records is not in accord with the ‘strange work’ now in progress, as it lets the people ‘sleep on’. May I also express my thanks for Jehovah’s wonderful ‘Theocratic’ Government that is truly aiding us in presenting more acceptable services before Jehovah.”
RECORDED LECTURES BRING IN SUBSCRIPTIONS
“January 3 we held a meeting at the home of C. W. S----, near Perry, Pennsylvania, with ‘Fascism or Freedom’, with seven present, amongst whom were two school-ma’ms; which was followed by about a half-hour discussion of questions on devil religion. Result was, we obtained subscriptions for The Watchtower and Consolation one year each, one Enemies book, and three Face the Facts booklets, and an invitation to return with ‘Fill the Earth’.”
CALLING THEIR BLUFF
“The police at Havana, Illinois, having a new ordinance on peddling, picked up three sisters and took them down to the police station, where the state’s prosecuting attorney was counseling them, if they were caught again working, what he would do toward prosecuting them. One sister gave him a copy of the ruling of the Supreme Court of the United States. He said: ‘That ruling does not apply to us in Havana.’ She said that ‘as an American citizen she was always taught to respect the highest tribunal of the land’. To date they have not interfered further with the work.”
FREQUENT RF-COVERING OF TERRITORY
“A businessman, when approached by the publisher, said: ‘Why, one of your people was here just a few weeks ago.’ Publisher: ‘That s funny. Somebody must be falling down on his job.’ Businessman: ‘What do you mean?’ Publisher: ‘Somebody should call on you each week, and just as soon as we find enough people who love Jehovah and are interested in God’s kingdom, someone will be here every week.’ Businessman (letting out a sigh): ‘Gosh! maybe I’d better take some of those books right now.’ He took a dollar combination (four books).”
IN “OVERWORKED” (?) CLEVELAND, OHIO
“For the month of November in the territory I worked the results were: 3 books and 49 booklets. I worked the same territory back-calling for the month of December; the results were: 77 books and 19 booklets. I often hear someone say: ‘The territory was just worked last month.’ My experience, since I have been in the pioneer service, is, the more the territory is worked, the better results I have.”
THE PHONOGRAPH IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS
“During December I worked both ‘big’ and ‘little’ business with the phonogr aph, and it was surprising the many business places where I was able to play the phonograph, and in every instance I played not only ‘Relief’ but also ‘Resolution’. Of course, there are places where it was inappropriate to even offer to play the phonograph, such as a crowded grocery store, and at which places I did not introduce the phonograph but set it down and used a short verbal witness, or would have used a testimony card had there been one for the ‘Vindication’ campaign. Below I give you my report reflecting results of using the phonograph in business districts:
Setups 82	Books	150
Attendance	140	Booklets	173
“Yesterday I played the phonograph at a tire shop to four men. At the close of ‘Instruction’ the manager looked to one of the others and said: ‘Will you read it if I take it?’ The reply was ‘Yes’, and he immediately subscribed for The Watchtoioer. I then played ‘Instruction’ for two partners operating a garage. At the conclusion one of them looked to the other and asked if he was agreeable to subscribing. He consented, resulting in another subscription. Again I played ‘Instruction’ for the editor of a small newspaper. He said, ‘That’s quite novel,’ went over to the safe, got a dollar and subscribed.”
BACK CALLS ON SUNDAY
“A brother who keeps record of all interested persons in his territory recently took a Sunday to call back. He spent seven hours, made eight calls, placed twenty-five bound books, six booklets, and had sixteen sound attendance, and traveled seventy-eight miles; a day worth while.”
AMONG NEIGHBORS IN ARKANSAS HAMLET
“I made nine back calls in December around with my neighbors. I walked most of the time by myself. So two families show some interest. They are reading. They tell me to come back any time. I have been back three or four times, so will keep going. Am hoping they still continue to study. I placed the set of Vindication books at one place.”
80
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE O TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street •	» Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President____W. E. Van Amburoh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God's kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British...................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian...................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian............ 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African ..........-......Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus nid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879.
CONVENTION
It seems appropriate that Jehovah’s witnesses and companions should assemble in convention somewhere in the East. For this purpose New York City has been selected. Time: June 23-25, inclusive. The first two days of the convention will be held at the Manhattan Center. Sunday, the 25th, all meetings, including the public meeting, will be at Madison Square Garden. It will be difficult for Jehovah’s witnesses in the far-away part of the United States to attend, and, if possible, another convention will be arranged farther west for some other time. Appropriate notice will be given in due season.
“FASCISM OR FREEDOM”
In a world threatened by the totalitarian monstrosity and blinded to the rightful theocratic government, this new booklet, Fascism or Freedom, appears as most timely information for all people of good will. Under a forceful cover illustration the 64 pages of this booklet set forth the nationally broadcast speech by Judge Rutherford at his last public appearance in New York city, together with a masterly article on “Theocracy”. You may obtain your personal copy now, on remittance of a contribution at 5c a copy. Time of release of Fascism or Freedom for general distribution is announced elsewhere.
“NEW HEAVENS” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The “New Heavens” Testimony Period will cover April, the final month of the current “Watchtower” campaign. A special feature of this period will be the release of the new booklet Fascism or Freedom. The details regarding the extensive worldwide campaign therewith now appear in the regular service paper Informant, to guide you in your plans for as large a part as possible in the special activities of this period. All persons not already in active co-operation with the service organization but who are interested in the proclamation of the kingdom of the heavens are invited to write the Watch Tower for information about the local company organization of Jehovah’s witnesses.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of April 23: “Drama of Vindication,” (Part 4) fl 1-23 inclusive, The Watchtower March 15, 1939.
Week of April 30: “Drama of Vindication,” (Part 4) fl 24-43 inclusive, The Watchtower March 15, 1939.
MEMORIAL
For the year 1939 the date for the feast in celebration of the name of Jehovah and to the sacrifice of his Vindicator, Christ (Continued on page 95)
ffieWWCHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX
March 15, 1939
No. 6
DRAMA OF VINDICATION
PART 4
'Be still and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations; I ivill be exalted in the earth.1 —Ps. 46:10, R.V.
TEHOVAH will have all creation to know that he I is the Almighty God. Only those who know and J acknowledge this will live. It has been very difficult for men to learn that indisputable fact. Among men there has always been a tendency to exalt creatures, and such has been due to the influence of Satan. That wily foe has employed all manner of means of deception and flattery to cause men to exalt the name of some creature or creatures. Satan exalts himself against Jehovah God, and his purpose is to cause other creatures to exalt themselves against God in defiance of the Most High. Selfexaltation results in just one thing, to wit, abasement and destruction. Jesus impressed this fact upon those who heard him. His words are: “For whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.”—Luke 14:11.
* Jesus took the course exactly opposite to selfexaltation. He completely humbled himself in obedience to his Father’s will, and God exalted Jesus to the highest place next to Jehovah himself. Why did Jesus abase himself? Because he loves and has always loved Jehovah with all his heart, soul and mind. God laid that rule before Israel: “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.” (Deut. 6:5; Matt. 22:37) Few persons have appreciated the importance of that divine rule, and many have wondered why God should thus command his creatures. The rule is not for the benefit of Jehovah, but is unselfishly announced to safeguard man from Satan’s wily deceptions. The determination of Satan is to turn all men away from God; and man’s only place of safety is full and undivided devotion to the Most High.
8 Mark the fact that Jehovah began to magnify this rule before the Israelites. Only a small number of that people in covenant with Jehovah appreciated'the rule and tried to obey it. Because of the recorded experiences of natural Israel, and because of the greater enlightenment of spiritual Israel, the latter should at all times have been diligent to ob
serve and to obey that divine rule, but even the greater number of those who have covenanted to do the will of God and have been favored with his spirit have failed to obey that rule.
* Joshua was leading Israel’s host, and he had to be forcibly reminded of this rule, and he joyfully obeyed, as will be observed hereinafter. From the day of the apostles till now professed followers of Christ Jesus have repeatedly been reminded of the importance of that rule, and only a few have joyfully obeyed it. A most striking example of that failure to obey is that made by the Roman Catholic organization, whose leaders claim, even though falsely, to be God’s servants and his church. The clergy of that institution exalt themselves, and the people exalt them, and their end is certain according to the statement of the rule. God is no respecter of persons, and his rules do not change. During the “Elijah period” of the church the “evil servant”, as a class, was exalted and the members thereof exalted themselves and heaped honor and praise upon one another, making it appear that men were considered of great importance; and their end has been clearly marked.—Matt. 24:48-51.
6 Jehovah purposes to make his name glorious among all creation, because only those who know Jehovah, recognizing him and obeying him according to his rule, will ever live. Let us keep in mind that Jehovah’s name is that which is at issue. Unless his name is exalted among all creation the Devil has succeeded in his wicked and boastful challenge. The Devil cannot succeed. The issue must be settled to the honor and glory of Jehovah. His great and holy name must be vindicated. That was the purpose of Jehovah from the beginning. His purpose is certain to be carried out. Jehovah could never be disturbed concerning the vindication of His name, because that is certain to be accomplished. Knowing the end from the beginning, he has taken his own good time to exalt and to fully vindicate his name. With his covenant people Israel he made many prophetic pictures illustrating his
84	THE WATCHTOWER	Brooklyn, N.Y.
purpose to vindicate his name. The prophetic drama in which Joshua played such an important part was foretelling Jehovah’s purpose to vindicate his name and was illustrating the manner in which he would do so. Now he brings to his anointed people on earth a revelation of that prophetic drama for their good and for the good of their "companions”.
•Jehovah performed the great miracle of holding back the swift waters of the Jordan and taking the multitudes of Israel over the dry river-bed; and that was a testimony to his name. That miracle struck terror into the heart of the enemy domiciled in Canaan, and particularly those in Jericho, and foretold that God would cause fear to seize hold upon all the religionists and their allies during the testimony that must be given just preceding Armageddon. “And it came to pass when all the kings of the Amorites, which were on the side of Jordan westward, and all the kings of the Canaanites, which were by the sea, heard that the Lord had dried up the waters of Jordan from before the children of Israel, until we were passed over, that their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them any more, because of the children of Israel.” —Josh. 5:1.
T The Israelites were at this point of the drama encamped in Gilgal on the west side of the Jordan. The people of Jericho had observed the miracle performed by Jehovah in bringing over the swollen waters of the Jordan that great multitude of Israelites, and without a doubt those in Jericho communicated that fact and the fear to the people throughout the land of Canaan, namely, to the Philistines along the shores of the Mediterranean and to Tyre and Sidon and to other peoples in the land of Canaan. No doubt the enemy had watchmen in the mountains on the west of the Jordan, and when they beheld the Israelites marching across the dry bed of the river, and a great wall of water standing up above them, their runners were hurriedly dispatched to notify the kings or rulers in every part of the land of Canaan. So stunned were those kings by the miracle Jehovah had performed that they, figuratively speaking, wilted up and fear held them in its hand, at least for a time. That part of the prophetic drama seems clearly to have had fulfillment, which fulfillment now is discerned by the “remnant” (Rom. 11:5) and the “other sheep” of the Lord, the “great multitude”, and the revelation of which truth greatly encourages those who love Jehovah and his King.
•	Jehovah’s faithful servants in the field had piled up the books and other literature explaining his Word from the year 1922 onward, and now in the year 1931, corresponding to the time of the crossing of the Jordan and marking the time of God’s
anointed’s entering into the kingdom conditions, the booklet The Kingdom the Hope of the World was served upon the official element of “Christendom”. The Lord saw to it that runners or publishers delivered that message to the clergy, the politicians, the commercial traffickers, the military and other officials, thus calling them to take notice that the modern-day rule of the nations by selfish men is doomed and soon must end. That was notice that the antitypical (that is, the spiritual) Israelites had been safely and miraculously brought across the antitypical Jordan and now in the year 1931 they were “in the land of promise” and were boldly declaring the name of Jehovah and his King and making known that God’s kingdom under Christ would soon wipe out all selfish rule of the world. The anointed of the Lord had received at the hands of the Most High their “new name” (Isa. 62:2; Rev. 2:17), and now as Jehovah’s duly accredited servants and witnesses they would push forward in the witness work with greater zeal than ever before. Jehovah’s name now began to be exalted as it had not been before. God’s people were armed for the conflict, and it was beginning.
•	As the kings of Canaan were greatly disturbed by what had occurred, even so the facts show that in the year 1931 there was a greatly disturbed condition among the nations of the earth, including religious, political, commercial and military elements thereof. All were frightened; all desperately uneasy. In that year the pope, leading the religious elements of the world, broadcast his assumed blessings upon the world, but that anticipated time of blessing did not materialize, and that frightened his adherents more than ever. That year the people of Spain set up a republic, which furnished an excuse for a Catholic rebellion. That year the president of the United States proclaimed a moratorium on European debts by reason of the disturbed conditions. The British Labor Government fell that year, Great Britain went off the gold standard, and by the Statute of Westminster the British Empire came to an end that year, being succeeded by the British Commonwealth of Nations. Japan invaded Manchuria; and the first world conference on disarmament was called to meet in Geneva, Switzerland. Such were some of the disturbing things of that year; and while it may properly be said that Jehovah’s witnesses had no part in it, Jehovah maneuvered the enemy that the conditions came about to correspond with what came to pass long ago in Canaan. As showing that the modern-day Canaanite kings were disturbed, in addition to what is said above, the Canadian government took drastic action shortly thereafter to stop Jehovah’s witnesses from broadcasting the kingdom message in
THE WATCHTOWER
85
March 15,1939
that land, and the combined enemy in America tried to do the same thing. Jehovah’s witnesses became a nightmare to the ruling elements. The scarecrow has increased since.
KINGDOM INTERESTS
10 At this point in the prophetic drama the Israelites were in the land of promise, picturing the kingdom conditions into which spiritual Israel were when gathered unto the Lord, the King, and which spiritual Israelites collectively are made a part of the “faithful and wise servant” and to which all the kingdom interests on the earth are committed. (Matt. 24:45-47) They must now be entirely devoted to God and the interests of the kingdom under Christ the King. The prophetic drama foretold this full and complete devotion, in this, to wit: “At that time the Lord said unto Joshua, Make thee sharp knives, and circumcise again the children of Israel the second time.” (Josh. 5:2) The time for the passover was near, and none could partake of the passover who was uncircumcised. The command of the Lord given was to resume circumcision, that is to say, to circumcise those who were born during the wilderness journey and who had not been circumcised en route. Down in Egypt there had been a mass circumcision of the male Israelites before the celebration of the original passover. (Ex. 12:43,44,48) Upon entering the land of promise, and before the first celebration of the passover in that land, there is another mass circumcision commanded and performed upon all that had neglected that thing up till that time. That was the second mass circumcision, hence within the meaning of the scripture, ‘circumcision again.’ That circumcision was a symbol of complete devotion to Jehovah God. When God gave his earthly “friend” his new name, changing it from Abram to Abraham, God established with him the covenant of circumcision. (Gen. 17:5-14; Rom. 4:11-13) Because of his faith and obedience unto God Abraham was counted righteous; and therefore his righteousness was by faith. He was completely devoted to God, and this was symbolized by circumcision. The Israelites brought across the Jordan had shown their faith in God, and by reason of their faith and obedience they pictured a righteous class, which class is entirely devoted to God and the interests of his kingdom. Circumcision was a symbol of testimony thereof.
11 Jehovah’s witnesses, exercising faith in and obedience to God, were brought out of the antitypical Jordan in the year 1931, and their “new name”, which God had given to them, was now revealed and was bestowed upon them and publicly acknowledged. They were made aware of the “new name”, and there the antitypical circumcision took place
upon the faithful remnant, the same being the circumcision of the heart, in the spirit. (Rom. 2:29; Phil. 3:3; Col. 2:11) The remnant were then in the covenant of faithfulness with Jehovah, that is, the covenant for the kingdom, and they must be entirely and completely devoted to that kingdom. Jehovah is always faithful, and those to whom the kingdom interests are committed must be faithful unto the end if they will receive the everlasting blessing of Jehovah. “Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him and keep his commandments, to a thousand generations.” —Dent. 7:9.
18 What, then, is required of those in the covenant for the kingdom? They must love God and keep his commandments. It is by the faithfulness of Jehovah, which is always certain, and the faithfulness of those whom he has taken into the covenant for the kingdom, that his name will be vindicated. In due time the people who live shall worship Jehovah because of his manifested faithfulness. (Isa. 49:7) Those in line for the kingdom and who are not faithful to the end fail completely. Only those who are faithful, prompted by love, and who thus prove their faithfulness unto death, receive the crown of life. (Rev. 2:10) Those who are in the covenant for the kingdom have this admonition: “Be ye holy; for I am holy.” (1 Pet. 1:15,16; Lev. 11:44) Jehovah is wholly and unreservedly devoted to righteousness, and so those for the kingdom must likewise be wholly and unreservedly devoted to righteousness, manifested by the kingdom of God under Christ.
18 Upon the plains of Moab, where the Israelites were assembled and addressed by Moses as Jehovah’s servant (Deut. 1:3-5; 29:1), and which occurred about two months before the Israelites entered Canaan, Moses emphasized the necessity of complete devotion to Jehovah: “Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no more stiffnecked.” (Deut. 10:16) If the natural Israelites were fully obedient to God’s law and that obedience was prompted by love or unselfish devotion to his name, they could not and would not be stiffnecked. Moses told the Israelites that God would take them into the land of promise, but the fulfilling of that promise to them meant that they must be obedient: “And the Lord thy God will bring thee into the land which thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it; and he will do thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers. And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live.”—Deut. 30:5,6.
86
THE WATCHTOWER
14 What is meant by the “circumcision ... of the heart”? The cutting off and putting entirely away everything that might hinder full devotion to the kingdom of God. The “heart” stands for the seat of motive or loving devotion. To love God means to be unselfishly devoted to Him and to His kingdom under Christ the King, the means of vindicating His name. Unselfish devotion to God means that one must give himself wholly, unreservedly to the service of God’s kingdom. This was symbolized or pictured by the wholesale circumcision of the flesh that took place when the Israelites entered the land of Canaan.
18 In the fulfillment of this part of the prophetic picture notice what is required of Jehovah’s witnesses brought into God’s capital organization and made a part thereof on the earth. They must be entirely separate from the world and not conform themselves to the world. (Deut. 12:29-32; Rom. 12:2; Jas. 1:27) One cannot mix up with any part of the Devil’s organization and at the same time purely and truly worship Almighty God. There must be no illicit relationship with Satan’s organization. (Deut. 22:13-30) There must be no compromise with the world. Therefore none of God’s covenant people could properly “heil” a human ruler, such as is required in Germany, or salute or do obeisance to or worship anything picturing or representing an earthly government, which action would attribute salvation to that government. Each one of God’s covenant people must be entirely for God’s kingdom regardless of what suffering this might bring upon them. (Deut. 7:1-5; 12:1-3) They must not depend on worldly governments, but must entirely rely upon Jehovah God and his kingdom. (Deut. 15: 6) For this reason those who are in a covenant to do Jehovah’s will could not indulge in saluting the flag of any earthly government, because the same is clearly in violation of God’s law and God’s law is higher than any earthly law. If corporal punishment is inflicted upon them for refusing such salute, those devoted to the Lord will obey God regardless of results. The anointed must maintain their integrity toward God, which will be tested by their consistent praise of Jehovah, and do this regardless of all opposition or reproach that may be heaped upon them. (Deut. 29:24-28) God’s covenant people are to feed upon the spiritual food which the Lord has provided for them. (Deut. 14:1-21) They are to do good unto all as they have opportunity, and particularly so toward those who love and serve Jehovah. (Deut. 22:1-8; Gal. 6:10) They must not indulge in that which draws attention to themselves, but must always give glory and honor to Jehovah. (Deut. 22:5-12) They must be at complete unity with one another. They must
Brooklyn, N. Y.
be faithful in safeguarding and advancing and promoting the kingdom interests, which interests have been committed unto them. To them the kingdom is everything, because it is the means of honoring and vindicating Jehovah’s name. To do these things, prompted by love, that is, an unselfish devotion to God and his kingdom, means to prove one’s faithfulness and integrity. That is what is the meaning of circumcision of the heart.
18 Joshua proceeded to carry out this part of the prophetic drama: “And Joshua made him sharp knives, and circumcised the [male] children of Israel at the hill of the foreskins.” (Josh. 5:3) The text here speaks of the place as “the hill of foreskins”, showing there was a large pile of such, and which was a testimony concerning the cleansing of the Israelites and their complete separation from other people of the land. They were preparing for the years of fighting against the uncircumcised, unclean, Devil-worshiping Canaanites. The picture showed a like work to be performed since 1931.
17 In the fulfillment of this part of the drama, the facts show that it took place after the giving of the “new name”, which was revealed to God’s people in 1931. Shortly thereafter God’s people all over the earth joyfully adopted and received that “new name”. The October 15, 1931, issue of The Watchtower announced that the “Editorial Committee”, provided for by a man, had been discontinued, and the acknowledgment was publicly made that Jehovah God and Christ Jesus are the Teachers of the church, instead of men. This made a number very sore, and their soreness did not heal. The November 1, 1931, Watchtower brought forth the article “Taught of God”, emphasizing the fact that Jehovah and Christ are the Teachers, and not men. Those of right condition of heart were quickly healed. The clearing out of self-important individuals as “elective elders” followed, and they did not get healed. The Watchtower of August 15 and September 1, 1932, in the articles “Jehovah’s Organization”, brought forward the Scriptural proof showing that the office of “elective elder” was a human invention and should be discredited. The Watchtower of October 15, 1932, published a resolution adopted, and which served as a collective announcement by Jehovah’s people, that 'the sanctuary had been cleansed’. (Dan. 8:14) The result was the purging and cleansing of the organization preparatory to carrying on the witness work of warfare against the enemy. Only those circumcised of heart, that is, wholly devoted to God, would go forward in the warfare just before them.
18 For many years the chief motive inducing one to be a professed follower of Christ Jesus was selfishness, that is to say, self-salvation. This is also shown in the prophetic drama. “And this is the cause
March 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
87
why Joshua did circumcise: All the people that came out of Egypt, that were males, even all the men of war, died in the wilderness by the way, after they came out of Egypt. Now all the people that came out were circumcised; but all the people that were born in the wilderness by the way as they came forth out of Egypt, them they had not circumcised. For the children of Israel walked forty years in the wilderness, till all the people that were men of war, which came out of Egypt, were consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord; unto whom the Lord sware that be would not shew them the land which the Lord sware unto their fathers that he would give us, a land that floweth with milk and honey. And their children, whom he raised up in their stead, them Joshua circumcised; for they were uncircumcised, because they had not circumcised them by the way.”—Josh. 5:4-7.
’•In fulfillment, note that from 1878 until the coming of the Lord to the temple in 1918, and even to 1931, many professed to be devoted to God and his kingdom but were uncircumcised of heart, such as “elective elders” and others who held to religious practices. God’s sanctuary class must be “cleansed” of such unclean conditions (Dan. 8:14), ignorance and innocence being no further excuse for the practice of religion. Those who refused the circumcision of the heart by the Greater Joshua must be gathered out from amongst those in line for the kingdom. The facts show that such was done following the year 1931.
10	All of the males born in the wilderness were under forty years of age, and the circumcision of such rendered them very much disabled to prosecute war operations against the enemy while in that condition. Hence they must remain inactive for a time: “And it came to pass, when they had done circumcising all the people, that they abode in their places in the camp till they were whole.” ——Josh. 5:8.
11	During the period of their disability Jehovah protected the Israelites. Had the enemy come out from their fortifications in Jericho and attacked the Israelites while the latter were thus disabled, it might have been a very sorry day for the Israelites. Jehovah, because of the faithfulness of the Israelites, gave protection to them by holding the enemy in Jericho by causing them to be greatly in fear, and so the warriors of Jericho remained inactive. (Josh. 6:1) Jehovah had protected the Israelites under similar conditions down in Egypt by sending a plague of three days’ darkness upon the Egyptians at the time of circumcision. (Ex. 10:21-23) In the fulfillment of this part of the drama there was a sore test upon the consecrated, and particularly upon those that had submitted to the Lord’s
circumcision of the heart. It was too much for some, such as the “elective elders” and religionists, while those really devoted to God submitted to the operation with joy, rejoicing in their suffering that they were counted worthy to bear the reproaches for being Jehovah’s faithful witnesses.
22	Gilgal was a place of the first camp after entering Canaan. One meaning of the name is “Circle”. The pile of stones in the form of a circle (Josh. 4: 20-24) suggests the endless testimony to the name of Jehovah, that which shall endure. The name also means “Rolling”, which is very significant. “And the Lord said unto Joshua, This day have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off you. Wherefore the name of the place is called Gilgal [(margin) rolling] unto this day.” To the Canaanites the name meant merely a place; but when the covenant people of God arrived there he gave a new meaning to the name, to wit: “I have rolled away”; that is to say, God rolled away the reproach of his people. (Josh. 5:9) As to the fulfillment:
23	Prior to 1931 the modern-day Egyptians and Philistines, representing religionists and other enemies, reproached Jehovah’s faithful people as a nameless people, that is, without a real name, and so those religionists designated the people of God by the nickname “Russellites”, “Millennial Dawn people,” “second chancers,” and various other names. They were held up as the followers of one man, giving glory to their dead leader. There was considerable reason for this, because there was a disposition to give high esteem, honor and glory to human creatures, such as the religious systems have done and continue to do. Out from that God’s people must come. Jehovah’s faithful people can mark well the time and place when God “rolled away [such] reproach”. It was the Lord’s doing, and to the honor of his name. The place was at the convention, July, 1931, when Jehovah revealed to his people their “new name”. The enemy still refer to God’s people disparagingly as “self-styled Jehovah’s witnesses”. But that does not at all disturb them, because they know their “new name” which God gave to them, and they delight to bear it. They know their relationship to Jehovah, and his King and kingdom, and they know that the kingdom is here and that they have entered into the antitypical promised land. No more do they acknowledge the modem Egyptians as “the higher powers”. (Rom. 13:1) Henceforth the faithful know and joyfully acknowledge Jehovah God and Christ Jesus as the true Higher Powers, and no one of the land is acknowledged as such. Therefore from now on the religionists cannot correctly reproach our God as having failed to keep his promise to his covenant people, and to bring them into the land of promise. Scornfully and derisively the religion
88	3Te WATCHTOWER	Bbooklyn, n. y.
ists laugh at Jehovah’s witnesses for proclaiming that God’s kingdom has come and that they represent and stand for the kingdom interests; but the fact remains true beyond dispute, and hence Jehovah’s witnesses have no occasion to fret themselves concerning the reproaches heaped upon them from the wicked crowd that defame God’s holy name.
PASSOVER
“Forty years exactly had elapsed since the Israelites kept the first passover in Egypt, when the law covenant was made and Jehovah delivered them. “And the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the month, at even, in the plains of Jericho.”—Josh. 5:10.
“ Now on the 14th day of Nisan they celebrated their first passover in the promised land. Jericho was right near, where the enemy was located, and the Israelites might be attacked at any moment, but that did not cause them to lean to their own understanding and to conclude that they would skip the Memorial because of the emergency. They kept the passover on time. It must have been a time of real joy, since thirty-nine years had elapsed since they had last kept the passover. No doubt it was a time when they had the joy of the Lord, because they were obeying his will. Note now what came to pass in the fulfillment of that prophetic drama. Shortly following the time of learning their “new name” the people of the Lord were made to understand, from The Watchtower of February 15, 1932, what constitutes “the joy of the Lord”, and the reason given therein was and is: “Because the time has come for the vindication of Jehovah’s name.” It is the joy resulting from the fact that the time has come for Christ Jesus to vindicate the name of the Most High. The proper course for the Lord’s anointed seems clearly to be that they should keep a memorial feast at the appointed time in each year and they must do so not in sorrow, but in joy. Accordingly, for the first time since the Memorial celebrating the death of Jesus, the week which began with that day (March 20, 1932) was set aside as a period to give world-wide public testimony and that period was designated and known as “International Thanksgiving Testimony Period”, and it proved to be a season of great rejoicing for the remnant and for their “companions”, the “other sheep” of the Lord. The Watchtower dealing with the Memorial that year furthermore said:
‘Kingdom Testimony. There is no reason why any of God’s people should observe any holiday that is fixed or set aside by the organization of this world. God's typical people celebrated two periods of the year: one in the spring and one in the autumn sea
son. Those periods were ‘holy unto the Lord’. (See Ezra 6:19-22; Nehemiah 8:1-3,9-12,14-18.) Why should not God’s anointed people specially observe during the year two days of joy, thanksgiving and praise unto Jehovah God? ‘The joy of the Lord is your strength.’ The Lord Tias given us an understanding of his word’ and continues to graciously ‘feed us upon food that is convenient’. (Neh. 8:10,12; Prov. 30:8) The kingdom is here and progresses, and our business is to sing forth the praises of Jehovah God and, as his witnesses, to bear testimony to his name. (Isa. 12:3-6; 43:10-12) October 1 to 9 inclusive is therefore named and designated as Kingdom Testimony Period. Let the companies of God’s people in various communities hold a service convention beginning Friday evening previous ; then let the period of nine days following be devoted to service, this to be a period of joyful thanksgiving, praise and service unto Jehovah God, a feast to the prosperous kingdom work. In that period of time every one of Jehovah’s witnesses, so far as it is possible, should participate in giving testimony and praise to Jehovah and to his kingdom by bearing the fruits of the kingdom to others who desire to hear.”—The Watchtower February 15, 1932, page 57, paragraph 27.
26 The next world-wide testimony period was that of October 1-9, 1932, known as “Kingdom Testimony Period”. Between the two joyous testimony periods named foregoing, the books Two and Three of Vindication were released for publication, these being supplementary to the Book One of Vindication. In books Two and Three, the Scriptural proof is brought forth that the prophecies of old recorded in the Scriptures, and which Christians had understood as applying to “Israel after the flesh” and their restoration to Palestine, really and in fact applied only to spiritual Israelites, Jehovah's witnesses, his anointed people, and to their deliverance from Satan’s organization and their reinstatement in the kingdom privileges and services, which took place from and after the year 1931 in particular. These two books, prepared and published by the grace of God and his King, truly show beyond any doubt that Jehovah’s witnesses had entered “the land of promise”, having crossed the antitypical Jordan. Shortly thereafter Jehovah revealed to his people that the “new covenant”, which he makes, does not apply to Israel after the flesh, but to spiritual Israel, Jehovah’s witnesses, and the publication of that satisfying truth appeared in The Watchtower, issues of April to July, 1934, and in the book Jehovah in the same year.
” For four days after the entering Canaan God caused manna to fall for the feeding of the Israelites. They celebrated the passover the evening of
March 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
89
the 14th of Nisan, and the next morning they had a different food. "And they did eat of the old corn of the land on the morrow after the passover, unleavened cakes and parched corn in the selfsame day.”—Josh. 5:11.
** The corn had just been plucked and was somewhat green and had to be toasted or parched, and for that reason they ate "parched corn”. As to the fulfillment of this part of the picture, note that until 1932 God’s devoted people had been feeding their minds to a large degree upon the teachings that had previously been preached and published before 1918, and which teachings were not up-to-date. A man had made provision for an editorial committee and had stated what might and what might not be published in The Watchtower, There was a reluctance to depart from that previous teaching, which shows that the fully consecrated were still somewhat religious. “Elective elders” were still preaching in the congregations and continued so to do until after the antitypical crossing of the Jordan and until 1932, when The Watchtower published the articles “Jehovah’s Organization”. (See The Watchtower August 15 and September 1, 1932.) Prior to that time Bible prophecy was being applied to Jews after the flesh, thus hiding the correct kingdom food. Manna was a temporary food given to the Israelites in an emergency; so also most of that which the Lord allowed to be taught prior to 1932 was temporary food for spiritual Israel.
’• The Jordan valley at the point of entrance to Canaan must have been very productive as in Abraham’s day. "It was well watered every where, before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah.” (Gen. 13:10) Entering the land, the Israelites appropriated to their own use the growing crops of grain: “And the manna ceased on the morrow after they had eaten of the old corn of the land; neither had the children of Israel manna any more; but they did eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan that year.”—Josh. 5:12.
“ During the forty years’ journey in the wilderness the manna picture had applied to natural Israel; but the words of Jesus (John 6:31-58) indicate that the antitypical manna applies to spiritual Israel, including the “remnant”, but not to the “other sheep”, which compose the “great multitude”. Therefore when the time arrived for the Lord to give his people a clear understanding of the gathering of his “other sheep”, the people of good will, the manna, that is to say, the temporary mental and spiritual food, ceased and was superseded by solid, stable kingdom truth food. From and after 1931, when the Lord gave the “penny” to his servants in the “vineyard” (Matt. 20:1-16), and when
the kingdom workers were in the kingdom land, the Lord began to unfold his prophetic dramas. The Watchtower Memorial article of March 1, 1938, will here be considered with interest.
*’ In harmony with this statement it is seen that the bringing in of the people of good will by the Lord was set before God’s people at London in June, 1931, and in Columbus in July of that same year, and more clearly by the Jehu-Jonadab prophetic drama published in The Watchtower in July, 1932. Thus exactly on time, and in due time, from 1932 onward Jehovah’s witnesses have been fed by the Lord on kingdom fruits or truths rather than on what had been on the table prior to 1918 and sometime thereafter. That which had served as temporary food for forty years duly ceased, and the Lord began to feed his people upon “food in due season”. (A.R.V.) Therefore it is clearly seen that the kingdom truth concerning God’s covenant people and their obligations, and also the truths regarding the people of good will, began to open up as “meat in due season”. Jehovah, as promised, ‘prepared this table for his faithful witnesses in the presence of the modern-day enemies.’—Ps. 23: 5.
INSTRUCTION
“ Jehovah, speaking through Moses (Deut. 20:16-20), had given general instruction as to the manner of besieging and taking the city of Jericho, but now this prophetic drama, with Joshua, was being enacted and certain specific instructions must be given with regard to Jericho. The siege of Jericho was about to begin, and Jehovah issued special instructions to Joshua as to how it should be assaulted and taken. “And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against him with his sword drawn in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and said unto him, Art thou for us, or for our adversaries!”—Josh. 5:13.
•• It appears that Joshua alone went out to view the surroundings of Jericho, and to size up the situation and the enemy, and to consider what method he would use to take the city. He would remember that Rahab was in her house on the walls, and since she had shown great friendship to the spies and they had made a covenant to protect her, Joshua would consider how that might be done. His mind was absorbed with the problem of the siege. Since Joshua most of the time played a part representing Christ, it appears that in this particular part of the picture he represented the members of the body of Christ on earth, to whom the Lord has committed the work of looking after his kingdom interests. He was in meditation concerning the siege of Jericho.
THE WATCHTOWER.
90
** In the fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama the attention of God’s servants on earth would be given to the preparation for the battle against the enemy, which would conclude with the battle of the great day of God Almighty. During the winter of 1932 and 1933 the Watchtower articles emphasized the preparation for Armageddon, and in the autumn of the year 1933 a new book, Preparation, was published. Also about the same time the booklet Escape to the Kingdom began to be distributed by the Society. Early in spring, 1933, operations began. Fifty-five radio stations broadcast the speech “Effect of Holy Year on Peace and Prosperity”, which was in response to the pope’s decree of 1933 as a “holy year”, and which was inaugurated with peculiar ceremonies, in which the politicians and others, of the Hierarchy, put on a great show. That year was a crucial period for Jehovah’s witnesses, and they sensed many difficulties just ahead. They needed special guidance and instructions that they might be assured that they were pursuing the proper course. Desiring to be fully assured that they might truly say, “If God be for us, who can be against us ?” they were therefore meditating and inquiring. The year text was Proverbs 18:10, A.R.V.: “The name of Jehovah is a strong tower; the righteous runneth into it, and is safe”; and The Watchtower of January 1 commented on the text and, amongst other things, said: “The situation as now revealed to those who love Jehovah is this: That the greatest fight of all time is beginning and within a very short time will reach the climax. It is the fight of Satan and his wicked hordes against the Lord of righteousness Christ Jesus, who is the special representative of Jehovah. This fight includes the remnant, but it is Jehovah’s fight. He is 'Jehovah of hosts’, and therefore the remnant are absolutely assured that Jehovah’s organization shall triumph. Satan and his forces are desperately attempting the destruction of all those who take a positive stand on the side of God and righteousness. The remnant are in the van of Jehovah’s people on earth and are singing the praises of Jehovah and should expect to be assaulted by the enemy. Without a question of doubt all the remnant would be destroyed instantly except for the protection the Lord throws around them. In this hour of great peril Jehovah speaks to his people and says: 'The name of Jehovah is a strong tower; the righteous runneth into it, and is safe.’ (Prov. 18:10, A.R.V.) This is a general rule of Jehovah made and applied at this particular time, and is applied beneficially to all who bring themselves within that rule. . . .
“Righteousness is counted only to men who believe in God and in Christ Jesus and who then
Brooklyn, N. Y.
joyfully render themselves in obedience to the law of God. According to this rule the members of the remnant class are righteous. They have the name of Jehovah, and his name is their strong tower. ‘The righteous runneth into it, and is safe [is set on high (R.F., margin)].’ Truly the righteous have hurried into this high tower. On July 26, 1931, at the Columbus convention, God’s people seeing and appreciating the fact that Jehovah had given to his people a new name, they joyfully accepted the same. They literally ran into that tower of everlasting strength. Not only did that convention adopt a resolution declaring their joy in the fact of having received their name at the mouth of Jehovah, but all over the earth faithful companies of God’s people hastened to thus declare themselves. . . .
“The fight is on, and will continue until Jehovah destroys the enemy, and this will be done as soon as the serving of notice is completed.”—The Watchtower January 1, 1933.
35 The covenant people of God needed to view the situation calmly and thoughtfully that they might ascertain the will of Jehovah concerning their movements. This was pictured by Joshua’s looking over the situation in preparation for the battle against Jericho. Jehovah had his officer on hand to instruct Joshua. Jehovah always guides them that fully trust him. While Joshua was soberly meditating the situation, he “lifted up his eyes and looked”. He must have been deeply impressed by what he saw. A man with a drawn sword in his hand stood some distance away. Joshua went up to that man, asking: “Art thou for us, or for our adversaries?” Joshua was anxious to know, and he boldly propounded the question. All of Jericho was inside the walls, and here was an armed man alone, outside. On which side of the coming battle was that man? Joshua was anxious to know, and the answer was given to him: “And he said, Nay; but as captain [(margin) prince] of the host of the Lord am I now come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto him, What saith my lord unto his servant?”—Josh. 5:14.
38 Joshua then learned that Jehovah was sending his prince invisible to human eyes to take charge of the siege of Jericho; that no man was ordering and directing the fight, but that the battle was Jehovah’s. The prince standing there was the spirit Logos, now appearing in human form for the occasion. As Jehovah’s special agent he was taking charge of the approaching battle of Jericho. In full harmony with this part of the drama the May 15, 1933, issue of The Watchtower published the article “Jehovah’s Prophet”, as foretold by Moses and set forth in Acts 3:22, 23, and in that article it was made to clearly appear for the first time that Christ
THE WATCHTOWER
91
Mauch 15, 1939
Jesus is the great Field Marshal, leading Jehovah’s host against Satan’s organization, and that the prophecy applies specifically to the “remnant”, and that the remnant are accountable to the great Prophet and must obey or suffer destruction, and that the prophecy is not having its primary application after the battle of Armageddon. The remnant, here pictured by Joshua, learned for the first time that they must be wholly and completely obedient to Christ in everything prior to the battle of Armageddon.
"Joshua immediately acknowledged Jehovah, there represented by the armed man, and this he did by falling on his face and asking for instructions. Likewise Jehovah’s witnesses, the remnant, following the proper understanding of Jehovah’s great Prophet above mentioned, rejoiced to learn that God has anointed Christ Jesus to give the command and that Jehovah’s witnesses must be fully obedient to him.
“Joshua stood before the chief representative of the Most High; and that he might be given to understand his proper relationship to the great Prophet and Representative of Jehovah, the Lord spoke: “And the captain of the Lord’s host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for the place whereon thou standest is holy. And Joshua did so.”—Josh. 5:15.
s* The place where Joshua stood, by reason of the presence of the Logos, was like the sanctuary of the temple, where the priests of the Lord do npt wear shoes. Moses had received a similar command at the burning bush to remove his shoes. (Ex. 3:1-6) In the orders given concerning the apparel that the high priest must wear, and also that the other priests should wear at the tabernacle and the temple, there is no order to make sandals or shoes for them, thus showing they were in their bare feet. It appears that those who are in the presence of the Lord should be without shoes or sandals. The seraphim attending the Lord at the temple covered their feet with their wings. (Isa. 6:2) The removing of the shoes by Joshua, therefore, appears to be a sign of self-abasement and willingness to completely obey the Almighty God and Christ the King. To be sure, the ground there was the same as other portions of the earth, but by reason of the presence of the Lord the place was holy and everything upon it that remains and lives must be wholly and completely devoted to God.
“Hearing the command, Joshua quickly obeyed; as it is written: “And Joshua did so.” Those devoted to Jehovah are anxious to know and to do his will. In the fulfillment of this part of the picture God’s anointed people had but recently learned that they must no longer honor men and laud and
praise them as leaders, whether dead or alive, and that therefore they must proceed to clean up by putting away such as the “elective elder” system and other means of man worship. No longer now do they look to such as their teachers and leaders. They begin to have the proper appreciation of the words of the Lord, that all who exalt themselves shall be abased and that it is their privilege and duty to give all honor and praise to Jehovah God and Christ the King. Exactly corresponding to this The Watchtower published the articles on “His Sanctuary”, which articles, appearing in June and July, 1933, brought forth the proof that the Lord had cleansed his sanctuary class on earth as of October, 1932.
41 The remarkable manner in which the physical facts dovetail in with the prophecy and the publication of these facts in The Watchtower is conclusive proof that the Lord is directing his people and that these prophecies were written aforetime for their comfort and hope. If it were possible for man to surmise that such, at the time of publication, was in fulfillment of prophecy, it would be presumptuous to say so; but such is an impossibility. Years after the coming to pass of the events that constitute the fulfillment the prophecy becomes clear, thus proving that man had nothing to do with either the picture or the bringing about of events in fulfillment. Everyone who is properly exercised by the revealed Word of God will rejoice to learn that the anointed are guided by Jehovah’s hand. Jonadabs, now seeing this, well know and appreciate that the remnant are God’s chosen people on the earth as his witnesses, and that the continuous assault upon these witnesses by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allies is because they are faithful to God and to his kingdom. The Jonadabs readily see that religion is a snare and a racket and that those who follow religious teachers are being woefully deceived and led into the trap of Satan. Therefore the revelation and publication of these prophecies now constitute a great aid and comfort to the Jonadabs, as well as to the remnant. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their allies of the totalitarian government have exalted and do continue to exalt themselves, and claim that which belongs alone to the Lord. The Jonadabs see that those religionists could not be the representatives of God and Christ, but are the chief earthly enemies of God and his kingdom, and hence they persecute God’s faithful people. These truths now revealed should serve and do serve to give strength to the people of good will, and therefore they diligently lay hold upon the truth of God’s Word and, applying themselves to the study thereof, they delight to go forward in doing the will of God. They now see that
92
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N.Y.
they must "seek righteousness” and "seek meekness”, and as they do so they learn the will of God concerning them and they are quick to obey. Like the remnant they learn that salvation is not within the power of men or any organization of religionists calling themselves "the church”. They learn that the Roman Catholic system constitutes a great snare of the Devil to turn the people away from God. They appreciate, as the Lord has said, “salvation belongeth unto Jehovah.” (Ps. 3:8, A.R.V.) The only way to life is to know Jehovah and Christ Jesus and to obey.—John 17:3.
*2 Now the time has come when Jehovah God will exalt and vindicate his name, and he will use his faithful witnesses in doing so. All the nations of the earth shall know that Jehovah is the supreme and almighty One. The battle of the great day of God Almighty is very near at hand, and Jehovah of hosts is with those who are wholly devoted to him and he is their refuge. To those who have devoted themselves to him he is now revealing the interpretation and meaning of his prophecies recorded long ago for their aid at this particular time. Those who will profit by his favor must now forsake all religious practice and give heed to the
plain Word of God. To follow man or man-made institutions means certain destruction. To obey the Word of the Almighty God means life, and to all such he now says: "Be still, and know that I am [Jehovah]: . . . I will be exalted in the earth.” —Ps. 46:10.
4S The assault was about to be made upon Jericho, in which Joshua was to lead the Israelites. Joshua now learned that this attack, to be successful, must be made exactly according to instructions which the Lord gave. Both Joshua and the people must give full heed to these instructions and carefully and diligently obey them. In the fulfillment of this part of the prophecy the modern-day enemy is entrenched and must be attacked, but this attack must be made exactly in accord with instructions the Lord has given to his people on earth. As Joshua received the specific instructions from Jehovah’s Chief Representative just preceding the beginning of the siege of Jericho, God’s people on earth have received instruction from the Lord in his appointed way. Jericho, both in the prophetic drama and in the fulfillment, has been attacked. Mark the results.
(To be continued)
MEMORIAL
THIS issue of The Watchtower contains a short article concerning Memorial, which will be celebrated April 4. If there is no competent person present to deliver a brief discourse immediately preceding the partaking of the emblems, that short article should be read before those assembled before partaking. Since the breaking of the bread and drinking of the wine both picture the death of Jesus, it follows that both emblems should be served together, and not separately.
WITH his disciples Jesus kept the passovcr, in A.D. 33, as commanded by Jehovah. That was the last passover. Jesus knew he was soon to be put to death and before that event he must instruct his disciples, and through them instruct others of like precious faith who should follow after, of and concerning his Father’s purpose, and therefore he did the things recorded. “And as they were eating [the Passover], Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it: for this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.” (Matt. 26:26-28) The institution of this memorial by the Lord Jesus took place immediately following the eating of the last passover, and it is the memorial of Jesus’ death that his followers are commanded to annually observe.
The law covenant, which included the yearly passover,
was made in Egypt with Moses as the chief one or mediator. The new covenant (Jer. 31:31-34) was made by Jehovah with Christ Jesus while Jesus was on earth (antitypical Egypt), and it was the blood of the Lord Jesus that made good or operative that new covenant. Therefore he said to his disciples, referring to the wine in the cup which represented his lifeblood: “This is my blood of the covenant, . . . Drink ye all of it.” — Matt. 26:27,28, American Revised Version.
At John 6:53, Jesus uttered these words: “Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.” He was then speaking of his ‘‘sheep”, the “little flock” (Luke 12:32), who become members of Jehovah’s royal house of sons. Otherwise stated, it is the spirit-begotten ones, taken into the new covenant, that must eat the bread and drink the blood. But do not all persons that ever get life on earth have to ‘eat of the bread’? No, only the spiritual sons eat the bread, and drink the blood. All who get life on earth must exercise faith in the lifeblood of Christ Jesus poured out for the remission of sins, but at the institution of the Memorial he was inviting his disciples alone to be broken with him and to be dead with him and to thus share in his death and in his resurrection. Since then his words apply only to those who are consecrated to God and are spirit-begotten. Let it be carefully noted that “Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it”, and gave the broken bread to his disciples and commanded them to eat. The breaking is of very great importance and cannot be ignored or passed over. It is of
March 15,1939
THE WATCHTOWER
93
vital significance to all who participate with Christ Jesus in his kingdom. It means that they must become members of “the body of Christ” (1 Cor. 12:12-18,27) and must be broken with him and therefore die with him in order to share with him in his kingdom glory.—1 Cor. 11:23, 24.
It will be conceded that Jesus’ words meant: “This bread represents my body.” The bread was merely a symbol, and the breaking of it discloses what must be done to those of the body of Christ. The “fruit of the vine”, or wine, represented his lifeblood about to be poured out, and to the disciples he said: “Drink ye all of it.” His words clearly mean that all who will be associated with him in his house must first be broken and die and therefore share with him in his death. That his words meant that his body members are partners in his suffering and death is fully supported by the apostle, who under inspiration of the holy spirit wrote: “The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion [partnership] of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? For we, being many, are one bread, and one body; for we are all partakers of that one bread.” —1 Cor. 10:16,17.
Eating of the bread did not mean that those eating are thereby justified to life. (Rom. 5:1,9) Nor do those words of Jesus mean that all must feed upon that “bread” and be sustained by the humanity of Jesus. Before one can become a part of that “bread” which is afterwards broken one must first be justified. Jesus took the loaf of unleavened bread and broke it and said to his followers: “This is my body.” Then his words were in substance these: ‘You must eat, that is to say, partake with me and thereby become my partners or fellow sufferers, and as this bread you see me break represents the body of Christ, or the members thereof, all of such must be broken together.’ Such breaking of the bread or body and the drinking of the blood must take place after those partaking are justified and spirit-begotten, and therefore only such properly partake of the emblems.
Justification does not result from such breaking of the body and drinking of the blood, because justification must first precede or be had before the breaking of the bread and drinking of the wine can take place. Jesus did not offer the bread and wine to everyone, but only to those who had proved their faithfulness. (Luke 22: 28-30) It follows, then, that only those properly partake of the emblems who are first justified and spirit-begotten, and who are in line for the kingdom. It is the will of God that Jesus shall have associated with him in his work as Vindicator 144,000 members of his body, all together constituting one body or royal house of sons of God. (Rev. 14:1-4) Every one of such must undergo a test similar to that to which Jesus was subjected and must suffer and die with him as a condition precedent to entering into the Lord’s glory.
Jesus then proceeded to instruct his disciples concerning the cup. The wine in the cup referred to his blood, and his words, in substance, meant this: ‘This represents my blood, which blood makes good the new covenant, which covenant my Father has made with me. Also, it is the price of redemption for the human race.’ Jesus knew drinking the blood meant death, according to the law of Jehovah. (Gen. 9:4; Lev. 17:11) He was therefore inviting his disciples to perform an act that meant their death, and thus
inviting them to participate in his death, and hence he said: “He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him.” (John 6:56) That is the only way to be taken into The Christ, and only those who are taken into and become members of The Christ are broken with Christ Jesus and pour out their life with him.
Everyone who makes an unconditional consecration to do God’s will properly symbolizes or gives outward testimony thereof by being baptized in water. That baptism, however, does not put him into the body of Christ; he must be baptized into the sacrificial death of Christ Jesus, and that must be done after he has consecrated himself to God and has received justification. (Read Romans 6: 3-5.) Only those called to the heavenly calling will share in the sacrificial death of Christ Jesus. Only the “little flock” of the Lord’s sheep, the spirit-begotten ones, are in line to share in the death of Christ Jesus and in his glory that shall follow, and therefore only such properly partake of the Memorial symbols.
Says the apostle (1 Cor. 5:7, 8): “Christ our passover is sacrificed for us: therefore let us keep the feast.” He means those that are in the class to which he belonged (1 Cor. 1:1,2) ; therefore the spiritual class. If one is a Jonadab, he is not in Christ (2 Ki. 10:15-23) ; and if he is not in Christ he cannot share in the death and resurrection of Christ. Therefore it would be improper for him to partake of the Memorial emblems.
“TILL HE COME”
“For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord’s death till he come.” (1 Cor. 11:26) Those who partake properly and with understanding and discernment thereby show that they recognize the purpose of the death of Christ Jesus and that it is their privilege to suffer and die with him in order to live and reign with him, sharing his glory. Christ Jesus has now come to the temple (Mal. 3:1-3); but there are yet on earth in the flesh those who properly celebrate the Memorial feast and should do so until their ‘change’ comes at death, when they are “changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye”, giving up the human organism and receiving at the hands of the Lord a spiritual body. (1 Cor. 15:50-54) It is enjoined upon them to celebrate the Memorial and thus bear testimony of their relationship to God and Christ Jesus, and they would be woefully negligent if they failed to do so. “Till he come,” therefore, is properly construed to mean until the last member of Christ’s body on earth finishes his course and is changed from human to spirit. Only such as are in a relationship to the Lord similar to that between the apostles and the Lord could be taken into the covenant for the kingdom. (See Luke 22: 28-30.) Therefore it is only those who are in Christ and who share in his death that have a part in the kingdom. This excludes everyone but the spiritual and anointed ones, and these alone properly partake of the Memorial emblems.
Those who properly and therefore worthily partake of the Memorial emblems must be first justified, then spirit-begotten, and gathered to the temple and anointed now with God’s spirit. The Jonadabs are consecrated to do God’s will, but are not spirit-begotten. They arc not justified. Their hope is not in heaven, but is that they may live on earth forever. They have found refuge in Jehovah’s
94
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
organization under Christ Jesus, where they must remain until the day of Jehovah’s wrath is passed; and while remaining in bounds, they must continue to seek righteousness and meekness. Being ‘strangers in the camp’ (Ex. 20:10), who have devoted themselves to God and Christ, they must participate in declaring the name and the kingdom of God under Christ. But since they cannot share in the death of Christ Jesus, and hence cannot partake of his resurrection, it would be entirely out of order and improper for them to partake of the Memorial emblems. Being under the protection of God’s organization, they are companions of the anointed and must serve with the anointed and joyfully do with their might what their hands find to do. The Scriptural evidence and the facts show that the Jonadabs, or “great multitude” (Bev. 7:9-17), are now being gathered to the Lord and, as such, they are continuously praising God and Christ his King, because they see that the day of salvation and deliverance has come. Therefore they hail Christ Jesus, the King of glory, and joyfully serve him continuously.
All the Scriptural argument, therefore, conclusively establishes this fact, that the Lord Jesus Christ instituted the memorial of his death and commanded that this should be celebrated only by those who are begotten of God’s spirit and baptized into the spiritual body of Christ; that such spiritual sons would fail of their duty and miss their great privilege if they did not partake of the Memorial; that once each year it is their duty and privilege to thus celebrate the Memorial. In the year 1939 the proper date falls on April 4, after six p.m., at which time the various companies of God’s anointed people throughout the earth will assemble together and partake of the Memorial feast. It
will be entirely right and proper for the Jonadabs to be present at such meeting and observe what is done, that they may have a keener appreciation of the relationship of the anointed ones to Jehovah and a keener appreciation of the relationship of the “great multitude” to God and to Christ. It should be and is a time of rejoicing for them also, because they appreciate the fact that the day of deliverance has come.
By having in mind the inspired words of the apostle, to wit, “Christ our passover is sacrificed . . . therefore let us keep the feast,” it is easy to be seen that the flock or class of which the apostle himself was and is a part, and like members of the spiritual company, alone can properly partake of the Memorial emblems. Jonadabs, or those who compose the “great multitude”, can never properly partake of the Memorial emblems. To do so would be doing injury to themselves.—1 Cor. 11: 27-31.
It was in A.D. 1918 that the Lord Jesus appeared at his temple for judgment and there began the judgment of the consecrated, spirit-begotten ones. (Mal. 3:1-3) The ones approved at that judgment have been taken into the temple. Since that time, therefore, the true followers of Christ Jesus have partaken of the Memorial emblems, not in sorrow, but with joy, because the Lord, the Head of the house, is with them. (Matt. 26:29) The “fruit of the vine” is the wine, and upon his second coming the wine pictured “the joy of the Lord”. Now all of the temple company are rejoicing in the Lord, as symbolized by drinking with him the wine “new”, and are there in the temple showing forth the praises of Jehovah their Father. “And in his temple doth every one speak of his glory.”—Ps. 29: 9.
LETTERS FROM AFIELD
THAT Others of like precious faith in other parts of the earth may know how the wicked agents of Satan persecute the Lord’s little ones in Germany, the following letter dated in December, 1938, recently received from Germany, is set out. Satan and his agents in Germany, and particularly the Hierarchy and Nazis, are desperately endeavoring to crush everyone who loves Jehovah and his King and kingdom. Amidst all the persecution the Lord still provides that these faithful ones get some consolation by occasionally receiving literature from the outside world. We long for the kingdom to be fully established, that these dear and faithful souls may be relieved and enter into the everlasting glory of Jehovah and his King.
Dear Brother Rutherford;
Dear Brethren in All Lands:
To Jehovah and the Lord, and then to you, we render our cordial thanks for the wonderful, life-sustaining food. Jehovah feeds his people, i. e., all those who are fearless in the presence of their enemies though suffering most cruel persecution. We received the 1938 Year Book, then the current issues of The Watchtower, Consolation, booklets and books. Crusade Against Christianity is also in our hands. So you see that Jehovah’s power is unlimited and that he does not forsake his faithful ones. We have suffered and been persecuted, but such is indispensable as evidence of our faithfulness and binds us more closely and firmly to the King of Eternity and to the Kingdom of Peace, and also
to you, dear ones, everywhere. Ever united with you in spirit, we collaborate with you in giving out the progressive light to the brethren and people of good will. The adversaries greatly defame the name of the Most High, his work and his witnesses; they thus identify themselves as enemies. When Habakkuk’s prophecy is fulfilled, Jehovah will justly cast them into the dust for ever. They and also mankind have been warned. See the new Warning booklet, of which we have a certain number and which we distribute, regardless of whether or not they are forbidden. We obey God, and not men. Practically all the brethren in this country were or still are in captivity. As far as we know, they are in many concentration camps, in groups, and comfort and encourage each other to remain faithful under all conditions unto the end.
Some who had consecrated themselves to serve God have not stood firm in their trials, but have returned to Satan’s organization, to their own perdition. Under such devilish dictatorial power it is impossible to carry on a business without surrendering oneself to and associating with the enemy. Neither may consecrated ones be officials in the Devil’s organization and at the same time officials or representatives of the King of Eternity and his eternal Kingdom of Peace. Some for other reasons or trifling things have failed of perseverance which requires endurance and brings suffering. Our hearts are sad when we think of how brethren have betrayed their brethren in cross-examinations and courtrooms, because of which many dear and faithful ones have languished in prisons for months and years. There are many other snares and traps, and in order to stand firm, prayer, faithful devotion to the Lord and extreme watchfulness are necessary. Much harm
Mabch 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
95
may be avoided through opportune instruction to the various companies.
Dear ones everywhere! Throw aside all dross, anything that might cause you to fall and lose your glorious inheritance. Be assured of our prayers offered before the throne of grace, and of the faithfulness and love of your enduring brethren. Death, imprisonment and concentration camp only bind us more closely to Jehovah, our loving Creator, to Christ, to his eternal Kingdom of Peace, and to you, dfear ones. The battle is God’s, and the Lamb will be victorious.
In this spirit we send you heartiest greetings from Zion for the new year.
Your brethren by His grace,
Local Company op----------.
December 1938.
RE HIDES AND FURS FOR CLOTHING
Question : The undersigned has been engaged in killing foxes and using their hides and furs for clothing. Is this a violation of the everlasting covenant!
answer
God caused Adam and Eve to be clothed with the skins of animals, and also required badger skins to be used in the construction of the tabernacle. This shows it was necessary to take the life of the animal. If any person should find it necessary, in providing raiment or clothing, to take the life of animals and use their skins for clothing or raiment, such would not be a violation of the everlasting covenant.
THE NEW QUOTA A GREAT HELP
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We, the San Diego, California, company of Jehovah’s witnesses, appreciate very much your timely letter of January 1,1939, concerning the new quota for company publishers. It has been a great help to us in realizing the importance of the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ Jesus and how we can prove by our actions that it is the biggest thing in our lives. Many of us are advanced in years and infirm and, if the suggestion of 60 hours per month had not come from the Lord through you, we would never have thought it possible for us to attain that. Knowing that the Lord would not ask us to do anything impossible, when we received your letter we put our full trust in the Lord to make us do his will and attain the quota and put forth our best effort to do it, and now we see the Lord’s blessing upon our effort.
One of us, who is no longer young nor in the best of health, succeeded by the Lord’s grace in devoting 99J hours to the field service during January. He set aside a certain time each day for the field work from house to house and certain evenings for back calls and let nothing keep him back. Many a day if he had given in to his physical feelings he would have stayed at home and rested instead of going out into the field.
Another one of us who is very frail got in 61 £ hours for the month. She also made up a schedule and stuck to it.
Another publisher reported 60 hours. Many of the rest of us got close to 60 hours for January, and, by the Lord’s grace, we will get in 60 hours or more during February.
The more we engage in the field service, the better we can appreciate that the kingdom is the only thing worth while.
We pray the Lord’s rich blessing upon you and that he may continue to strengthen you to carry on, and we thank him for the privilege of co-operating with you in tanning the “old woman’s” hide.
ONLY BY JEHOVAH’S GRACE AND SPIRIT
Dear Brother Rutherford;
Our hearts are full of gratitude to Jehovah for the continual help which we receive from him through the medium of The Watchtower.
Pointing as it does to the inspiring truths of God’s Word, it serves to strengthen us for the fight and give us true joy in that service. The articles on “Lovers of Righteousness”, which have been studied in the month of December, have been a portion from Jehovah.
Men have always tended to be either bullies or sissies, and some both, and it is only by Jehovah’s grace and the influence of his spirit that one can be a true follower of Christ and be bold and courageous and yet kind and considerate. Jesus was confident because he knew he did that which pleased Jehovah, and every lover of righteousness, acting according to the divine principles, can have that same confidence and assurance.
We thank our Father for his provisions for us that we may serve him in this day.
With warm love and best wishes,
Your brethren in Jehovah’s service,
Bethel Family, Copenhagen.
MADE POSSIBLE THROUGH JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We, the special pioneers in Louisville [Ky.], on closing a year of service, wish to express our appreciation of the favor and privilege of working in such close contact with the people of good will in this city. True, we have very little time for anything else; but the full devotion of our days and moments has brought us joys and blessings which we would not exchange for any earthly thing.
We realize that this has been made possible only through the Lord’s organization, and we herewith express our gratitude to Jehovah God for the uplifting of the standards through the special pioneer service. The goal of monthly hours that is set and the vast material to work with have shown us such a fuller life, such a higher “standard of living”, that we never want to back down to anything less.
We want to thank you for your thoughtfulness for the small allowance that is made, and for our own sakes we are glad of the rule by which it is given.
Our desire is to be in this fight to the finish, and to stand with the Society, and yourself, to see the triumph fully won.
We pray for our heavenly Father to greatly encourage and counsel you, that all in Zion may continue to rejoice.
Your brethren and fellow publishers,
Louis Shar	Mary	Hinds
Eunice Lamson	Daisy	Hemmaway
Iva Davison	John	Hemmaway
(Continued from page 82)
Jesus the Lamb of God, is Tuesday, April 4, after six p.m. Let each company, therefore, assemble after six p.m. of April 4, and the anointed thereof celebrate the Memorial, their companions the Jonadabs being present as observers. The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red wine. The Lord and his apostles used real red wine in symbol of his blood, and the anointed remnant should follow their lead. A report on the celebration should bo made to the Society as instructed in the Informant. In prepara
tion therefor the article “Memorial” in this issue of The Watchtower will be studied with profit.
“WATCHTOWER” BINDER
The improvements in make-up of The Watchtower, beginning January, 1939, necessitate a new binder for those who desire to preserve their copies of the magazine. Sueh a new binder is now on supply, clothbound, new blade-style, at $1.00 each. Those associated with companies should order binders through their respective company servant. Remittance should accompany order.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
THE NEGLIGENT LOSE A PRIVILEGE
“The Society mailed a letter to one of the small companies of the zone, with instructions to give immediate attention to the enclosed Consolation subscription that had expired. Up to January 4 nothing had been done about it, because some of the publishers said there was no use calling on her, because she was no longer interested. Knowing that some effort should be made to renew the subscription regardless of what some of the publishers may say or think, I said, ‘If none of you want to call on this party, I will call on her and try to find out why she has so suddenly lost interest in the only work on the earth that amounts to anything.’ I called, and after answering many questions and endeavoring to give her a better view of God’s kingdom and the manner in which Christ Jesus is carrying on his work in the earth, she gave me a year’s renewal for The Watchtower, contributed for the back numbers, gave me a renewal for Consolation for a year, also contributed for the Consolation back numbers. In addition to this she ordered a subscription for The Watchtower and Consolation to be sent to her brother in Euclid, Ohio. Then noticing the booklets in my case, she said she wanted some of them to send to her daughter who is attending the Methodist school. She took all the different colored-cover booklets I had. The results here prove that regardless of what some may say or think, it pays to have someone call on all the names received from the Society.”
WHAT DELAYED THIS BACK-CALLT
“About a year and a half ago a publisher in eastern Pennsylvania left Riches with a young man whose parents are Slavs. Becoming interested in’ it,- he'read-portions of it to his mother, who could read very little English but who eventually took up the book and got out of it what she could and then sent in contribution to the Brooklyn office for some books in Slavic. The Society sent her a number of books and booklets in her language, and The Watchtower, for which she subscribed, at the same time sending a good-will slip to the local company so the lady could be called on. This call was made promptly by a local publisher, who found exceptional interest. He was asked by her (which shows she had already done considerable reading and thinking) why the call had not been made before, as now it was too late for her to be a ‘sister’ to the publisher (referring to the difference between the ‘remnant’ and the ‘great multitude’). At this call arrangements were made for a publisher speaking her language to call in order that she might better understand and that her family, who had been Catholic all their lives, might get the proper understanding of the truth. During this year she has become an active publisher. Iler example in living a Christian life has caused her family to realize that ‘religion is the bunk’. The images they had formerly prayed to have disappeared—she has seen to that—and they are glad.”
DUE TO A CHILD’S TESTIMONY
“Two little children were playing together at school. One told the other all about Armageddon. The other told her mother about it. The mother was very inquisitive about that trouble, so she decided to go to the mother of the
playmate of her child and inquire. Result: Another Jona-dab coming regularly to all the studies.”
HELPING OTHERS INTO FIELD SERVICE
“A lady showed some interest, but had no money. She repeated several times: ‘If only Mr. R------ were here, he
sure would get those books.’ Mr. R-------- was a neighbor.
The publisher arranged to call back a few days later, when she would take some literature and have Mr. R---------
at her home. In making the baek-call the publisher played a lecture or two and discussed the truth at some length with Mr. R------ and the woman of the house. The result
was, Mr. R------ took two bound books, and the woman,
three booklets. Mr. R-----had Riches previous to the backcall and showed so much interest that it was suggested to him that he ought to have a part in this work. His immediate reply was that he was ready to work. So another back-call was arranged to explain to him how our work is carried on, how our organization functions, methods of witnessing to the people, and the importance of the two magazines, The Watchtower and Consolation, for which he subscribed at once. After this he again remarked he was ready to work. He was then told of the regular Watch tower study and brought in touch with the company servant, from whom he will obtain literature very shortly to engage in the witness work.”
GETTING THERE IN HILLBILLY COUNTRY
“A publisher who lives in the Cumberland mountains of Tennessee takes his phonograph and wife on muleback to go witnessing. In this way he reaches out in all directions, about ten miles, without tiring himself out. He starts out early in the morning and goes to his farthest territory, and oftentimes reaches his remotest territory by ten o’clock. Then he starts witnessing toward home. This works very well in isolated mountain territory. Much more territory is covered by this method than by foot. It is less tiresome and goes somewhat faster than by foot. Also people can be reached who could not be reached by auto.”
FORMER OPPOSERS MAY CHANGE
“No place should be passed because of opposition. One publisher who was very well known called at a home. The lady who answered the door said: ‘I do not want any of your books. I will be glad to have you call and sec me at any time, but I do not want you to bring any of your books.’ The next time the publisher was working that rural territory she passed the house without going in. As she drove up a hill beyond the place the thought came to her mind, ‘I am going back there anyway.’ So she turned her car around and drove to the house. The lady met her at the door with these words, ‘Come right in. I have been waiting for you; for I want some of those books.’ A pioneer that worked permanent territory kept a cheek of seven places in a very short time where opposition had been on the previous visit but literature was placed the last time. Another instance: At a house on a farm the man had helped the witness from the place by pushing him as he left. Another witness called at the house next time and left a bound book.”
96
&



'w;j3Mgiasg^


•i


£
* -!>•. ■»

N
■4

>£
: "£
'?^'v*
1$





LtJh
#


Bi

S'.

lf|i&
gipfecfgg
%

s.«g
gfw
£&’
7
T.-J*-

'!•
I,
¥
W

,’I.
rij



ii:
l.¥
-r,
p:.
“ .
'^■C
r.
at



■

s
:<•
5s


f'--;A i.
/'
’■i'j''
;,k

/ , '. ' ■ /
?/’■

"Th^yshall know that lam Jehovah.”
-Ezekiel 35:15.
Vol. LX
Semimonthly
APRIL 1. 1939
CONTENTS
No. 7
Drama or Vindication (Part 5) ____99
Who Are the “Great Multitude”!____109
Field Experiences________________112
Convention _______________________98
“Fascism or Freedom” 98 “New Heavens” Testimony Period____98
“Watchtower” Studies _____________98
Memorial ________________________ 98
“Watchtower” Campaign ___________111
“Watchtower” Binder______________111

K


w id h/.

?
::^W;Tg.-^t.5.-
T-'
t:>
|K—B,«
^HnSMB8aSBSM8EB^BiBSSS^SSS^^mWaaM«HEgS^^^^Wg^-^!K^
THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	~ Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburoh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ In glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God's kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah's witnesses and all people of good wllL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge In controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.60; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by international Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ....................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian.....................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.............7 Beresford Road, Stratlifleld, N. S. W., Australia
South African _____..____________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T., under the Act of March 3, iST9.
CONVENTION
It seems appropriate that Jehovah’s witnesses and companions should assemble in convention somewhere in the East. For this purpose New York City has been selected. Time: June 23-25, inclusive. The first two days of the convention will be held at the Manhattan Center. Sunday, the 25th, all meetings, including the public meeting, will be at Madison Square Garden. It will be difficult for Jehovah’s witnesses in the far-away part of the United States to attend, and, if possible, another convention will be arranged farther west for some other time. Appropriate notice will be given in due season.
“FASCISM OR FREEDOM”
In a world threatened by the totalitarian monstrosity and blinded to the rightful theocratic government, this new booklet, Fascism or Freedom, appears as most timely information for all people of good will. Under a forceful cover illustration the 64 pages of this booklet set forth the nationally broadcast speech by Judge Rutherford at his last public appearance in New York city, together with a masterly article on “Theocracy”. You may obtain your personal copy now, on remittance of a contribution at 5c a copy. Time of release of Fascism or Freedom for general distribution is announced elsewhere.
“NEW HEAVENS” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The “New Heavens” Testimony Period will cover April, the final month of the current “Watchtower” campaign. A special feature of this period will be the release of the new booklet Fascism or Freedom. The details regarding the extensive worldwide campaign therewith now appear in the regular service paper Informant, to guide you in your plans for as large a part as possible in the special activities of this period. All persons not already in active co-operation with the service organization but who are interested in the proclamation of the kingdom of the heavens are invited to write the Watch Tower for information about the local company organization of Jehovah’s witnesses.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of May 7: “Drama of Vindication” (Part 5), fl 1-28 inclusive, The Watchtower April 1, 1939.
Week of May 14: “Drama of Vindication” (Part 5), fl 29-57 inclusive, The Watchtower April 1, 1939.
MEMORIAL
For the year 1939 the date for the feast in celebration of the name of Jehovah and to the sacrifice of his Vindicator, Christ (Continued on page ill)
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LX	April 1, 1939	No. 7
DRAMA
OF VINDICATION
PART S
“Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee’’ —Isa. 12:6.
TEHOVAH’S consecrated people on the earth now I walk in the light of his countenance. No longer J do they doubt. They know that the name of Jehovah shall be vindicated and exalted above all creation in heaven and in earth. The prayer uttered by David is now their prayer and song: “Be thou exalted, 0 God, above the heavens; let thy glory be above all the earth.” (Ps. 57:5) During the World War the consecrated, because of fear, remained inactive for a time, but now their fear of creatures is gone, and so they say: “Jehovah is my strength and my song; he also is become my salvation.” (Isa. 12:2) They are strong in faith and courageous. The people of Jehovah are now fully assured that in his strength and under the command of Christ Jesus they can accomplish whatsoever God’s purpose is concerning them. Knowing that they have entered into the “land of promise”, they go onward with songs of praise of Jehovah upon their lips. To their vision Jehovah unfolds his prophecies, which give them full assurance of faith and comfort of heart, and make strong their hope. They see that Jehovah is now doing his “strange work”, in which they, as his servants, are privileged to have some part, and they know that when that “strange work” is completed Jehovah will bring to pass his “strange act”. (Isa. 28 : 21) Away back in the time of Joshua He made this prophetic drama, and now Jehovah unfolds the meaning thereof for the comfort of his people.
* A strange and unusual thing was brought forward at this point in the drama of vindication, foretelling Jehovah’s “strange work” and concluding with another picture foretelling his “strange act”. The city of Jericho contained a population that were enemies of God. The people there, in behind the walls, pictured the religious element in particular, which element go into their holds. They were sore afraid and hid themselves behind the walls of the city; and this is in keeping with what the Lord says concerning the religionists of the present day. (Jer. 51:30) The walls of the city of Jericho pic
tured the political and commercial elements of the governments, which support and keep in action the strong-arm squad and the military powers in an effort to accomplish their purpose. “Now Jericho was straitly shut up, because of the children of Israel: none went out, and none came in.”—Josh. 6:1.
8 This Scripture text states the condition that existed in Jericho because of fear the people had of the Israelites, and which caused them to stay within the walls of the city. Like the religionists of modern times, they shut themselves in. The facts that have come to pass in recent years show that the religious element incite their allies to persecute Jehovah’s witnesses, but, as to themselves, they shut themselves up or try to hide themselves from view in order to deceive their dupes, while the persecution goes on against Jehovah’s witnesses. In 1932 the Lord began to bring about conditions to smoke the religionists out of their holds. On May 1, 1932, a speech, publicly broadcast, on the subject “Jehovah’s witnesses: Why Persecuted?” challenged the leaders of religious systems to come into the open to defend their position. Catholic and Protestant leaders were asked to choose their most desirable spokesman to defend their religious doctrines in their course of action employed by them to deceive the people and to defame Jehovah’s name. Those religionists remained in their holds.
4 January 19, 1933, a letter was addressed and sent to the Canadian radio commission protesting against the action of that Commission in refusing to permit the president of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society to broadcast the kingdom message, and in that letter the Anglican clergy were challenged to come into the open and defend their position and give their reasons for objecting to the broadcast of Jehovah’s message. Those “gentlemen of the cloth” hid themselves and remained silent.
B On May 3, 1933, a letter was sent to The Catholic Bulletin, St. Paul, Minnesota, containing a challenge to the pope to appoint his best man in America to publicly debate with the president of the organi
100
THE WATCHTOWER.
zation of Jehovah’s witnesses the doctrines by which the clergy of that institution fool the people. That institution kept its men behind the walls. At the same time the religionists incited and used the political and trafficking element and the strong-arm squad to persecute Jehovah’s witnesses.
•November 28, 1933, marked the beginning of a circulation of a “Petition and Protest” against the opposition to Jehovah’s witnesses’ using the radio and which demanded full liberty for the use thereof and asked the governmental powers to restrain the religionists and their tools from interfering with such freedom of action. The names of liberty-loving people who signed that Petition and Protest totaled 2,416,141.
’ On January 24, 1934, that Petition was filed before the Congress of the United States, demanding action, and that political “wall” continued to protect the religionists behind it and disregarded the Petition. The anti typical Jericho-ites remained silent.
•Joshua had removed his shoes at the command of Jehovah’s Officer (Josh. 5:15), after which the Lord spoke to him: “And the Lord said unto Joshua, See, I have given into thine hand Jericho, and the king thereof, and the mighty men of valour.” (Josh. 6:2) That assurance, given by the Officer of the Lord, would remove all fear and doubt in the mind of Joshua concerning the ultimate result of the siege of Jericho. That spirit of fearlessness, no doubt, Joshua would transmit to the other Israelites, so that their faith would be strong. In keeping with that part of the drama The Watchtower, which the Lord uses to transmit his truth to the consecrated, published an article, on November 1, 1933, entitled “Fear Them Not”, and which publication was for the special benefit of the faithful servants of Jehovah in Germany, where the dictator Hitler was cruelly using his power in closing the Magdeburg branch office of the Society and burning the literature containing the kingdom message. This he did while the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, at whose instance Hitler acted, hid behind the political wall. Thus was given the assurance from Jehovah that into the hand of Christ Jesus he had delivered the modern-day Jericho and that his witnesses should fearlessly go ahead regardless of the persecution of the enemy in Germany and other places. As further evidence that the Hierarchy was scared because of the message delivered by Jehovah’s witnesses, and by their zeal and activity in delivering the same, the pope, as reported by the public press of February 1, 1934, gave warning against Armageddon and asked his faithful dupes to pray that Armageddon might be averted. The religionists continued to hide behind the walls.
Bbooklyn, N.Y.
• The Lord gave specific command to Joshua as to the manner in which he must attack the city of Jericho: “And ye shall compass the city, all ye men of war, and go round about the city once. Thus shalt thou do six days.” (Josh. 6:3) This foreshadowed the manner in which the Lord’s people, under the command of the Lord Jesus, attacks the enemy’s stronghold in modern times. As to the Israelites in the picture, the women and children and all others remained in the camp at Gilgal, except the men of war and the priests. They were commanded to march seven days around the wall. One of those days must have been the sabbath, but the marchers would not rest on that account. Likewise Jehovah’s witnesses do not lay off on Sundays and “holidays”, but have worked all the time. That daily marching around the city was a warning to the people of Jericho; yet no assault was made. The command from Joshua was that none should be made. This foretells the work to be done by Jehovah’s witnesses prior to Armageddon, and the manner of doing it. They are not to use carnal weapons. It must have appeared to the Jericho-ites as a strange procedure for the Israelites to be marching around their city, blowing trumpets. Likewise the religionists regard the work of Jehovah’s witnesses in continually proclaiming the warning concerning Armageddon as a very strange course of action. As the marching around the city must continue every day for six days, so Jehovah’s witnesses must go over the same territory time and again, proclaiming the kingdom message. On the seventh day a great miracle was to be performed.
,0 The number seven is symbolic of completeness. “And seven priests shall bear before the ark seven trumpets of rams’ horns [literally, jubilee trumpets (A.R.V., margin)]: and the seventh day ye shall compass the city seven times, and the priests shall blow with the trumpets.” (Josh. 6:4) Let it be noted here the prominence of number “seven” mentioned. There were seven priests, seven trumpets, and on the seventh day they must march around the city seven times. The formation and order of march was this: The armed men took the lead, and were followed next in line by the priests, who carried and blew the trumpets. Next to them followed the priests bearing the ark of the covenant, which in symbol showed the presence of Jehovah; and in the rear came armed men, immediately behind those bearing the ark of the covenant. Thus it is seen that the armed warriors were both in the front and in the rear of the marching procession. The armed men pictured the invisible forces of the Lord, the same as pictured by ‘the six men with the slaughter weapons’, described in the ninth chapter of Ezekiel. The
THE WATCHTOWER
101
April 1, 1939
Lord was guarding his marchers, both in the van and in the rear.
11 Further instructing them at the command of the Lord, Joshua said: “And it shall come to pass, that when they make a long blast with the ram’s horn, and when ye hear the sound of the trumpet, all the people shall shout with a great shout: and the wall of the city shall fall down flat, and the people shall ascend up, every man straight before him.”—Josh. 6:5.
w The seven priests that blew the jubilee trumpets would suggest that the fulfillment takes place at the time that the remnant of Jehovah’s earthly servants have been brought to the full number predestinated by the Lord. In the fulfillment of this part of the drama the remnant of Jehovah, the “royal priesthood” bearing Jehovah’s name, march about “Christendom”, the antitypical Jericho, but no carnal weapons are used. Instead thereof Jehovah’s witnesses are equipped with instruments to sound the praise of the Most High. The invisible host of the Lord pictured by the armed men, and which invisible host do the real slaughter work, in due time march with the remnant of the priesthood on the earth, and thus God’s invisible host, his angelic company, serve as a safeguard to the van, and as a rear guard of his servants on earth. The invisible servants of the Lord are round about the visible ones to protect them. (Ps. 34:7) Understanding and appreciating this part of the picture, Jehovah’s faithful covenant people know that they are protected by the Most High and the enemy can do nothing to them except by God’s permission.
“Now as to the fulfillment of this part of the drama relating to the horns or trumpets, note the following facts: In January, 1933, marking the time after the entering of the “land”, for the first time the Society announced that a portable transcription sound machine would be used to proclaim the kingdom message, and in the February 1, 1933, Watchtower appeared a second - page notice announcing the same thing. The reproduction of public speech by sound machines there began, and by June, 1933, in America alone 300 of such sound machines, or antitypical trumpets, were in use, while in other countries also the sound machine was used proclaiming the jubilee message. (See Year Book for 1934, pages 64 and 65.) The Lord was increasing the proclamation of his message that those who love him might hear, and “blessed is the people that know the joyful sound; they shall walk, 0 Lord, in the light of thy countenance”.—Ps. 89:15.
“ Thereafter, in June and August, 1934, the twelve-inch record of speech and portable phonographs were put in use in the house-to-house witness work. From that time on the use of the phono
graph increased, and at the end of the fiscal year of 1938 there were more than 32,000 of such sound machines and phonographs in use by Jehovah’s faithful people going about “Christendom” proclaiming the kingdom of God and his name, and the slogan of these faithful ones now is: “Every witness a phonograph.” No carnal weapons nor acts of violence used by these faithful witnesses, but just the sound of the mechanical voice, proclaiming the name of Jehovah and his kingdom, which must continue until the time of Jehovah’s miraculous and “strange act”. Thus the Lord Jehovah, by his Chief Messenger, instructed Joshua as to what to do and what would be the result. Likewise now, Jehovah through Christ Jesus, the Greater Joshua, instructs His people what they must do, and tells them what will be the result, and this is greatly to their encouragement and hope.
18 Preliminary to Armageddon, what shall Jehovah’s witnesses do? Just march and sound the message of the kingdom with their antitypical trumpets, and when the marching is done they must shout in obedience to the command received. So Joshua called the priests and instructed them. At this point the “Captain of the host of Jehovah” (Josh. 5:14) evidently had left Joshua. “And Joshua the son of Nun called the priests, and said unto them, Take up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priests bear seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the ark of the Lord.” (Josh. 6:6) The seven priests with seven horns represented the complete number of Jehovah’s servants bearing the heavenly message and proclaiming it. In these instructions issued by Joshua, note that Jehovah is made most prominent as the One who would bring about the overthrow of the enemy. Jehovah, being present, was pictured by the ark of the covenant being carried around by the priests, and his name and presence must be heralded by the full and complete number of the priests, who by their trumpets blown drew attention of all to the presence of Jehovah.
18 Note now some of the facts that God has brought to pass in fulfillment of this prophecy, and be assured that the Most High, through Christ Jesus, is guiding his people. The Greater Joshua, Christ Jesus, early in 1933 issued the instructions to the earthly, priestly remnant. Up to that time the radio exclusively had been used at hired rates, but early in 1933 the sound machines were brought into use. Pioneers and company workers were supplied with the phonographs and with recorded speeches. It is interesting to note, at this time, that the original speech recorded, and sounded since, is entitled “Jehovah”, and now recorded speeches to the praise of Jehovah and his kingdom are daily used by the marchers who march about “Christendom”. It is of
102
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
interest to note in this connection the political and religious development of events within that same time, to wit:
January 18, 1933, Canadian Radio Commission, at the instance of the religious leaders, prohibited the further use of the radio in Canada to broadcast the message of the kingdom.
January 30, 1933, Hitler became chancellor of Germany, and within less than a month thereafter his followers burned the Reichstag building and wrongfully charged the crime against others, and thus increased the power of the dictator.
March 4, 1933, F. D. Roosevelt was inaugurated president of the United States, and immediately the information was given out that the Vatican would have an ambassador at Washington as soon as the people could be brought around to it.
March 23, 1933, Hitler became absolute dictator of Germany.
March 27,1933, Japan withdrew from the League of Nations.
April 2, 1933, the pope inaugurated his so-called “Holy Year” with peculiar ceremonies.
April 4, 1933, Hitler issued an order forbidding the operation of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, or Jehovah’s witnesses, in Germany, and seized the property of the Society, and this he did in violation of the treaty between the United States and Germany, and the evidence shows that this was done at the instance of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy.
April 8, 1933, began the second International Thanksgiving Period of Jehovah’s witnesses throughout the earth, and in which many thousand publishers took part and placed in the hands of the people nearly four million books and booklets, the greater number of which were placed in Germany alone. Shortly thereafter Hitler’s Nazi crowd broke up the meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses, confiscated their books and Bibles, and arrested and imprisoned many of God’s faithful people.
June 25, 1933, a convention of seven thousand German Christians met at Berlin and publicly adopted a Resolution against the unwarranted action of the Hitler government in interfering with the witness work of Jehovah’s witnesses, and upward of a million copies of that Protest were distributed throughout Germany. About the same time 170 radio stations in America broadcast the speech concerning the so-called “Holy Year”, and which greatly embarrassed the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and made them exceedingly mad.
June 29, 1933, Goering, acting for the dictator of Germany, suppressed the Society and closed its office at Magdeburg, and that was done at the instance of the Papacy.
July 20, 1933, the Vatican concluded a concordat or agreement with Germany in behalf of the Catholic organization in that land.
July 30. 1933, at Plainfield, New Jersey, the president of the Watch Tower Society delivered a public
address on the subject “Why Religious Intolerance in America”, and throughout that speech the speaker was surrounded by armed policemen bearing revolvers and machine guns.
September 1 to 29, 1933, a special campaign by Jehovah’s witnesses was carried forward, in which they distributed a large amount of literature exposing the Scriptural denunciation of the religionists, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy.
IT Referring now to the drama: Joshua begins to carry out the instructions: “And it came to pass, when Joshua had spoken unto the people, that the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams’ horns passed on before the Lord, and blew with the trumpets; and the ark of the covenant of the Lord followed them.”—Josh. 6:8.
18 In the fulfillment of that part of the picture action began in the spring of 1933, when the sound equipment began to do its part in the siege of “Christendom”, antitypical Jericho. In that year several hundred sound machines went into action, and from then till this day they have increased in number and in activity. During the same year there was considerable radiocasting of the kingdom message in various lands, and it was in June of that year that the pope issued an order to the Catholic population that they were not to listen to “that man Rutherford”, who did the broadcasting. In October that year the book Preparation was issued, in which was contained much information by the Lord for the encouragement of his people.
“Joshua’s orders were carried out exactly as given: “And the armed men went before the priests that blew with the trumpets, and the rereward came after the ark, the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets.” (Josh. 6: 9) Visualize that procession: armed men in the front, armed men in the rear, priests in the center, bearing the ark and blowing their trumpets, and the religionists inside the walls quaking in their boots. In that same year, for the encouragement and comfort of his people, the Lord gave to them the text Proverbs 18:10, A.R.V.: “The name of Jehovah is a strong tower; the righteous runneth into it, and is safe.” The armed men marching before and in the rear of the priests, and the trumpets sounding, pictured the invisible angels of the Lord protecting the ones on earth while they sound the trumpets that frighten the enemy. No noise aside from the trumpets was permitted. “And Joshua had commanded the people, saying, Ye shall not shout, nor make any noise with your voice, neither shall any word proceed out of your mouth, until the day I bid you shout; then shall ye shout.”—Josh. 6:10.
80 If the people on the walls of Jericho should shout derisively at the Israelites or taunt them about their strange action, the Israelites must give no heed
April 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
103
thereto and must not retaliate, but must be silent in everything except the sounding of the trumpets. The people of Jericho would think it strange action on the part of the Israelites, who were merely marching round about the city and disturbing them by blowing horns. No doubt that sound shocked their religious susceptibilities and made them gnaw their tongues, as well as to tremble with fear. In like manner the religionists, the anti typical Jericho-ites, have had their religious susceptibilities frequently shocked by the message of the kingdom proclaimed by the sound machines, and at the same time they have been filled with fear because of the message proclaimed. The action of Jehovah’s witnesses has seemed to the religionists as very strange. That marching of the priests and blowing of the trumpets, however, would be good music to Rahab and would be a signal for her to gather her relatives into her house on the wall, and to continuously display the “line of scarlet thread” over the wall. She could not know just when she was to be delivered; but she relied upon the promise made to her by the spies that deliverance would come, and she must perform her part of the arrangement. Likewise the Jonadabs, whom Rahab pictured, must do their part, trusting wholly in the Lord.—Josh. 2:18-21.
” The marchers were forbidden to speak to anyone on the walls of Jericho, and therefore even if they knew what it all meant they could not communicate the same; and, of course, they did not know what was about to come to pass. They knew that they were under the command of Joshua and that they must trust in the Lord and be obedient. Too much talk often results disastrously; and instructions given by Joshua prove this fact. That part of the picture also foretells something that must be done by God’s people in due time. The minute details for the carrying out of instructions are given by the Lord to his covenant people. So in the fulfillment of this part of the picture the Lord caused his covenant people to carry out in reality what the picture meant, even though they did not know it at the time.
“ Now as to that part of the fulfillment concerning the non-talking. In connection with the campaign period designated as “Preparation” (November, 1933) a new method of preaching to the people was introduced. The testimony to be used was printed on a small card and each publisher provided with such card, and each person approached with the message was handed the card to read for himself, and the publisher did little or no talking. The Lord blessed that method, and it has been in use since. There came to be less and less verbal testimony; which saves much time and energy, and the result
is much better. Now the cards and the sound machines do the talking.
23 The silent and methodical movement of the people around the city each day must be kept up until the proper time for them to shout and, as Joshua said to them, “then shall ye shout.” The daily march proved to be a “strange” operation to the people of Jericho. After a few rounds the self-important religionists behind the walls would conclude that such a procedure by those Israelites could accomplish nothing against the fortified city, and they would no doubt conclude and say to others: “We are now in peace and safety.” And even so, during the past few years the faithful witnesses of Jehovah have been going about “Christendom” sounding the antitypical trumpets, and the clergy and other religionists have concluded that Jehovah’s witnesses can accomplish no real results; and when they shall say, as the Scriptures foretell: “Peace and safety,” "then sudden destruction coineth upon them,” and they will find no way to escape. (1 Thess. 5:3; Jer. 25:35) And so when the “strange work” is done, and the Lord has given command, then the people will shout.
“ That the “strange work” is Jehovah’s work is further shown by the fact that the ark was in the line of march each round of the city. Jehovah was there in a representative capacity: “So the ark of the Lord compassed the city, going about it once: and they came into the camp, and lodged in the camp.” (Josh. 6:11) After mailing the first round on the first of the six days the marchers returned to their camp at Gilgal. The next day they repeated the same march as they had the first day. “And Joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the ark of the Lord.”—Josh. 6:12.
28 The marchers got an early start, and the priests and trumpeters particularly foretold that the witness work of Jehovah is being performed punctiliously and as directed. Note now, in fulfillment of the picture, that in the fiscal year of 1933 Jehovah's witnesses marched about “Christendom”, the antitypical Jericho, and sounded the antitypical trumpets and placed in the hands of the people twenty-four million books and booklets, and held meetings with sound machines, to the total number of 4,646, with a total attendance of 240,434. That was the first year.
28 But that was not sufficient, which was shown by the drama at this point. “And seven priests, bearing seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the ark of the Lord, went on continually [daily], and blew with the trumpets; and the armed men went before them; but the rereward came after the ark of the Lord, the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets.”—Josh. 6:13.
104
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
” That daily repetition must have exposed the Israelites to the ridicule and reproach of those who were on the walls of Jericho watching. That was a real test of the faith of the Israelites, but they, believing that Jehovah had commanded Joshua, who had so directed them, went forward in obedience to the instructions faithfully and punctiliously. After the first round they did not consider that enough and refuse to go again. To be sure, Jehovah could have thrown down the walls after the first round; but here again he is seen as holding off the enemy and the approaching day of destruction for his own wise reasons. This apparent delay was also a test to Rahab and those of her household as they continued to display the scarlet thread and watched from the windows of their house the marching Israelites, not knowing what it meant. Likewise Jehovah’s witnesses have been going about antitypical Jericho for several years proclaiming the message, and their activities have brought upon them reproach from the modern-day Jericho-ites, and such has been a real test to the faith of Jehovah’s witnesses, and some who entered the marching have failed in the test; but the real ones have gone obediently and joyfully on. At the same time their companions, the Jonadabs, have had their faith tested as they looked on and waited.
88	The marching continued: “And the second day they compassed the city once, and returned into the camp; so they did six days.” (Josh. 6:14) For six successive days the marching went on, daily the same way. That could not be construed to mean that each of the days represented a year in the fulfillment, but rather that, in the fulfillment, Jehovah’s witnesses continue in obedience to the Lord’s command for an appointed time, the “six” more particularly representing the imperfect part of the earthly witnesses; whereas the real and effective work must be done by the Lord on the seventh day. But note that the second antitypical period, that is to say, the next year, 1934, the publishers in the field placed in the hands of the people books to the number of 22,041,622, and at the same time and in addition thereto the portable transcription machines and phonographs were used in the field work, and in the United States alone 1,757 such machines delivered the kingdom message to an aggregate audience of 1,901,821, and with the use of the testimony card a brief and pointed testimony was given to more than twenty-five million persons that year. But the marching must go on; and on they went. As Isaiah later inquired, some must have asked: “Lord, how long?” “Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate, and the Lord have re
moved men far away, and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the land.” (Isa. 6:11,12) Otherwise stated, they must continue until the time arrives for Jehovah’s “strange act”. It is of interest here to note the work done during the years that followed. Each year millions of persons have heard the message by radio and sound machine, and at the end of the fiscal year 1938 more than 32,000 sound machines were in use in the field service; and the placing in the hands of the people of books, large and small, over a period of years has been as follows, to wit:
1935	26,322,854	1937	22,577,146
1936	24,457,111	1938	26,772,150
And this has been done in the face of the fact that in Germany, Austria, Poland, Rumania, Yugoslavia and Greece the political powers have so interfered with the work, at the instance of the clergy, that in those countries practically nothing has been done in the past two years.
89	The seventh day approached, and or. that day there was special work to be done, and Joshua commanded the Israelites to get at it early. “And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose early about the dawning of the day, and compassed the city after the same manner seven times: only on that day they compassed the city seven times.” —Josh. 6: 15,
80	Jehovah had assigned a definite time to do his work of destroying the city. Likewise Jehovah has fixed a definite time for the destruction of “Christendom”, and it will come off exactly on time. No one can hasten the time, but the faithful witnesses will keep right on marching and sounding the trumpet, trusting wholly in the Lord, knowing that he will bring to pass his purpose in his own due time. Jehovah’s “strange work”, pictured by the six-day marching, must be completed before his "strange act” begins on the seventh day. (Isa. 28:21) The marching continued for seven days, and no stopping for the sabbath. Likewise Jehovah’s witnesses continued to carry forward the witness work, and no stopping for rest days. Seven days, and on they go! And on the seventh day, around the city seven times they marched. That was perfect. There must be increased activity on the seventh day. The people of Jericho would note that special activity on the part of the Israelites and would see that six times that day the marchers had gone around the city and nothing had happened, and probably they concluded that the Israelites were just fooling themselves and the fear of the Jericho-ites was growing less. Likewise the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allies have about come to the conclusion that Jehovah's witnesses are fooling themselves; and hence the religionists are growing bolder, although they
April 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
105
are trembling in their boots. The Scriptures do not indicate that Joshua told even one of the Israelites nearest to him in command what Jehovah had communicated to him would happen when the shout was given on the seventh day. That Joshua must keep to himself until due time. The Israelites marching had to take it by faith and keep moving. That is exactly true today with the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses, and they are not ‘growing weary in well doing’ (Gal. 6:9), but are going right ahead. They know that God will perform his “strange act” just at the proper time, and with them there is no doubt about it. If one begins to doubt, and grows weary, it is just too bad for such one. The faithful know that Jehovah’s victory is as certain as that the sun shines.
11 The commercial radio stations were used for some years to broadcast each week the kingdom message by means of electrical transcription records. But on September 26, 1937, notice was given that such commercial broadcasting would cease on October 31; and it was done. That same year the “special pioneer” work was inaugurated, and these were equipped with sound machines and put in the field. The faithful of God's people continued to march steadfastly on and with ever-increasing joy. Although Jehovah had told through his messenger to Joshua what would come to pass on the very day, Joshua said nothing about it to the marchers, as to what would be the result when they received the command to shout. “And it came to pass at the seventh time, when the priests blew with the trumpets, Joshua said unto the people, Shout; for the Lord hath given you the city.”—Josh. 6:16.
“ To obey that order to shout was a real test of faith. There was no artillery present or other means of bombarding the city walls, and no one knew just how the city was to be taken. But in obedience to the command the faithful ones shouted, and the walls fell down by reason of the power of Jehovah: “By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed about seven days.” (Heb. 11:30) What means this to Jehovah’s witnesses? It means that they must, with full faith and confidence in the Lord, continue the witness work until the time arrives for them to shout, and no doubt at the appointed time the Lord will command them to shout a shout of triumph, and the enemy will hear the shout. Jehovah waits upon the shout to be given; not that he needs it, but such is like a faithful report rendered by the “faithful and wise servant”. (Ezek. 9:11) It is not at all unlikely that at the time of the shout by the earthly witnesses of Jehovah the heavenly hosts, invisible to human eyes, “the sons of God” in heaven, will shwt as Vne.y did at the laying of the foundation
of the earth. (Job 38:7) That will be a great day, a day of triumph to Jehovah. The Greater Joshua is in command, and the Scriptures show he gives the orders and they will be obeyed: “0 clap your hands, all ye people; shout unto God with the voice of triumph. For the Lord most high is terrible; he is a great King over all the earth. He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations [all who are against God and who fail or refuse to praise his name] under our feet. He shall choose [the land of promise] our inheritance for us, the excellency of Jacob whom he loved. Selah. God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet.” (Ps. 47:1-5) The faithful remnant will keep going on until the command to shout when Armageddon begins.
83	In the marching around the city of Jericho the drama does not picture the Jonadabs as participating, but that does not mean that they have no part in the witness work. No picture shows every detail and every point. Rahab, who pictured the Jonadabs or “great multitude”, had an arrangement with the spies which illustrated that the Jonadabs do have a part in the witness work. The modern-day ones, the Jonadabs, have the assurance that God has given to Christ Jesus the enemy organization for destruction, and their full faith is pictured by the continuous displaying of the line of scarlet thread.
84	Joshua gave specific instructions as to what must be done by the Israelites concerning the city when it fell: “And the city shall be accursed [(margin) devoted], even it, and all that are therein, to the Lord; only Rahab the harlot shall live, she and all that are with her in the house, because she hid the messengers that we sent.”—Josh. 6:17.
85	No one was permitted to appropriate a single thing of the city for himself, and to do so would be a serious offense and bring upon him quick punishment, because everything in the city belonged to Jehovah. Jericho was the first city of Canaan to fall, and it was the firstfruits unto Jehovah, and not redeemable, but must be destroyed. (Lev. 27: 21, 28,29) As to the fulfillment of that part of the drama, the warfare now carried on by God’s people against “Christendom” is not for the personal gain of any person and is not for loot by any of Jehovah’s servants, but solely for the vindication of Jehovah’s name and the satisfaction of his claims. “Christendom,” like Jericho, is ‘a vessel of wrath fitted to destruction’. (Rom. 9:22) Nothing thereof must be spared or saved. No one must desire or be willing to receive anything thereof for selfish purposes, such as Achan did, who suffered destruction. Exception was made only as to Rahab and her household, because she had shown faith in God and
106
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N.Y.
favored his servants. Rahab and her household, who pictured the “great multitude”, for good reasons were spared. This is strong proof that none aside from the remnant and the “great multitude” will survive Armageddon.
*® Jehovah’s anointed people are not permitted to make any compromise with any part of Satan’s organization; and this was shown in the drama: “And ye, in any wise keep yourselves from the accursed thing, lest ye make yourselves accursed, when ye take of the accursed thing, and make the camp of Israel a curse, and trouble it.”—Josh. 6:18.
87 No one who is devoted to Jehovah can partake of or take any part with that which is accursed of God. (2 Cor. 6:17) No compromise of the Christian with the world is permitted. (Jas. 4:4) Sparing that which God condemns, so as to turn it to selfish gain, is disobedience subject to punishment. (1 John 2:15,16) “And thou shalt consume all the people which the Lord thy God shall deliver thee; thine eye shall have no pity upon them; neither shalt thou serve their gods; for that will be a snare unto thee.” (Deut. 7:16) The entire camp would be a curse until it cleansed itself of that which brings on the trouble, as in the case of Achan. (Josh. 7:1-26; 1 Cor. 5:6,7) Had Jehovah permitted such a thing for selfish gain at the start of Israel’s operations, it would quickly have spread and the nation would have become corrupt, being turned to coveting that which the heathen had, and it would result in the defilement of the Israelites. Thus God has fixed the unchangeable rule that must govern the true followers of Christ Jesus. They must have no part with the world.
** Frequently the Watch Tower publications have called attention to the fact that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy has mixed freely with worldly political affairs and attempts to control the politics of the world. Such is not mentioned for the purpose of holding up Catholics to ridicule, but for the purpose of pointing out that those who serve God cannot please him and at the same time participate in the affairs of this world, over which the Devil is the invisible ruler. There are many sincere Catholics who undoubtedly are ignorant of these great truths set out in the Bible, and to call their attention to such is an act of kindness and friendship rather than otherwise, and is done in obedience to God’s command. Regardless of how sincere men of the religious organizations may have been at the outset, the fact remains that the divine rule is continuously violated by such organizations. (Jas. 1: 27; 4:4) Jehovah’s witnesses must keep themselves separate from the world; and for that reason they will obey God, and not man.
"That which belongs exclusively to Jehovah he
uses according to his good pleasure: “But all the silver, and gold, and vessels of brass and iron, are consecrated unto the Lord; they shall come into the treasury of the Lord.” (Josh. 6:19) The precious metals here mentioned belong exclusively to the Lord for the reason that he put them in the earth: “The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, saith the Lord of hosts.” (Hag. 2:8) Then such precious metals must be purified with fire. “And Eleazar the priest said unto the men of war which went to the battle, This is the ordinance of the law which the Lord commanded Moses: only the gold, and the silver, the brass, the iron, the tin, and the lead, every thing that may abide the fire, ye shall make it go through the fire, and it shall be clean; nevertheless it shall be purified with the water of separation: and all that abideth not the fire ye shall make go through the water.”—Num. 31:21-23.
40	Such purification by fire shows that the thing devoted to Jehovah must be entirely separate from Satan’s organization: "The graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire; thou shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein: for it is an abomination to the Lord thy God.” (Deut. 7:25) The bringing of such precious metals into the tabernacle or temple put the same at the disposal of the priests of Jehovah for his service, and not for creature’s selfish use. The destruction of Jericho was not to enrich creatures, but for the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and all of Jericho must be rendered unto Jehovah because of being the firstfruits of the land, and must be destroyed. That was a test upon the Israelites as to whether they would willingly destroy Jericho for the vindication of Jehovah’s name, because of their love for him. A similar test is upon all true servants of Christ, and to receive the approval of God they must expose for destruction the wickedness of “Christendom” solely because of their love for Jehovah and for the vindication of his name. Jehovah’s witnesses are not “engaged in a campaign of hate”, as wrongfully charged against them. They are doing what God has commanded to be done.
41	Having been fully instructed by Joshua, the marchers were ready for action at the appointed time for shouting: “So the people shouted when the priests blew with the trumpets; and it came to pass, when the people heard the sound of the trumpet, and the people shouted with a great shout, that the wall fell down flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight before him, and they took the city.”—Josh. 6:20.
42	The shout of the people was a shout of triumph for Jehovah’s victory. Marching was done and ended, and the people in the city must fall by the hand of
THE WATCHTOWER
107
April 1, 1939
the Lord. So in the fulfillment, the marching of Jehovah’s witnesses, that is, his devoted priestly class, and their sounding of the message of the kingdom continue until God’s due time for that to end. When the witness work is completed according to Jehovah’s will, then all his witnesses will shout to him in faith for him to act in the victorious vindication of his name, and down “Christendom” must fall. No matter how strong or apparently impregnable the enemy organization, and no matter how much the inhabitants of that city may like peace and safety, the worldly organization, religious, political, and commercial, must go down. Such is the “strange act” of Jehovah, and it will strip the religionists, their allies and supporters, of their hiding place and their protection, pictured by the wall, that is, the political and commercial elements, which now use the strong-arm squad to do the bidding of the religious leaders. Religionists now rely upon their wall; but it is certain to fall: “The rich man’s wealth is his strong city, and as an high wall in his own conceit.”—Prov. 18:11.
" The fall of Jericho’s walls killed and buried many people. Likewise the fall of “Christendom’s” wall will be the end of religious systems that have long defamed the name of Jehovah. When the wall fell the men of war went right over the ruins thereof and took the city and completed the destruction of it. None were permitted to escape: “And they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and woman, young and old, and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the sword.” (Josh. 6:21) Thus is pictured the complete destruction at Armageddon of all who have supported religion and form a part of Satan’s organization. The armed men that were permitted to act in taking the city and destroying the people pictured the invisible army of the Lord described at Ezekiel nine. That will mark a time of tribulation such as never was known before, and there shall never be another.—Matt. 24:21.
44 The only part of the walls of Jericho that remained standing was that portion where Rahab’s house was situate. Jehovah thereby confirmed the oath of the spies and gave respect to the display of the scarlet thread and held up that part of the wall, while he demolished every other part. Rahab and her household showed faith in God and obedience to the covenant made with his servants, and they were saved. Rahab had been warned by the spies that she must remain in her house. “Whosoever shall go out of the doors of thy house into the street [mix up with the religious institutions], his blood shall be upon his head, and we will be guiltless.” (Josh. 2:19) This supports and is in harmony with the law concerning the city of refuge, showing that the “great multitude” must remain in the
city of refuge until released by the will and act of Jehovah God, and further supports the conclusion that those persons forming the “great multitude” will be the only survivors of Armageddon aside from the remnant and the faithful men of old.
45 Immediate action was taken to rescue Rahab and her household: “And the young men that were spies went in, and brought out Rahab, and her father, and her mother, and her brethren, and all that she had; and they brought out all her kindred and left them without the camp of Israel.” (Josh. 6:23) Rahab had showed her faith, in her activity in gathering her relatives into her house. Those that did not believe and that refused to come in perished. So it will be at Armageddon. Jehovah has warned the people of good will to seek righteousness and meekness if they would find refuge in the day of his wrath. (Zeph. 2:3) This shows that as one of good will receives a knowledge of the truth his duty is and the proof of his faith will be his activity in proclaiming the message of the kingdom to others who have the hearing ear, that they may be gathered into the Lord’s organization and there find safety. Rahab and those with her needed to be examined before being accepted into the tribes of Israel, and therefore they were “left . . . without the camp” for a time. If they had brought with them any of the valuables of the accursed city, such must be taken from them and destroyed. They must be meek, that is, willing to learn, and must seek righteousness by obeying instructions. This emphasizes the truth that those who will compose the “great multitude” are not spiritual Israelites. Rahab and her relatives that were saved pictured the people of good will who become the “great multitude” that abides in the earth for ever.
48 That “Christendom” shall be completely destroyed is here shown in the drama: “And they burnt the city with fire, and all that was therein: only the silver, and the gold, and the vessels of brass and of iron, they put into the treasury of the house of the Lord.” (Josh. 6: 24) God gave through Moses the law by which Jericho must be dealt with: “But of the cities of these people, which the Lord thy God doth give thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth: but thou shalt utterly destroy them; namely, the Hittites, and the Amorites, the Canaanites, and the Periz-zites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites; as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee: that they teach you not to do after their abominations, which they have done unto their gods; so should ye sin against the Lord your God.”—Deut. 20:16-18.
41 The destruction suffered by Jericho foretells what shall come to pass upon “Christendom” at Armageddon, that is to say, complete destruction.
108
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Only such things, therefore, as belong to God shall come through that great “fire”. What are such things? The people of good will who exercise faith in and obedience to the Lord, who flee to the Lord and take refuge in him, and who then obey the rules by remaining under the protection of the Lord and there seeking righteousness and meekness.
48 The unfolding of this prophecy will now be of great comfort to the people of good will as they see and appreciate how Jehovah, long centuries ago, had them in mind and made provision for their salvation. Joshua means “Savior”. “And Joshua saved Rahab the harlot alive, and her father’s household, and all that she had; and she dwelleth in Israel even unto this day; because she hid the messengers which Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.”—Josh. 6:25.
48 The Greater Joshua, Christ Jesus, the Officer of Jehovah, will execute all of Satan’s army at Armageddon, but will save those of the “great multitude”, his “other sheep”. This further proves that the Rahab class, the “great multitude”, will survive Armageddon because of their faith and obedience unto the Lord. No mention is made in the Scriptures of Rahab’s death, but she is reported in the context as living in the land, “even unto this day,” that is, the day of Joshua, who wrote the record, and whose testimony proves that the “great multitude” will live forever on the earth under the kingdom of the Greater Joshua.
80 Later Rahab married Salmon, who became the father of Boaz. (1 Chron. 2:11-15; Ruth 4:20,21) David was a descendant of this marriage, and David pictured the Lord Jesus. (Matt. 1:5,6) Thus the Lord shows a reward for full faith and obedience. As a reward of their faith and obedience the “great multitude” come into intimate relationship with the “remnant” while on the earth and later are granted life everlasting and given the great privilege of carrying out the divine mandate to “multiply and fill the earth”. (Gen. 1: 28; 9:1) It is now seen that the divinely recorded drama revealed at this time is for the benefit of both the remnant and the “great multitude” and brings greater joy to each, and is additional reason for them to praise Jehovah and Christ Jesus.
81 The fall of Jericho was the occasion of great rejoicing of the Israelites because God had shown them his favor. It was the time of real responsibility upon them also, and so Joshua put all Israel under oath, reminding them of their responsibility: “And Joshua adjured them at that time, saying, Cursed be the man before the Lord, that riseth up and buildeth this city Jericho: he shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest son shall he set up the gates of it.”—Josh. 6: 26.
“Never in the time of Joshua was Jericho rebuilded. Never in the time of the Greater Joshua, Christ Jesus, who remains forever, will “Christendom” be brought into existence. It perishes for ever. The ruins of Jericho were a testimony to the vindication of Jehovah’s name. The destruction of “Christendom” will for ever be a testimony to the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
88 The words of Joshua, recorded, were spoken under inspiration and stated Jehovah’s rule in respect to Satan’s organization. Violation of the words of Joshua would mean defiance of the Almighty God. More than 500 years later, and when the ten tribes had rebelled against Judah and Jerusalem, and when Ahab and Jezebel ruled in Samaria and indulged in Devil religion, one of the Devil religionists named Kiel, in defiance of Jehovah, rebuilt Jericho, and the curse was upon him. “And Ahab made a grove; and Ahab did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel that were before him. In his days did Kiel the Beth-elite build Jericho; he laid the foundation thereof in Abi-ram his firstborn, and set up the gates thereof in his youngest son Segub, according to the word of the Lord, which he spake by Joshua the son of Nun.”—1 Ki. 16:33,34.
84 Jericho, the first and the last, was a city founded in rebellion against Jehovah. The rebuilding of that rebellious city did not picture that Satan’s organization will be rebuilt, but does show that those who try to perpetuate the religious element of Satan’s organization come under the curse of the Greater Joshua. Those who commit the “sin of Samaria” are of this class. (Amos 8:14) Like in the rebellion of Hiel, they lose their children, from the firstborn to the last, and have nothing to survive them.
88 The vindication of Jehovah’s name is further proved by the concluding words of this sixth chapter: “So the Lord was with Joshua; and his fame was noised throughout all the country.” (Josh. 6: 27) Before Armageddon is completed and before all the enemy is cleaned out, all will be compelled to acknowledge Jehovah as supreme and that He and Jesus are the higher powers. All enemies will be terrified and forced to see the hand of Jehovah working their destruction.
88 Jehovah’s covenant people will now consider this prophetic picture of the siege of Jericho and its fall with real consolation and with strong hope. We know that the enemies of God and his kingdom are entrenched and that they feel themselves secure behind their “wall”. The religious element defy the Almighty God and his King. Together with their allies they claim the right to rule the world. They stand where they ought not stand. (Mark 13:14) “The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof,” and shall be ruled by his anointed King, and no
April 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER.
109
one of the uncircumcised has any right to stand in the earth and claim the right to rule it. The position and attitude of the enemy, the religionists, in particular the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, is an abomination unto God. The success of that devilish institution even for a short time will work desolation. The enemy is now arrogant, dictatorial, cruel and malicious, persecuting Jehovah’s witnesses, with the greatest bitterness. The enemy follow in the course of their father the Devil, resorting to all manner of lies to defame Jehovah’s name and to bring reproach upon his servants. But this is the time for the remnant, together with their “companions”, the Jonadabs, to be very courageous. Jehovah is backing up those that love and serve him. As he said to Joshua, so now he says to his faithful remnant: “Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest.” (Josh. 1:9) Thus God reveals to his people now
on the earth the meaning of the foregoing prophetic drama, and the words that he spoke to Jeremiah are now appropriately considered and applied to themselves by those who love Jehovah. The enemy now viciously fights against God’s people, and to them he says: “And they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee.”-Jer. 1:19.
"No single drama or picture shows every detail of the progressive movements in the carrying out of Jehovah’s purpose, nor do those prophetic pictures occur in chronological order. With chapter six of Joshua’s prophecy that part of the picture leading up to Armageddon ends. Another picture follows with Joshua playing an important part therein. This Jehovah has also caused to be written and recorded and now revealed for the aid and comfort of those who love and serve him.
(To be continued)
WHO ARE THE “GREAT MULTITUDE”?
**K ZTILLIONS now living will never die.” That mesityl sage of millions now living on earth and never A to die off the face of the earth was first publicly proclaimed at Los Angeles, Calif., on Sunday, February 24, 1918. At the time millions were dying prematurely as a result of world war, famine and pestilence. That proclamation was greeted with astonishment and skepticism. Thereafter, for more than two years, that “millions” message was hindered. Then, in 1920, the public proclamation thereof was resumed, and in September of that year a 128-page book entitled “Millions Now Living Will Never Die” was published. The copies circulated ran up into the millions, in thirty-one languages. The use of the title as a subject of discussion on public platforms became world-wide. In 1922 the subject began to be heralded over the then few radio stations. The vast majority of the world were unbelieving, but multitudes of people of good will hailed the good news with joy.
How many “millions”? The number was not revealed, not even to the man who nineteen hundred years ago was given a vision of the gathering of those millions and who recorded that vision for the benefit of all people of good will on earth today. This man, John, an apostle of Jesus Christ, wrote: “After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands. . . . These are they which came out of great tribulation, . . . For the Lamb, which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.”—Rev. 7 : 9-17.
When he wrote, John was in banishment on the Isle of Patmos in the Aegean sea because he had testified to God’s Word. The revelation to John discloses that the church of God, which is built upon Christ Jesus, its pre
cious Foundation Stone or Rock, is composed of 144,000 faithful Christians, who are also pictured as “living stones”. (1 Pet. 2:1-10, R.V.) John was first told of the sealing cf these 144,000 spiritual Israelites, who are to be associated with Christ Jesus in heaven in the royal house of Jehovah God. (See Revelation 7:4-8.) Then John says: “After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues* stood before the throne.” The 144,000 are begotten and anointed of God’s spirit as his sons and joint heirs with Christ Jesus and shall be for ever in heaven; whereas the “great multitude” is made up of “other sheep” (John 10:16), or people of good will (Luke 2:14), who obtain the riches of earth and dwell for ever upon the earth in peace and endless joy under God’s kingdom. The Scrip tures clearly show that it is after God has taken out oj selected those who shall be of the heavenly class that He brings forth the “great multitude”, and this he does shortly before Armageddon, the battle of the great day of God Almighty.—Rev. 16:14,16.
The fact that they “stood” shows that the great multitude are approved by the Most High, because (Psalm 1:5) “the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous”. But where do they stand? Would they have to go to heaven in order to stand approved before the Lord? Certainly not; nor would they have to be in heaven in order to stand “before the throne”, either with reference to their position or with reference to God’s approval. While standing before the throne those of the great multitude are shown to be hungry and thirsty, whereas if they were in heaven there would be no occasion for them to hunger and thirst. (Rev. 7:16,17) Those that are hungry and thirsty for spiritual food are the ones on earth that are seeking to be fed on that which will satisfy their heart’s desire. Manifestly the great multitude are here shown as standing before the judgment
110
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
throne of Christ Jesus, where God, by proxy, judges; that is to say, Jehovah judges by his beloved Son, to whom he has committed all judgment. (See John 5:22.) In standing before the Lord for judgment these need not be in heaven, for it is stated by Jesus that when he assumes his throne for the judgment of the nations all nations shall be gathered before him, and surely these nations are not in heaven.—Read Matthew 25: 31, 32.
With whom does Christ Jesus begin judgment upon assuming his high office as Judge upon the throne? Not with the dead of mankind, but with the living. It is written (2 Tim. 4:1, Am. Rev. Ver.): “Christ Jesus, who shall judge the living and the dead, and by his appearing and his kingdom.” Bible prophecy and the events of our day in fulfillment thereof prove that Christ Jesus is at the temple now, as a divine spirit, upon his throne of judgment and glory, and before him are gathered all the nations for the purpose of being separated and judged, as pictured in the parable of the sheep and goats. Even so, the great multitude are “of all nations” on the earth, and are before Christ Jesus for judgment, which judgment shows that it is those of good will that take the side of the Lord and that become the “other sheep” of the Lord. To these “sheep” Christ Jesus says (Matthew 25:34): “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.” These are the ones that get life eternal, on the earth, and they, being now alive on the earth, if continuing obedient and faithful, may never die.
What, then, is pictured by the “robes” given the individual members of the great multitude and with which they are clothed? These white robes picture that they are clean and approved. Cleanliness results by reason of faith in the shed hlood of Christ Jesus, who loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood. (Rev. 1:5) The people of good will are those who have faith in his shed blood as the only means of redemption and salvation for the human race, and these voluntarily agree to do the will of God; and in taking this step of consecrating themselves to God by faith in the blood of Christ Jesus they stand approved before the judgment seat of Christ. This approval of them is symbolized by white robes. These keep their robes clean by continuing in faith and devotion to God and Christ Jesus, his anointed King.
What is the meaning of “palms in their hands”? It means that this great multitude hails Christ Jesus as the King and rightful Ruler of the world and the Savior of mankind. Nineteen hundred years ago, when the Lord Jesus rode into Jerusalem, he was there hailed by the multitude as King; as it is written (John 12:12,13, A.R.V.): “On the morrow a great multitude that had come to the feast, when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, took the branches of the palm trees, and went forth to meet him, and cried out, Hosanna: blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord, even the King of Israel.” Both in the Gospel by John and in The Revelation to him John makes mention of the palm branches, and that in connection with the great multitude. When Jesus entered Jerusalem the great multitude that spread down their garments and waved their palm branches were not then the disciples of Jesus Christ, as the subsequent facts showed. Manifestly those mentioned in The Revelation as with “palms in their
hands” are not the spirit-begotten footstep followers of Christ Jesus, the remnant of Jehovah’s anointed witnesses on earth; but that great multitude is made up of others who hear about Jehovah and his kingdom under Christ and who desire that kingdom. These are gathered out of the nations and tribes, kindreds, peoples and tongues; and when they learn that God’s gracious kingdom has come, they take their stand on the side of Jehovah and his King rather than for the totalitarian state, and they wave their palm branches as an evidence that they are heartily in accord with and support Christ Jesus the King, about whom they have heard. “And [they] cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation [be ascribed] to our God [Jehovah] which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb [Christ Jesus].” —Rev. 7:10.
John writes (Rev. 7:13,14): “And one of the elders answered, saying unto me, What are these which are arrayed in white robes? and whence came they? And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.” The American Revised Version reads: “They . . . come out of the great tribulation.” The Emphatic Dia-glott reads: “These are those coming out of the great affliction.” At Matthew 24: 21, 22, Christ Jesus, prophesying of the end of Satan’s world, said: “For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be. And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for the elect’s sake those days shall be shortened.” If the tribulation mentioned at Revelation 7:14 is this “great tribulation, such as was not”, and which comes at the end of the world, then the great multitude could not be a class developed throughout the centuries past. True, those of Jehovah’s royal house of sons, that is, the 144,000, have great tribulation, and such tribulation has extended over the entire “Christian era”; but the greatest of all tribulations mentioned in the Scriptures must come as stated by Jesus at Matthew 24: 21 above. That “tribulation” period began in A.D. 1914, when the “war in heaven” started against Satan’s organization in heaven and was accompanied by the World War on earth. (Rev. 12:7-10) That tribulation period reaches its climax at the time of the battle of Armageddon, “the battle of that great day of God Almighty.” In harmony with this, Revelation 7:14 (Rev. Ver.) calls it “the great tribulation”.
Had the tribulation, which was begun in 1914, continued without interruption to its finality in the complete destruction of Satan’s organization visible and invisible, all flesh on earth would have been destroyed. However, the tribulation was shortened by the Lord Jehovah approximately when the World War ended, in 1918, thus affording an opportunity thereafter for Jehovah’s witnesses under his commandment to go forth and bear testimony to his name and his kingdom, as a witness to the world. (Matt. 24:14) It is during this period of giving testimony by preaching “this gospel of the kingdom” that the great multitude are “coming out”, to wit, out of the Devil’s organization on earth. The “tribulation” is upon Satan’s organization. Thus Jehovah shortened “those days” of “great tribulation” by this cessation of hostilities for a time, to wit, by this in
April 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
ill
between period of enforced peace for preaching the Kingdom gospel before the final end comes at Armageddon.
Thus seen, to “come out of the great tribulation” not alone means to survive that trouble as “flesh [to] be saved” (Matt. 24:22) ; but primarily it means that the great multitude come out from Satan’s organization and take their stand on Jehovah’s side during the in-between period of time that elapses from the stopping of the World War until the day of Armageddon, that is to say, during the time that “those days should be shortened”, and during which time period “this gospel of the kingdom” is preached, as at present.
What is the purpose of shortening “those days”? Matthew 24:22 answers: “Except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for the elect’s sake [the sake of the remnant on earth of the 144,000] those days shall be shortened.” During that period of time the elect have a work to do as witnesses for Jehovah, in obedience to his commandment. That means that Jehovah’s witnesses must proclaim the message of Kingdom truth and thus give an intellectual understanding of such truth to those of the “great multitude” class. This is immediately after the first part of the “tribulation”, which first part was from 1914 to 1918. (Matt. 24:29) The “great multitude” class of persons will also survive Armageddon, because, at Zephaniah 2:1-3, God’s promise is that those who seek Jehovah and who seek meekness and righteousness may “be hid” in that time. Hence, as first announced in 1918, “millions now living will never die.”—See also John 8:51 and 11:26.
These “have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb”. (Rev. 7:14) How? The shed blood of Christ Jesus is the basis for the forgiveness of sins and the basis for God to forgive uncleanness. By believing that Christ Jesus’ shed blood is the redemptive price of mankind, and by consecrating themselves to do God’s will, based upon such belief, and by serving, worshiping and obeying the Lord, and not men, these take their stand on Jehovah’s side and participate in his active service. That is the only course that would give them a white and clean appearance in God’s sight. No man can take his stand on Jehovah’s side without believing in the shed blood of Christ Jesus as the means of salvation. Millions of church
goers claim to believe in Christ; but having been improperly taught that he is merely an example to follow, they do not understand about his blood and its efficacy. The false and faithless clergy have been and are responsible for their being taught the wrong way.
During the past few years, and within the time when “this gospel of the kingdom [is] preached . . . for a witness”, there have come forward great numbers (and they are still coming) who confess Christ Jesus as their Savior and King and Jehovah as their God, whom they worship in spirit and in truth and joyfully serve on the earth. These are being baptized in water, in symbol, thus testifying that they have consecrated themselves to do God’s will and have taken their stand on Jehovah’s side and serve him and his King. Thus they have cleaned up and are now “arrayed in white robes”. Thus the “great multitude” are identified as a class trusting in the Lord, and who hope for everlasting life on the earth as a gift from Jehovah through Christ Jesus our Lord.
These honest-hearted ones have left Satan’s organization and are now on the Lord’s side, and they want that fact to be known and they make it known, and they worship the only true God, Jehovah, and his King. Revelation 7:15 says: “Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them.” They look to the throne of God and Christ, and to no other place, and hence they are “before the throne” and in the sight of Jehovah and his King. They vote for the kingdom of God, and they participate in the publicity work of advertising the King and the kingdom. They have the recognition of the Throne, and God turns his favorable attention to them to the end that they may be hid in the day of his anger.
Since A.D. 1918 Jehovah’s witnesses have been privileged to carry to these hungry ones God’s message of truth, and those who. have fed upon it have no occasion to ever hunger and thirst: “They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat.” (Verse 16) Christ Jesus, as Head of God’s capital organization Zion, now leads and feeds those who honestly put themselves under his leadership.—Verse 17.
(Continued from page 98)
Jesus the Lamb of God, is Tuesday, April 4, after six p.m. Let each company, therefore, assemble after six p.m. of April 4, and the anointed thereof celebrate the Memorial, their companions the Jonadabs being present as observers. The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red wine. The Lord and his apostles used real red wine in symbol of his blood, and the anointed remnant should follow their lead. A report on the celebration should be made to the Society as instructed in the Informant. In preparation therefor the article “Memorial” in The Watchtower March 1, 1938, will be studied with profit.
-WATCHTOWER” CAMPAIGN
Four full months of 1939, January to April inclusive, have been set aside for the biggest, if not most important, yet of the campaigns to publish Jehovah’s kingdom. It is designated the “Watchtower” campaign because of the special offer made, agreeable to arrangements of the Society, to wit, a full year’s subscription for the magazine The Watchtower together with the book
Enemies or any other bound book and copies of the new booklets Face the Facts and Fascism or Freedom, on a $1.00 contribution. A like combination is made in every language in which The Watchtower appears, at its regular magazine rate; hence this four-month campaign is a world-wide one. Every reader of The Watchtower who appreciates its real value and the dire need of all people of good will today for its spiritual food will without urging desire to take part in this campaign. If not already in touch with the Society’s service organization, write this office and make arrangements for the campaign. A report for April is expected of each publisher. Consult the Informant for all details hereon.
“WATCHTOWER” BINDER
The improvements in make-up of The Watchtower, beginning January, 1939, necessitate a new binder for those who desire to preserve their copies of the magazine. Such a new binder is now on supply, clothbound, new blade-style, at $1.00 each. Those associated with companies should order binders through their respective company servant. Remittance should accompany order.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
RECORDINGS OVERCAME PREJUDICE AGAINST BOOKS
“He had just joined the so-called ‘Church of God’. When we arrived he said we were a little late, as two preachers had just left. We put on a recorded lecture and just finished it when in came another preacher. The first thing he said was that those lectures are false and he could prove it with the Bible. He said to the man: ‘These people will deceive you.’ I offered to play the lecture again if he would select out the false parts and prove it with the Bible. He said he did not wish to hear it. The man of the house said to him: ‘These people know more Scripture than you will ever know, and they understand the meaning of it.’ He added: ‘I have asked the Lord for the truth, and I believe he is now giving it to me.’ At this I presented him some literature, but he said he ‘would absolutely buy no literature, as the Bible was his guide’. Whereupon the preacher said: ‘Goody, Amen, bless the Lord!’ I then left the booklet WAere Are the Dead! and made an appointment to call the following week. This time I just played the lecture. I did not even mention literature, but made an appointment to return again next week with another lecture. This time I placed two bound books and took his subscription for The Watchtower for one year. He also said the next time the preacher came he would tell him he did not want any more of his religion. He also promised to attend our study class; which he is now doing.”
BORROWED MONEY TO GET LITERATURE
“I explained the work with the phonograph, but her excuse was she could not understand English nor read it so well. I presented a German booklet. She said she would like to read it, but had no money. ‘If you promise me you will read it, I will give it to you.’ She says: ‘Wait!’ comes around to the door, looks the booklet over, then says, ‘Come in; it’s cold out here,’ then proceeds to tell me how rotten Hitler and religion are. I got a word in edgewise to mention the phonograph again and the record ‘Enemies’, which she now heard. At the conclusion she said she understood it all. Before I could show her Enemies she asked if I had that book the record told about. Yes! and I pointed out the use of the index and found some of the facts she had mentioned. She asked, ‘How much?’ I explained. She responds: ‘I’ll steal 25c, and take that book,’ and gets 25c out of her husband’s pants pocket.”
TRUTH HELPS OVERCOME WEAKNESS
“After hearing the phonograph the young man asked some questions, which were answered by a number of scriptures on the subjects. He said he was glad for this first visit: he had his questions answered that the preachers could never answer for him. After three calls he took all the books and booklets, and after three weeks of study gave up his smoking; which he thought he could never do. But ‘the truth shall make you free’.”
DUE TO A BOOKLET GIVEN FREE
“Dear Sirs: I obtained a copy of your booklet Face the Facts from one of your representatives on Sunday last. I have read the booklet through, as I promised to do, and on reading it a second time I looked up every one of the scores of Bible references cited. I have never read any-
112
thing of this type before, and to say I was interested would be putting it entirely too mildly. I am not employed at present and have no money, but I certainly am eager to read all of this type of literature which is obtainable. Is it possible that you have available any worn copies of your books or pamphlets or back numbers of your periodical, which I could have upon my promise to send you a contribution as soon as I can possibly do so? Also please advise me if there are any meetings of your people in the vicinity of------
THE “INFORMANT” INFORMED
“Mrs. -------- is very active in back-call work and has
been for over a year now. She and her husband operate a service station and store. During January two different people took the trouble to drive to her store and home in order to subscribe for The Watchtower. In making back-calls on these people she left the service paper Informant with them and they learned of the Watchtower offer from it and came over to subscribe. The zone servant went out to help on one of her back-calls and found a group of 21 adults and children assembled to study. The children were aged from seven to fifteen, but all sat quietly and orderly to listen to the recorded lecture. When scriptures were called for, even the little seven-year-olds eagerly looked them up for the older people to read. It is quite thrilling to see children so eager for the Kingdom message; and to see them locate scriptures they were too young to read.”
WORK AMONG NEW YORK “CATHOLIC POPULATION”
“The priest of St. Patrick’s church, on the pretense of aiding the poor (most of them on relief), has leased many of the apartment houses in the section and himself rents the apartments by the week to the tenants, and one of the conditions of their remaining is that they do not have anything to do with Jehovah’s witnesses. The poor things are scared to even speak to us. The ward captain, a gangster named Paretti, is also one of the ‘principal of the flock’ at St. Patrick’s, and I understand his henchmen spy on the people and report the ones that dare listen to the phonograph or take literature. At present I am working in the neighborhood of the local unit’s Kingdom Hall at ------, which neighborhood is known as ‘St. Anthony’s parish’. The ‘church’ is very conspicuous and, from appearances, doing a rip-snorting good business, but from what I can gather from the members all is not well. Just within two squares I found a surprising number who have quit. ... I made a back-call on a family of seven who have just quit. When I made the first call during regular witness work the lady answered the door and when I told her I was from the Watch Tower she answered: ‘I don’t want to have anything to do with you—religion is nothing but a racket.’ This last Saturday I arranged five back-calls on one street. Of course, there are a few goats around that occasionally curse and threaten and, evidently sensing themselves powerless to do anything about it (as yet), get madder, but most of the opposition is passive. I heard this was ‘a terrible place to work in’, but as yet I fail to sec it, and indications are that much interest will develop here shortly. The people here are a little tough outside, but respond to kindness.”
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 34:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and Is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge In controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ..................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian.................. 40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian........... 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African ..................Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may hate The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will bo sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, ISIS.
CONVENTION
It seems appropriate that Jehovah’s witnesses and companions should assemble in convention somewhere in the East. For this purpose New York City has been selected. Time: June 23-25, inclusive. The first two days of the convention will be held at the Manhattan Center. Sunday, the 25th, all meetings, including the public meeting, will be at Madison Square Garden. It will be difficult for Jehovah’s witnesses in the far-away part of the United States to attend, and, if possible, another convention will be arranged farther west for some other time. Appropriate notice will be given in due season.
“FASCISM OR FREEDOM”
In a world threatened by the totalitarian monstrosity and blinded to the rightful theocratic government, this new booklet, Fascism or Freedom, appears as most timely information for all people of good will. Under a forceful cover illustration the 64 pages of this booklet set forth the nationally broadcast speech by Judge Rutherford at his last public appearance in New York city, together with a masterly article on “Theocracy”. You may obtain your personal copy on remittance of a contribution of 5c.
“NEW HEAVENS” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The “New Heavens” Testimony Period covers all April, the final month of the current “Watchtower” campaign. A special feature of this period is the release to the public of the booklet Fascism or Freedom. The details regarding the extensive worldwide campaign therewith now appear in the regular service paper Informant, to guide you in your plans for as large a part as possible in the special activities of this period. All persons not already in active co-operation with the service organization but who are interested in the proclamation of the kingdom of the heavens are invited to write the Watch Tower for information about the local company organization of Jehovah’s witnesses.
“WATCHTOWER" STUDIES
Week of May 21: “Drama of Vindication” (Part 6), fl 1-26 inclusive, The Watchtower April 15, 1939.
Week of May 28: “Drama of Vindication” (Part 6), fl 27-52 inclusive, The Watchtower April 15,1939.
“WATCHTOWER” BINDER
The improvements in make-up of The Watchtower, beginning January, 1939, necessitate a new binder for those who desire to (Continued on page 127)
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX
April 15, 1939
No. 8
DRAMA OF VINDICATION
PART 6
“Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine."—Ex. 19:5.
EHOVAH’S name stands for everything that is righteous. His name could not be vindicated if he would approve anything that is unrighteous. The eyes of Jehovah are pure, and he cannot look upon lawlessness. (Hab. 1:13) Willful disobedience of his commandments is iniquity or lawlessness. The creature that receives God’s approval must be obedient. That unchangeable rule applies to all of his creatures. When God made a covenant with Israel he emphasized the necessity for full and complete obedience. Israel, in the covenant of faithfulness, pictured the spiritual Israelites in the covenant for the kingdom. Those chosen of God to be associated in heaven with his beloved Son are a peculiar people, and their approval must be preceded by full obedience to the Lord. The words, therefore, uttered by Jehovah to natural Israel apply with even greater force to spiritual Israel, to wit: “If ye will obey my voice indeed [that is, emphatically, to a certainty, wholly or completely], and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine.” There is nothing in the earth to which man has an inherent right as against God. Everything that man receives is by God’s favor. That is particularly true with reference to those in the covenant with Jehovah. It is Jehovah’s purpose that He is carrying forward, not man’s purpose. What God has purposed, that he will do, and no creature will be permitted to pursue his own selfish course contrary to God’s purpose and at the same time receive God’s approval. In due time everything that willfully takes a course contrary to God’s will shall be destroyed. Repeatedly the Word of God emphasizes the absolute necessity for the creature to be obedient to God the Creator. There could be no exception to that divine rule, and there is none.
2	Jehovah’s unchangeable rule requiring obedience was emphasized in the prophetic drama of vindication which Jehovah caused to be played by his covenant people Israel under the command of Joshua.
The same rule is emphasized in the fulfillment of the drama, which God reveals to his people who are now under the command of the Greater Joshua, Christ Jesus. Jehovah had just performed two great miracles: one, the bringing of the Israelites across the swollen waters of the Jordan, and the other, the miraculous overthrow of Jericho; and by these miracles he had fully demonstrated to Israel his own supremacy. Why should any Israelite, while those two miraculous things were fresh in mind, dare take a course contrary to the commandment of the Most High? Joshua had uttered the commandment, but that was the commandment of Jehovah, and the Israelites had no reason to doubt that fact.
3	The avaricious man has an inordinate desire for material gain, either of money or of fame or honor for himself. Achan, of the tribe of Judah, was that kind of person. The facts show that there have been persons in line for the kingdom of heaven and who have fallen by reason of their inordinate desire for personal gain. That part of the prophetic drama here considered shows that very thing, and it was recorded and is now made clear for the aid and benefit of those who have agreed to do the will of God and who would avoid pitfalls and walk in the way that Jehovah has pointed out: “But the children of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed thing; for Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took of the accursed thing: and the anger of the Lord was kindled against the children of Israel.”—Josh. 7:1.
4	In reality only one man of the tribe of Judah committed that trespass, but God here shows that he deals with his people collectively as an organization and that willful wrongdoing in any part thereof will not be overlooked and left unnoticed or unpunished. To permit a wrongful act to go unnoticed would put in danger the entire organization and bring reproach upon Jehovah’s name.
8	The “accursed thing” at that time was Jericho, and at the present time it is the religious organi
116
THE WATCHTOWER,
zation and allies called “Christendom”. The thing is accursed because doomed for complete destruction by Jehovah’s Executive Officer, and to be destroyed for the reason that the thing is an abomination in the sight of God and a reproach to his holy name. Achan, in violation of the expressed command given by Joshua, had greedily taken away from Jericho some things that his avaricious heart desired. The manner of his taking such things is described in verses twenty and twenty-one of the seventh chapter of the book of Joshua. “Achan” means “trouble”, and those who follow in his course always get into trouble. Mention is made of the incident in another place in the Bible, where he is called “Achar”, meaning “troublesome”. “And the sons of Carmi: Achar, the troubler of Israel, who transgressed in the thing accursed.” (1 Chron. 2:7) That Achan, or Achar, therefore, pictures those spirit-begotten ones in line for the kingdom and who become unfaithful and who bring trouble upon Jehovah’s organization. This part of the prophetic drama occurred immediately following the siege of Jericho, and applies in the fulfillment after 1931, and more particularly after 1933, after which the march around the antitypical Jericho had begun. Those unfaithful ones in the Lord’s organization become troublesome or serious trouble-makers within the visible organization of the Lord; and which, if left unchecked, would cause difficulties in the organization, leading to disaster; and therefore Jehovah brings the same to light and into the open that all the people may see and profit by what is done. Appropriate here are the words: “Some men’s sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment; and some men they [their sins] follow after.” (1 Tim. 5:24) Note, then, that “the anger of the Lord was kindled against the children of Israel”, that is, against the entire typical organization, and which organization now must be purged and cleansed. As a whole the Israelites were entirely ignorant of the offense committed by Achan, and of the offender who had committed it, and they were in need of having the Lord lay bare the trouble before them. The offender was not ignorant of his offense, but only by taking action before the entire congregation, that is, publicly, could the Israelites who were innocent prove themselves guiltless and entirely out of sympathy with the offense and the offender by taking their positive and uncompromising stand on the side of Jehovah.
• The Lord maneuvered the entire matter to bring it clearly before the people, and in this he directed the course of Joshua: “And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is beside Beth-aven, on the east side of Beth-el, and spake unto them, saying, Go up and view the country. And the men went up and viewed Ai.”—Josh. 7:2.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
T Jericho was then in ruins, and Joshua sent men to Ai (the name meaning a ruin or heap of ruins), which was afterwards destroyed. Look now to the fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama, and the action taken by Joshua against Ai pictures the activities of the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses from and after A.D. 1933 against Satan’s organization, particularly the religionists on the earth. Some serious details are shown which are not set out in relation to the siege and destruction of Jericho. Joshua sent men as spies to get a close-up view of Ai, foretelling Christ Jesus would send his men to get a closer view of the Devil’s visible organization, that it might be more particularly exposed by his faithful servants. After 1933 the profound exposure of the Devil’s chief earthly instrument took place, which gave Jehovah’s witnesses an additional close-up view of that wicked organization. On April 23, 1933, the speech was broadcast on the subject “Effect of Holy Year on Peace and Prosperity”, disclosing the close alliance and association of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy with the political and commercial elements that misrule the nations; and that forced the Hierarchy into the open and exposed them as being against Jehovah and his Kingdom. The facts brought forth in 1935 by the Lord’s direction clearly disclosed that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy constitute the modern-day Philistines, fighting against the modern Samson, God’s anointed people on the earth. Some walking with the Lord’s organization did not view that revealed truth in the proper light. Joshua 7:3: “And they returned to Joshua, and said unto him, Let not ail the people go up; but let about two or three thousand men go up and smite Ai; and make not all the people to labour thither; for they are but few.” It appears from the record (Josh. 8:25) that the population of Ai was about 12,000, which was a small number compared to Joshua’s army. Correspondingly, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is made up of a comparatively small number amongst all the religionists under Satan’s command. Jericho having fallen so easily because of Jehovah’s miraculous act, the men sent to spy out that land came to the conclusion that no great effort needed to be put forth by the Israelites against Ai, and that the real work on their part would be after the Lord had destroyed that city in battle, and that therefore only a small number of fighting men needed to be sent up to Ai, and they so advocated before Joshua.
8 In the fulfillment of this part of the picture some self-constituted “wiseacres”, who appeared to be in line for the kingdom of God, manifested themselves and produced arguments to support their position. It was in the summer of 1935 that the Lord revealed to his people that the “great multi
April 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
117
tude” (Rev. 7:9-17) is an earthly class and constitutes his “other sheep” (John 10:16), which he would gather unto himself before Armageddon, and that it was the obligation and duty as well as the great privilege of the remnant to carry the message to the people of good will before Armageddon, that they might seek refuge, because after Armageddon would be too late for them to be gathered and for the remnant to do this work. But, contrary to this revelation from the Lord, there quickly came forward some self-constituted “wise ones” who persuaded themselves and some others that ‘the real big work would come after Armageddon’, which work they, the said “wise ones”, would do, and the said “wise ones” would appear particularly in the limelight as great ones, and greatly to their advantage. Proclaiming the kingdom message in the midst of “Christendom” is not merely for the purpose of warning “Christendom” of her impending disaster, but also for the purpose of enabling those people of good will who might be in “Christendom” to hear the joyful trumpet sound and to take warning and flee to the Lord’s organization for protection. These great truths the Lord put before his people in 1935, but the aforementioned “wiseacres”, like those who reported to Joshua, said, in substance: ‘Even if the “great multitude” is to be an earthly class, which is very doubtful, the present is not the time to go after them and gather them; the work of gathering the “great multitude” will follow Armageddon, and then we (the wise ones) will do that big work; and hence any special effort put forth now would he quite premature. Wait for the Lord to do his part, which must be confined to the spiritual class; don’t put forth such a great effort now to get everybody into the field and make them all work hard unnecessarily, because there are only a few now to be gathered in, if any at all. There is no occasion to make all the remnant get busy now in behalf of the “great multitude”, which can be gathered only after Armageddon. Where is the “great multitude”, anyhow? We don’t see them.’ Such was the substance of the argument of those that thought themselves important and would-be leaders of God’s organization; and so they went about amongst the Lord’s people in 1935 preaching such unscriptural doctrines or theories of “a big work after Armageddon”, and a few silly ones gave heed and followed them.
• It appears that Joshua must have yielded, to the argument of these men sent to spy out the land: “So there went up thither of the people about three thousand men; and they fled before the men of Ai.” (Josh. 7:4) Disaster followed that assault, and the Israelites were compelled to run away after the men of Ai chased them. Mark now some of the facts
that came to pass in fulfillment. The aforequoted unscriptural and unsound argument was put forth vigorously in some parts of the earth, and for a time the field work, particularly in Canada, lagged behind and many became indifferent. The effect was to weaken the faith of some and cause them to lag back or flee before the enemy. It is always true, where one is weak in faith he fails to make a vigorous assault in carrying out Jehovah’s commandments. Those weak ones, who had been directed to go up to modern Ai with the kingdom message, lagged back in giving the testimony, and some became altogether inactive and opposed the kingdom message and used the aforementioned “wiseacres’” argument to justify themselves. The result was that they laid off from the assault upon the Hierarchy and had nothing more to do with the work in behalf of the “great multitude”, because, said they, that work must wait until the Lord does his great work at Armageddon. “And the men of Ai smote of them about thirty and six men; for they chased them from before the gate even unto Shebarim, and smote them in the going down; wherefore the hearts of the people melted, and became as water.”—Josh. 7:5.
10	The defeat of these men who attacked Ai took all the courage out of the Israelites that had remained in camp. Likewise those who did retire from the witness work in 1935 or thereabouts were smitten by the enemy and put completely out of action and had no faith or courage to go on. The effect of those “wise ones” was to weaken others of the Lord’s organization. Even of those who were anxious to proceed with the work some were held back by reason of the wrongful action.
"When Joshua learned what had come to pass at Ai, he was greatly distressed: “And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face before the ark of the Lord until the eventide, he and the elders of Israel, and put dust upon their heads.” (Josh. 7:6) The distress of Joshua well pictured the grief of those keenly interested in the progress of the kingdom interests, which grief was because of the wrongful acts of the so-called “wise ones”. Upon some the Lord has put more responsibility in connection with this work, and because of the responsibility great would be the grief resulting from any apparent failure of the Lord’s work. In his distress Joshua cried unto the Lord: “And Joshua said, Alas! 0 Lord God, wherefore hast thou at all brought this people over Jordan, to deliver us [in the end, for some cause] into the hand of the Amo-rites, to destroy us? Would to God we had been content, and dwelt on the other side Jordan!”— Josh. 7:7.
12	The words of this part of the text could not be construed to mean that Joshua was charging Jeho
118
THE WATCHTOWER.
vah with infidelity, nor that he was charging that Jehovah had brought them there to be destroyed by the Canaanites. God had miraculously brought the Israelites over the Jordan, and by a great miracle had given them the victory over Jericho, and now conditions seemed to be exactly changed, and in the face of this disaster it was time for Joshua to ask what had come to pass that had caused the great change of the Lord toward them. He reasoned that it would have been better not to come over the Jordan and begin a conquest in Canaan than, having begun, to have the result to be so disgraceful shortly after beginning. He was greatly grieved for the name of Jehovah, and therefore Joshua humbled himself and begged the Lord to show him the reason why. In the fulfillment of this part of the drama the development aforementioned caused those wholly devoted to God to turn to him to seek a reason for the deflection and opposition, with a keen desire to learn whether this had come to pass because of some gross mistake or error, and whether they had been presumptuous in beginning the work concerning the “great multitude'’ before Armageddon. Many of the Lord’s people will recall the facts fulfilling this identical part. In his grief Joshua continued before the Lord: “0 Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turneth their backs before their enemies?”—Josh. 7:8.
13	For the men of Israel to turn tail and run from the enemy, after God had shown them such marvelous favor, was proof that they were faithless and wholly unworthy to be entrusted with any work of importance, and that was greatly humiliating to Joshua. The loss of the thirty-six men that were killed by the enemy was not so important, and had they died with their faces to the enemy it would not have been a reproach. Fleeing under the circumstances tended to demoralize the entire camp, and the situation prostrated Joshua. Likewise in the fulfillment, for one occupying a responsible position in the Lord’s organization to assume that the “great multitude” would not be gathered until after Armageddon, and that the Lord had permitted the announcement and the beginning of the work of gathering the “great multitude” contrary to His will, would have a tendency to work disaster upon his people; and hence the situation demanded an investigation and drastic treatment, that the anointed people of God might see clearly the cause of the trouble and what would be the proper course for them to take.
14	Because of this distressing condition and the effect it would have upon the camp, Joshua continued before the Lord: “For the Canaanites, and all the inhabitants of the land, shall hear of it, and shall environ us round, and cut off our name from
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the earth; and what wilt thou do unto thy great name?”—Josh. 7:9.
16 The Israelites under the command of Joshua were the only people then on the earth representing Jehovah, and this disgraceful affair would bring great reproach upon Jehovah’s name; and so Joshua inquired: “What wilt thou do unto thy great name?" Thereby he meant, What would be done to save the name of Jehovah from disgrace, further reproach, and ridicule? Likewise in the fulfillment, for Jelu» vah’s remnant to back down from the course they had taken in pushing forward with the message to the people of good will and to slack their hand in the work which the Lord had commanded them to do would be such a disobedient act as would lead to destruction. The same would bring great reproach upon Jehovah’s name instead of having a tendency to vindicate his name. Such unfaithfulness would preclude the remnant from having any further pro tection from the Lord before or during Armaged don, and, above all, would bring greater reproach upon the name of the Most High. His witnesses had received their “new name” (Isa. 62:2; Rev 2:17) and were now known by the name of “Jeho vah’s witnesses” (Isa. 43:10-12), and for them to fail to go forward in doing the witness work a: God had revealed to them they should do would h< a reproach upon Jehovah’s name and would result in their own casting away. Those of the remnant now will call to mind the disturbance caused by th<-position taken by the proclaiming of the aforesaid unsound speech and doctrine that ‘the “great mul titude” must be gathered after Armageddon, and hence there is no reason why anything should be done until that time’. There was a disturbance through out the organization of the Lord, because the rem nant had reason to expect that all the people in God’ organization were moving forward in harmoniou • action.
16 God’s faithful people must know the reason why this condition had arisen, that they might know theii own position before the Lord. The Lord advised Joshua, as the picture shows, and the advice ap plies to God’s people in the fulfillment. “And th" Lord said unto Joshua, Get thee up; wherefore lie-’ thou thus upon thy face?”—Josh. 7:10.
” Jehovah was not displeased with Joshua. On the contrary, God informed Joshua that his “god!;, sorrow” must be followed by a positive and em phatic action (2 Cor. 7:10,11) and that, instead of lying prone and inactive, he must be up am! doing, and hence that he must do what the Loid commanded him.
18 Joshua did not know that someone of the Israel ites had committed a trespass contrary to the Lord > command concerning the accursed city of Jericho,
Apbil 15, 1939
^He WATCHTOWER.
119
but now Jehovah informed him: “Israel hath sinned, and they have also transgressed my covenant which I commanded them: for they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen, and dissembled also, and they have put it even among their own stuff.”—Josh. 7:11.
” The entire company of Israelites had sinned, in a representative capacity, at least, by permitting one guilty man of their number to stay in the camp, and for this reason God had permitted a calamity to come upon the entire camp of Israel, and this to come at the hand of the enemy. His people collectively had broken their covenant, by the terms of which Jehovah had delivered Jericho into their hands. After the fall of Jericho Joshua had assumed that every Israelite in the ranks was standing firmly by the covenant and giving strict heed and obedience to the commandment with reference to the accursed city, and therefore he made no examination or search to ascertain whether somebody had violated God’s command. A thief amongst them had stolen of the things devoted to Jehovah and had covered up those things in the earth, and continued to go about pretending to be innocent. As stated in the text at Exodus 19:5, “All the earth is mine,” saith Jehovah, and everything of Jehovah’s must be used as he has commanded. Mark now the facts showing the fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama.
10	It was about 1933 or shortly thereafter that one occupying a position of responsibility in the Lord’s organization, and who was aided and abetted by some of his personal admirers, tried to gain something for selfish reasons. A course contrary to instructions had been taken concerning the Canadian radio stations, while at the same time that party pretended to be striving solely for the vindication of Jehovah’s name and for the downfall of Satan’s organization. Wise in his own conceits, he shunned instructions that he had received and pursued his own selfish course, that he might have a greater reputation amongst men, and attempted to get published his detailed report of action taken by him contrary to instructions received by him. On three separate and distinct occasions he sent to the Society’s main office a written report of what he had done, which report attempted to magnify his own importance, the publication of which was declined. The wrongful course of action of that individual continued. After the revelation from the Lord, in 1935, that the “great multitude” is an earthly company which the Lord will gather before Armageddon, that same person and his supporters, for selfish reasons and with the hope of selfish gain, tried to interfere with the forward movement of the Lord’s work. Each one amongst these wrongdoers remarked
in the presence of others that the aforementioned “wise one” would have charge of the work after Armageddon and that he would perform wonderful things in the Lord’s organization and that he would be great and his name great. When one assumes a position in the Lord’s organization for selfish gain or for the purpose of making a name for himself, then, like Achan, he is robbing Jehovah by failing to ‘bring all his tithes into the storehouse of the Lord’, and which full performance must be done before Armageddon. (Mal. 3:8-10) (See The Watchtower November 15, 1936.) All things in the earth, including praise and honor, belong to Jehovah, and not to men, and men who attempt to grab what belongs to Jehovah are stealing from God, just as Achan did at Jericho.
21	The three thousand men that went up against Ai failed because of the trespass that had been committed by one in the organization. Jehovah could not consistently bless that campaign when there was a single one in the organization that had violated his covenant and commandment. The Lord was now bringing the matter to light, that the guilty one might be made known, exposed and punished, and he chose the manner of doing so, and directed Joshua: “Therefore the children of Israel could not stand before their enemies, but turned their backs before their enemies, because they were accursed; neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed from among you.”—Josh. 7:12.
22	Jehovah was dealing with his people as an entire organization, and not merely with individuals. The organization must be clean, and all must obey the commandments of the Lord, without a single exception. Likewise in the fulfillment, God having directed certain work to be done, the doctrines proclaimed by anyone in the organization, which doctrines would tend to postpone or delay the witness work until Armageddon, could have only one effect, and that was to cause many to flee before the enemy and become inactive. Exactly those conditions arose amongst God’s organization. A few persons in the various parts of the earth were affected, and all the organization was stunned. If anyone in God’s organization follows a course for selfish purposes or selfish aggrandizement, and in doing so retards full obedience to the work of the Lord as commanded by Him, such would constitute a curse, and such a thing must be put away before the Lord would be with his people and give them prosperity in the work. As God said to Joshua, “Neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed from among you.” So God required the rebellious action aforementioned to be exposed and put away. God’s sanctuary must be kept clean. (Dan. 8:14) The work in Canada was falling behind, as many
120
THE WATCHTOWER.
will now recall, and the witness work in other parts of the earth would be retarded; and something must be done. God had not punished the offender instantaneously, but had permitted him to have some consideration and opportunity to repent; but since that offender did not do so, the Lord acted, and he instructed Joshua what to do: “Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify yourselves against to morrow; for thus saith the Lord God of Israel, There is an accursed thing in the midst of thee, 0 Israel; thou canst not stand before thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among you.”—Josh. 7:13.
,s It was evening when the Lord thus spoke to Joshua, and he told him to “sanctify the people . . . against to morrow”. Rahab and her family, picturing the Jonadabs or “great multitude”, were then in the camp of Israel, and even these must now be in full harmony with the Lord and be harmonious with the Israelites in order to dwell with them. Likewise in 1935 Jehovah had disclosed that the people of good will called “Jonadabs” are an earthly company, and that they must work in full harmony with the “remnant” and all advance in the kingdom work and promote the kingdom interest. Contrary to the Lord’s direction, the aforementioned self-constituted “wise ones” amongst God’s people began to preach their own selfish doctrines for selfish gain. The Lord kept quiet and let the offender go on until February 23,1936, at the Los Angeles convention of Jehovah’s witnesses, at which time nine other conventions in different parts of the United States, with a like number of conventions in Britain, were linked together by wire and wireless equipment and the Lord caused to be publicly called to the attention of all of God’s people thus assembled that there was sin in doctrine and in practice being committed by those within his organization who pretended to be faithful to the Lord, and that special sin consisted of a studied effort to interfere with the Lord’s work on behalf of the “great multitude”; and that the same was being committed presumptuously and for selfish gain. Among other things on that occasion the statement was publicly made and afterwards published, to wit:
“Only a few months ago the Lord revealed that those ‘other sheep’, or Jonadabs, are the ones who compose the great multitude coming from all these nations. Now we behold these standing before the Lord waving their palm branches and hailing Christ as King and singing out with a loud voice that they attribute salvation to Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, and to none other. The Lord then discloses that all the faithful remnant and all the resurrected ones, and the angels of heaven, together with the great multitude, are proclaiming Jehovah’s praise and
Brooklyn, N. Y.
rejoicing. (Rev. 7:11,12) That marks the beginning of the feast of tabernacles, the feast unto Jehovah, and these are the ones, according to the prophecy of Zechariah, that keep the feast of tabernacles. Some men, wise in their own conceits, tell you that ‘we are getting nowhere’, and that ‘the great multitude cannot come forth until Armageddon’. Such conclusion is void of reason and without Scriptural support. The Lord’s promise is that he will carry some through Armageddon, and those few will be the ones who keep the feast of tabernacles to the praise of Jehovah. Armageddon will work an indescribable devastation of the nations, and, says the prophet, ‘it shall come to pass, that everyone that is left of all the nations which came against Jerusalem, shall even go up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles.’ It is manifest that this scripture must be construed as meaning that those of all the nations who refuse to keep the feast of tabernacles by worshiping the King shall not be left, but shall be destroyed. Furthermore it means that the Jonadabs or the great multitude must joyfully ubey and worship and serve Jehovah God all the time if they would be carried through Armageddon. They must prove their integrity toward God before the wrath of God is expressed. That means that they must hear and learn the truth and obey it now and that the obligation is laid upon Jehovah’s witnesses and all that do hear to continue joyfully and energetically to proclaim the truth from now on.” (The Watchtower April 15,1936, page 123, paragraph 42) At that same convention an emphatic declaration was adopted and published declaring, amongst other things, “That we will not stultify ourselves by compromising with or yielding to the enemy’s demands,” but will go forward in the work as the Lord has directed.
“Under the Lord’s command Joshua took steps to find the guilty one and to purge the organization: “In the morning therefore ye shall be brought according to your tribes; and it shall be, that the tribe which the Lord take th shall come according to the families thereof; and the family which the Lord shall take shall come by households; and the household which the Lord shall take shall come man by man.”—Josh. 7:14.
“As it was in the picture, so in the fulfillment. That was not an effort to kick one merely because it could be done, but in obedience to God’s will, that the organization must be cleansed of the offender; and such action in the fulfillment was performed by the angels of the Lord at his command. (Matt. 13:41,42) Continuing his instructions, the Lord directed Joshua to say: “And it shall be, that he that is taken with the accursed thing shall be burnt with
THE WATCHTOWER,
121
April 15, 1939
fire, he and all that he hath; because he hath transgressed the covenant of the Lord, and because he hath wrought folly in Israel.”—Josh. 7:15.
26	That such a course is always in harmony with God’s will is shown by the Scriptures, and the faithful were admonished to have nothing in common with troublemakers who caused divisions, but to avoid them. (Rom. 16:17,18; 2 Tim. 3:5) Such rule is for the preservation of those who really love God. Covenant breakers will not be permitted to continue long in the ranks, but every root and branch thereof shall be removed. (Rom. 1:31,32) Covenant breakers defile God’s people; that is, they defile the temple and the temple service, and become the secret agents of the Devil. Such God must destroy.—1 Cor. 3:17.
27	Joshua, like Jesus Christ, the Judge of the temple, took action: “So Joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought Israel by their tribes, and the tribe of Judah was taken: and he brought the family of Judah; and he took the family of the Zarhites: and he brought the family of the Zarhites man by man; and Zabdi was taken: and he brought his household man by man; and Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was taken.”—Josh. 7:16-18.
28	That was seemingly a slow process, but showed that the Lord was directing the action so that no one would have reason to doubt. There must be a thorough searching before all the people, that they could see who was guilty; and the guilty one was located when the process of elimination had reached the point where Achan was brought forward as the guilty one. He pictured that class of persons that become wicked after the crossing of the antitypical Jordan and after the siege of the antitypical Jericho has begun. True, there must be some outstanding individual that takes the lead in such matters, but the fulfillment of the picture applies to all who are of that class; and therefore Achan pictured not particularly an individual, but all of that class of persons who become members of the “evil servant" class.
22	Referring now specifically to the fulfillment of this part of the drama: Such wrongful course had been pursued by some of that “evil servant” class for more than a year prior to being exposed and prior to being located and before these matters were brought to the view of the “remnant”. There appeared to be a lagging or unnecessary delay in exposing the wrongdoer, but not so in fact. At the beginning of the investigation no name was mentioned, and action was taken only after due deliberation and after seeking the Lord’s guidance. These facts, afterwards coming out, caused some who desired to find fault to sarcastically criticize the Society and those having to do with the send
ing out of instructions, and to remark concerning the one who had been in the lead and outstanding in the guilty action, and those murmurers and critics to say, “If you knew he was crooked for some time previous, why did you not put him out immediately?” The Watchtower of February 15,1938, paragraph 23, gives the answer: ‘It is best to wait upon the Lord. A man might be recovered from the error of his way.’ The servants of God should always act as directed, and Jehovah promises to guide and direct those who are diligent to ascertain and to do his will.
80	The offender being located, Joshua addressed him with words of kindness: “And Joshua said unto Achan, My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him; and tell me now what thou hast done; hide it not from me.”—Josh. 7:19.
81	Joshua was one of the three oldest men amongst the Israelites, and he spoke to the offender in a kind and fatherly way. He called upon Achan to give glory to God by acknowledging the justice of God in enforcing his rule previously announced. Being guilty and denying the same would be dishonoring Jehovah. Likewise taking any action or course to justify one’s wrongful act would be dishonoring to Jehovah. In the fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama the guilty might take the position that he was being “framed” and that the one who was required to act in the matter “for a , long time had been trying to get something on me”; which quoted words he used in letters written to others. Having taken such a wrongful course the offending individual might even think that the action was personally against him, while at the same time his course was that of dishonoring the Lord. One taking a wrongful course often seeks to justify himself and first to convince himself of liis course as rightful.
82	Joshua then said to Achan: “Hide it [the wrong] not from me”; and thus Joshua was giving the offender an opportunity to ask forgiveness, and he might have found forgiveness. Likewise Jesus gave an opportunity to the modern-day Achan class to amend their wrongful course. Men may successfully conceal their mistakes from other men, but nothing is hid from the Lord, the great Judge. Likewise nothing was done in malice or ill will toward Achan or toward the class he pictured. Often, when a man knows he is guilty and that he is certain to be discovered, he caves in and confesses. A willful violator of God’s law is wicked, and concerning such it is written: “The wicked flee when no man pursueth.” (Prov. 28:1) Achan knew he was discovered as a wrongdoer, and hence he spoke: “And Achan answered Joshua, and said, Indeed I have sinned against the Lord God of Israel, and thus and
122
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
thus have I done: when I saw among the spoils [of the accursed Jericho] a goodly Babylonish garment [(literally) a garment of Shinar; worn by Devil religionists to attract attention to themselves], and two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted them, and took them; and, behold, they are hid in the earth in the midst of my tent, and the silver under it.” —Josh. 7:20, 21.
M Achan must have been one of the marchers around Jericho who entered over the ruins of the wall after Jehovah had torn the walls down. Then he yielded to temptation. He saw that which would give him a more brilliant appearance and make him distinctive amongst other persons, and which would cause him to receive honor and plaudits, and he “swiped” the garment to use, and then with the gold that he stole he could make a splurge. That was a case of yielding to the dust of the eye, and the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life’; and it was even so in the fulfillment. (1 John 2:16) Apparently Achan forgot that he was in a covenant to execute the commandments of Jehovah. His own selfish desire led him into the trap of Satan. (Jas. 1:14,15) This scripture cited announces the certain rule and the result it brings when followed. Achan was playing a part in the drama. The fulfillment shows the reality which God foretold.
M Note how accurately the drama pictured what has come to pass in modern times: Particularly from and after 1933 some have taken a course similar to that of Achan by marching around the modem Jericho of Satan’s organization and declaring God’s judgments written against her; but after doing so for a season such servants yield to temptation which arises from something appearing in Satan’s organization, and to satisfy a selfish desire they take a wrongful course and are ensnared by Satan. It may be a desire for more honor among men. It may be an unsound conclusion that God has chosen that person for some special work which in due time will make him an outstanding person among others. Nursing such a selfish desire for fame amongst men, he yields to that selfish desire and falls into Satan’s snare. Having reached that point, naturally the wrongdoer seeks justification for self by putting forth propaganda. Call to mind now the fact that the published propaganda matter advocating greater consideration for Satan’s organization, and particularly for the religionists, was sent forth in which an attempt was made to induce the publishers of the kingdom message to slack their hand and delay the work commanded by the Lord, and to wait until Armageddon and then they would do something great. That printed propaganda sent forth made the further argument, in effect, at least,
that after Armageddon there would be no reproach to come upon the workers. The author of that propaganda announced to some, who had sympathetic ears, that then he would lead the work and he would occupy a position of great responsibility and honor before the Lord because the Lord had appointed him to do such work. This was well pictured by the peculiar garment and by the plenty of gold that Achan stole. Such a course taken by the opposers of the kingdom shows that they are not zealous about giving Babylon, the Devil’s blasphemous crowd, a full blast of Jehovah’s declaration of vengeance, but they say: “Wait until God breaks down the organization, and then we will do our part, a great work.” That conclusion led the offenders to give more attention to preparing themselves for the supposed “great work” that they would do after Armageddon, and they lost sight of obedience to the Lord’s commandment. Brooding over the matter, the leader in that offense, in fulfillment, and his companions reached the conclusion that they were doing the proper thing by interfering with the work assigned by the Lord to his people when he commands them to “arise . . . against her in battle”. (Obad. 1) Such insane and illogical conclusion led them to look after their own salvation and to take steps to justify themselves in the course of action taken. The Lord Jesus’ words here aptly apply: “Ye are they which justify yourselves before men; but God knoweth your hearts; for that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God.” (Luke 16:15) The next step to be taken by such deluded ones was that “salvation is for everyone”; that “universal reconciliation is provided for all, including Judas and the Devil”. In substance these things were announced in the propaganda sent forth, and that propaganda sheet concluded with these words: “What a Saviour!”; thus attempting to show that Christ Jesus provides salvation for all the enemies of God, including Judas, the Achan class, and the Devil himself; no matter how great had been the sin of one, he would be saved in the end, according to the unsound and unscriptural propaganda sent forth by that Achan class. By such argument the evildoers convinced themselves that this would be God’s course; thus showing that they were deluded by the Devil and had gone insane.
35 This had an evil effect on a few others in the organization who recognized the one who was putting forth the propaganda as a person who had for a long while occupied a position of responsibility in the Lord’s organization. When the offender was put out of his position, he took his stand against the Society and sent his propaganda throughout the land in an effort to induce others to join him in his attempt to justify his action. Some few fell
THE WATCHTOWER,
123
April 15, 1939
into that trap, but none of the elect were deceived. —Matt. 24:24.
“Achan tried to hide the evidence of his sin by burying the accursed things in the earth in the midst of his tent. The “evil servant” class, pictured by Achan, tried to hide the evidence of their sin against God and against his organization, and tried to justify themselves by sending out letters to certain persons who were thought to be sympathetic with the wrongdoer in his unrighteous course. Such letters were written while the offender was occupying an official position representing the Society; and to cover up his wrongful action, although his letters were written in the Society’s office and by the Society’s help and on the Society’s literature, he kept no carbon copies, thus hoping that no one would find it out. To be sure, the Lord knew about those letters, and brought them to light in his due time and caused them to be produced and read before witnesses. The Lord put Achan “on the spot”, and he confessed his wrongful acts; and so when the letters above mentioned, together with a large amount of corroborative evidence proving the guilt of the offender, were produced, the guilty one had to admit and did admit the wrongful acts.
87	Joshua, acting under the Lord’s direction, would not permit Achan to afterwards have any reason to claim that he had been framed or coerced into making confession. So Joshua proceeded to get the corroborative evidence that fully supported his confession. “So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent; and, behold, it was hid in his tent, and the silver under it.”—Josh. 7: 22.
88	The men sent to search found the accursed property in Achan’s tent, where he said it was, and they brought it forth and thus doubly proved Achan’s guilt, that is, by two witnesses: his confession and the physical facts. The crime was now proved beyond any question of doubt. Mark now the fulfillment of this part of the prophetic picture. Action against the accused aforementioned was taken only after a careful search of the material facts and bringing these together, which proved beyond all doubt that the accused one had taken a course against God’s organization. Joshua caused the physical evidence to be brought forth and exhibited to the congregation, that the whole matter might be open before the Lord and men: “And they took them out of the midst of the tent, and brought them unto Joshua, and unto all the children of Israel, and laid them out before the Lord.”—Josh. 7:23.
88	Likewise those in God’s organization who had attempted to wreck it were permitted by the Lord to pile up evidence against themselves and then the Lord caused the same to be brought out publicly before others. The Greater Joshua, Christ Jesus,
caused the evidence to be produced showing that one of the Society’s representatives, aided and abetted by others, had been working against the Lord’s organization; and that evidence was brought before witnesses, and in the presence of the offender, and was presented and recorded so that there could be no doubt about it and no one can ever be able to truly claim or charge that the wrongdoer was “framed”. The action was taken in harmony with the Lord’s will.
40	The Lord caused to be recorded the manner of punishment inflicted upon Achan; and that is proof that the record is important and was put in the Bible and is now revealed for the aid of those today who are on the earth and who are diligent in seeking to know and to do the will of Almighty God in his service. “And Joshua, and all Israel with him, took Achan the son of Zerah, and the silver, and the garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons, and his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his tent, and all that he had: and they brought them unto the valley of Achor.”—Josh. 7: 24.
41	Joshua’s duty and responsibility did not end with the bringing of Achan to account before witnesses. Achan had taken and failed to destroy the accursed things, and now Joshua must destroy them and see that God’s decree of destruction was carried out to the full. In announcing God’s decree concerning the fate of Jericho Joshua had said: “Keep yourselves from the accursed thing, lest ye make yourselves accursed, when ye take of the accursed thing.” (6:18) When Achan Took of the accursed thing’ the anger of the Lord was kindled against the children of Israel, and, the entire camp or congregation being subject to the anger of Jehovah, it was mandatory upon Joshua that he see to it that there was a complete cleansing for the offense committed. Immediately Achan had his privilege of service taken away from him. Such is exactly what Jesus declared he would do with those of the “evil servant” class when he pronounced judgment at the temple: “Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which hath ten talents. For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance; but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath. And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”—Matt. 25: 28-30.
42	The Lord could not permit his organization to be disturbed by allowing the wrongdoer to go unpunished. The sin of Achan was presumptuous and could not be permitted to pass unnoticed. Had not Joshua performed his duty unto the Lord faithfully in causing Achan to be punished, the Lord would have destroyed Joshua.
124
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
"Achan and all he had was brought unto the valley of "Achor”, the name meaning "trouble”. God’s judgment against the wrongdoer had been announced before the crime was committed. (Josh. 7:15) Achan was to have no one survive him to carry forward his sinful course or works. God's judgments are not subject to change. (Isa. 14:20,22) The action of Joshua was not personal against the offender Achan. He had trusted him, and Achan had betrayed that trust; but the punishment to be inflicted was because Jehovah had commanded it. “And Joshua said, Why hast thou troubled us? the Lord shall trouble thee this day. And all Israel stoned him with stones, and burned them with fire, after they had stoned them with stones.”—Josh. 7:25.
44 The question propounded publicly to Achan, "Why hast thou troubled us?” offered the opportunity to Achan to publicly repent of his wrongdoing and to beg forgiveness from God. Achan “found no place of repentance”. (Ileb. 12:17) The Society’s former servant who had taken the wrongful course, when all the evidence proving his guilt was laid before him, then and there promised that he would write a letter to all the consecrated throughout the earth acknowledging his wrong and asking their forgiveness. Not only did he fail to keep that promise, but within a short time he took exactly the opposite course by sending letters throughout the earth condemning the Lord’s organization on earth and many individuals connected therewith, and thus exhibited his unrepentant spirit. That one person, together with some of his supporters, continued to trouble the Society by sending letters to radio stations and to religionists known to be avowed enemies of God’s organization, and to others, wherein threats were made “to break up the organization of the Society within two years”. Not content with that threat, the name and address of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society was willfully and deliberately forged by some of the conspirators, who sent their libelous publications through the mail on letterheads and envelopes marked with the Society’s name and address, with the manifest purpose of deceiving and attempting to carry out their cruel purpose of 'breaking up the Society’. Their propaganda was printed in the United States and posted in New York, on paper purporting to come from the Society, thus proving conclusively the purpose of deceit and fraud. Instead of showing the spirit of repentance, the spirit of malice and wickedness continued to be expressed by the wrongdoers. Such a spirit is, within the meaning of the Scriptures, “spiritual fornication,” by going to religionists and attempting to join with them in fighting against the fjord's organization. A desire to glorify self had led
Achan to commit a great sin. The desire to satisfy self led Esau to commit a great sin. The desire for personal or self gain led the former Society’s representative to 'sell his birthright’ for self gain. Concerning such the admonition is given in the Scriptures : “Follow peace with all men, and holiness [uncompromising devotion to Jehovah], without which no man shall see the Lord: looking diligently lest any man fail of the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled; lest there be any fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright.”—Heb. 12:14-16.
48 After propounding to Achan the question as to why he had troubled Israel Joshua said: “The Lord shall trouble thee this day.” How marvelously the Lord has made pictures and then brought about the facts to show their fulfillment and later has permitted his people to see the fulfillment and the meaning thereof. These things should cause all of God's people to tread lightly, with fear and trembling, lest they should go contrary to God’s appointed way. In The Watchtower of May 1, 1937, page 141, in an article entitled “Evil Servant” the facts concerning the aforementioned deflection of the “evil servant” class are set forth. In that article the following, amongst other things, appears: “His duplicity being discovered, he was, because of his unfaithfulness, relieved of his position and duty in the Lord’s organization. About a year later this same man enters into a further conspiracy with the enemy to commit more wrong. He got someone to write an article attempting to prove that the Lord Jesus Christ is not present. That article he printed and caused to be distributed amongst many of the Lord’s servants in different parts of the earth, together with a covering letter, which letter and article purported to come from the head office of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society. Manifestly this was done in order to practice fraud and deception upon the faithful ones. He caused the printing to be done in the United States, and had his papers posted in the mail at Brooklyn, New York. In his letter of so-called ‘instructions’, and which purported to be instructions from headquarters, the demand is made that the letter and article be read to the various companies at a stated time, and further stated that organization instructions are mandatory and this instruction must be carried out and the letter read.
“Then he issued another paper, had that printed and sent throughout the earth to the various offices and servants of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, and in which letter he resorts to lies and manifests a vicious and malicious, lying disposition, attacking the president of the Watch Tower Bible
SEe WATCHTOWER,
125
April 15, 1939
& Tract Society, and making many statements which he knew at the time are deliberate lies. He demanded that his letter be answered through The Watchtower. The Watchtower columns are not open to the discussion of matters with those who are opposed to the Lord, and certainly not to printing the argument of one against the presence of the Lord, when this question of the Lord’s presence has been thoroughly covered by the publications of the Society.
“The Lord Jesus denounces such as conduct of those who are of the evil servants, using this language : ‘But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin to smite his fellowservants, and to eat and drink with the drunken: the lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites ; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’ —Matt. 24:48-51.”
46 The Lord permitted all the Israelites to see what was done, and they all approved what was done to Achan. Likewise in this day the spiritual Israelites show themselves in full accord with the Lord’s judgments, and these joyfully announce that they willingly bow to his law, his name and his majesty. This was evidenced by many letters sent by companies of Jehovah’s witnesses to the Society’s main office, and by resolutions adopted and published by many companies throughout the land, and some of which were published in The Watchtower at the time. The sinful course of Achan caused the Israelites to determine that they would be more diligent in obeying the Lord; and the subsequent facts show that a like influence directed the course of God’s faithful people of the remnant, as shown by resolutions adopted and published by them, a sample of which resolutions appears in The Watchtower June 1, 1937, and, amongst other things, contains the following:
“Almost a year has now passed since (under the Lord’s direction) as president of the Society you removed from office one W. F. Salter, to whom we had long looked for leadership in the service, but who had become unfaithful to his charge.
"At that time some could not quite clearly see the reason for such action. We had, however, implicit confidence in Jehovah and that the steps there taken were under his direction.
“Subsequent events not only have fully justified this faith and confidence in Jehovah, and yourself as the one used in this connection, but also have made clearly to appear why this action was necessary.
“Because of the fact that the Lord’s people are being, from this source, now subjected to a barrage of literature calculated to undermine and overthrow
their faith, we, the Toronto company of Jehovah’s witnesses, at a joyous assembly on this the eighteenth day of April, nineteen hundred and thirtyseven, unanimously adopt the following resolution, to wit:
“1. That we fully endorse the action of our president, Brother Rutherford, in thus removing from office one who so manifestly had, by his course of action, said, ‘The table of the Lord is contemptible,’ and who had ‘snuffed’ at what is spread on that table, by ‘offering polluted bread upon the altar’.
“2. That, as a means for our protection, we will meet this latest move of the enemy with
“(a) Increased activity and interest in the Lord’s service, especially in the new ‘strange work’ just beginning and also the studies in The Watchtower and other publications of the Society.
“(b) That we will destroy without reading any such literature received through the mail or otherwise.
“(c) That w’e will turn a deaf ear to any, either among us or outside, who manifests a desire to debate or argue respecting this course of action.
“3. That we acknowledge as the visible organization of Jehovah on earth the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, and recognize the Society as the channel or instrument through which Jehovah and Christ Jesus give instruction and meat in due season to the household of faith.
“4. Further, that we pledge our faith in and loyalty to the Society, and its servants, Brother Rutherford at Brooklyn, and also the branch servant, Brother Chapman at Toronto; that we are pleased and thankful for his appointment in charge of the Lord’s work in our midst. We wish to say that, the company following your instructions, working under the unit arrangement, and because of the zeal manifested by the branch servant, Brother Chapman, never before has the interest in and on behalf of the Lord’s work been so keenly aroused nor has there ever been such a manifestation of activity as now. We pledge our co-operation to the fullest extent with him in the work, and, together with you, pray that the Lord will smite His enemy to the dust and shine forth in Kingdom glory.
“5. That we once more express our united determination to do the will of Jehovah as expressed through his executive officer, Christ Jesus. That, in obedience to God’s commandments, having heard the call, ‘Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle,’ we will carry forth the fruits of the kingdom to our brethren, the great multitude, who must be led and fed by Christ Jesus before Armageddon and may be preserved at Armageddon in vindication of Jehovah’s name.”
—The Watchtower June 1937, page 175.
4T At Winnipeg, the residence of some of the coconspirators aforementioned, the company there of faithful, spiritual Israelites made and published a declaration, which was published in The Watchtower
126
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
July 1,1937, page 207, and which resolution, amongst other things, contained the following:
“We received from the Canadian branch, Toronto, this afternoon, information leading to the disfellow-shiping of Walter F. Salter by the Toronto company. At the regular weekly service meeting of the Winnipeg [Canada] company of Jehovah’s witnesses, held this date, the motion of disfellowshiping Walter F. Salter by the Toronto company was also concurred in by the company here. The following resolution was also moved, seconded, and passed unanimously:
“(1) Seeing that the Lord’s people are being subjected to a barrage of literature calculated to undermine and overthrow the faith of some, the Winnipeg company of Jehovah’s witnesses hereby recommend to all of the Lord’s people, here and elsewhere, the following course as a means of protection and safety:
“(2) Increased activity and interest in the Lord’s work, especially in the ‘strange work’ in the field service now beginning, as also the studies in The Watchtoicer and other publications of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society.
“(3) The destruction, without reading, of any such literature received through the mail or otherwise.
“(4) The turning of a deaf ear to anyone among us manifesting a desire to debate or argue respecting this course of action.
‘We take this opportunity to tell you that we are unitedly behind you as the one Jehovah has raised up to carry forward the Kingdom witness, as directed by Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s mighty King and Vindicator.
“We are in full harmony with the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society and the teachings which Jehovah is so bountifully providing us, through his visible channel, the columns of The Watchtower."
*s The modern-day faithful servants of Jehovah do no bodily injury to the willful wrongdoers, but avoid them and count them as dead, and this they do in obedience to God’s command, and they do not mourn for them. (Ezek. 24:15-18) The Society, as the apostle admonished, acted in harmony with such admonition, ‘that the church’s body, soul and spirit [of the Lord] be preserved blameless in this day of our Lord Jesus Christ.’—1 Thess. 5:23.
48 Not for the benefit of nor to preserve the memory of Achan, but as a memorial to the justice of Jehovah, the Israelites erected a monument at that place: “And they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day. So the Lord turned from the fierceness of his anger. Wherefore the name of that place was called, The Valley of Achor, unto this day.”—Josh. 7:26.
80 The justice of Jehovah is executed against those who oppose him, and the monument so testified. The Lord has caused a record of the modern-day Achan
or “evil servant” class to be recorded in The Watchtower heretofore published, and now after many days he shows his people also through The Watchtower how he long ago pictured that deflection, and how that prophecy is now fulfilled to his own vindication. Thus the seventh chapter of Joshua stresses the importance of full obedience to the commandments of the Most High. The people of the Lord are forcibly reminded of the importance of such obedience, and particularly so as the battle of the great day of God Almighty approaches. The Israelites in Canaan, under Joshua, were at war with the enemies of God. Likewise today the spiritual Israelites are at war with God’s enemies, and that which is now required of everyone under the command of the Greater Joshua, Christ Jesus, is full and complete obedience. (Acts 3:23) To such the Scriptures apply, to wit: “For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh: (for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds;) casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ; and having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled.”—2 Cor. 10: 3-6.
51 Jehovah was preparing the Israelites under Joshua for further strenuous work foretelling the vindication of his name. They were making a prophetic drama foretelling the complete vindication of the name of the Most High. Since the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple he, as the great servant of Jehovah, has revealed to his faithful servants one after another of the prophecies for the aid, encouragement, comfort and hope of his people. Each and every one of these prophetic pictures in which God’s present-day people are shown to have a part in the fulfillment stresses the great importance of absolute obedience to the Lord. We are now in the day of his judgment, and Jehovah’s unfailing promise is: “The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies.” —Psalm 25: 9,10.
82 Without doubt there are more trying experiences just ahead for the remnant, and for the Jona-dabs, but each and every one must be assured that he who will be diligent to learn righteousness and obedience the Lord will guide. The Lord will direct the course of his faithful people and protect them, and to remain in that class one must be fully obedient. Another part of the drama of vindication, to follow, discloses what must be done by the faithful servants of the Lord.
(To be continued)
IN WHAT BODY
N THE day Jesus was raised from the dead and on several occasions thereafter he appeared to his disciples. Facts show he did not appear in the same
body in which he was crucified; nor with the same clothing in which he was buried. The Scriptural account is that the clothing and a napkin were folded up and laid aside in the tomb. Had he appeared in the same body that was crucified, those who were with him for three and a half years would have readily recognized him. Surely Mary Magdalene in the garden would have known him, and we cannot say she was blinded by her tears. Jesus appeared to her as a gardener, and only when he spoke her name in the tone so familiar to her did she recognize him. (Read John 20:11-18.) He also appeared as follows: On the same day of his resurrection, to the women returning from the empty sepulcher.—Matt. 28: 9,10.
On the same day, to Simon Peter alone near Jerusalem (Luke 24:34), and to two disciples going to Emmaus. —Luke 24:13-21.
On the evening of his resurrection day, to the apostles (except Thomas) at Jerusalem, where they were meeting behind locked doors.—John 20:19-25.
One week later, the first day of the week, to the apostles, Thomas this time being present.—John 20: 26-29.
Some days thereafter he appeared on the shores of the Sea of Galilee to seven of his disciples who had gone back to fishing. “And none of the disciples durst ask him, Who art thou? knowing that it was the Lord” because of the miraele he had just performed like to one he had performed previous to his death on the tree.—John 21:1-14.
A little later he appeared to the eleven disciples on a mountain in Galilee. “And when they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted [why?].”—Matt. 28:16-20.
A short time thereafter he again appeared to a company of more than five hundred of his followers, gathered by appointment, in Galilee.—1 Cor. 15: 6.
He appeared to the apostle James only.—1 Cor. 15:7.
Then he appeared, for the last time, on the side of the Mount of Olives, east of Jerusalem, to his disciples at the time of his ascension, when the angels said to the disciples: “This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner [Note: not, in like body] as ye have seen him go into heaven.”—Acts 1: 6-11.
Did he appear in a spirit body or a human body? and how did he get the body if it was not the one in which he was crucified? Surely he was not raised from the dead with a human body, because on occasion he appeared to the disciples when they were in a room with the doors fastened. (John 20:19-26) An eye-witness (1 Pet. 3:18, A.R.y.) writes: “Christ also suffered for sins once, ... being put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the spirit." The only answer is that now, as a divine spirit, Jesus had the power to create a body of flesh and clothing and appear at any time and upon any occasion he desired, even as spirit angels had previously done. Mary Magdalene supposed the resurrected Jesus to be a gardener; two of the disciples who walked with him to Emmaus thought he was a stranger in the community. Again, none of the disciples recognized him by his body on the seashore of Galilee (John 21:12) ; likewise on other occasions when he appeared to them. And then he was recognized by his actions, his words,
127
DID HE APPEAR?
and the familiar tone of his voice. It was hard to convince Thomas, who declared he must have some more proof; therefore the Lord created a body having in it the marks of the nails in order that Thomas might be convinced.
The purpose of Jesus’ appearing to the disciples was that the fact might be established that he was resurrected and alive. He had power to create a fleshly body and appear in it and to dissolve it at any time. Without doubt when he appeared to his disciples behind locked doors he created the body immediately in their presence and dissolved it when he disappeared. The body with which Jesus ascended on high and which he has in heaven is a glorious body which no man can look upon and thereafter live, except by the miraculous power of Jehovah. The apostle states (1 Cor. 15: 50, 51): “Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God.” (Read also 1 John 3:2.) Paul was given a miraculous view of the Lord in glory. He did not see the body of Jesus, but only the light from his glorious body. So brilliant was this light that for three days Paul was blind. Only a miracle removed his blindness.
All the facts show that the fleshly bodies in which the resurrected Jesus appeared were neither the body that was crucified nor his glorious spiritual body, but bodies created expressly for the purpose of appearing to his disciples. His human body, the one in which he was crucified, was removed from the tomb by the power of God. Had it remained there it would have been an obstacle in the way of the faith of his disciples, who were not instructed in spiritual things until the giving of the holy spirit later, at Pentecost. The Scriptures do not reveal what became of that crucified body, except that it did not decay or corrupt. (Acts 2:27,31) Jesus having been resurrected a divine spirit, the “express image” of Jehovah, no man can look direct upon the glorified Jesus and live.—Ex. 33:20.
Christ Jesus the Lord now in heaven is a glorious person, the ‘fairest of ten thousand and altogether lovely’, and no human eye has ever seen him since glorified, except in the vision miraculously to Saul, who became the apostle Paul. The purpose of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, when understood, is further proof that he was raised, not human, but divine. The ransom for humankind had to be provided by a perfect human creature going into death, to wit, Christ Jesus, who “was made flesh”. (John 1:14) This ransom price, the value of a perfect human life, must be presented in heaven itself as a sin-offering on behalf of mankind. Unless this was done, the ransom would be of no avail and there would be no purchase of the human race from death and its results. The apostle Paul plainly states (Heb. 9:24) that Christ Jesus has entered into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us. He is now a great High Priest, who passed into the heavens, becoming the high priest on behalf of those who come to God through him, (Hcb. 4:14-16) This would have been impossible had not Jesus been resurrected a divine person; for “flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God”.
{Continued from page 114)
preserve their copies of the magazine. Such a binder is now on supply, clothbound, new blade-style, at $1.00 each. Those associated with companies should order binders through their respective company servant. Remittance should accompany order.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
MAKING A “DUMB DOG” TURN TAIL AND RUN
“While working near a Catholic church, I noticed a priest walking up and down the sidewalk. When I came out of a home he managed to be there waiting to confront me. He asked what I was doing, all the time fully aware of my work. He asked, 'Why does Judge Rutherford bring out so much smut about the Catholic church?’ I answered I didn’t realize Judge Rutherford was doing that, but that he had to tell the truth as to what religion was, for it meant his life if he did not. ‘If you feel Judge Rutherford has misrepresented anything in regard to your church or teachings, why don’t some of you have the manhood to come out and talk with him on the radio?’ He brought up the subject of patriotism, at which I asked him if he was born in this country. He answered, ‘Why, sure! . . . I am 100-percent American!’ I said, ‘If you were you would be preaching Americanism instead of Romanism. . . . Today Rome, headed by the pope and the Catholic Church, is doing its best to bring to America the very things our forefathers ran from years ago.’ He said, ‘If you people love this country, as you claim, why don’t you salute the flag?’ My reply was that forcing people to salute a flag was out of Rome, too: ‘If you are a good Catholic and would salute the flag every second it would not amount to anything, for there isn’t one honest Catholic in this country who can salute the American flag and still stand back of that salute if the pope issued a decree for all Catholics to fight for the Church and Rome. So, you see, you are really 100 percent for Rome, if you sincerely believe your, theory.’ By this time he was upset, he nervously looked at his watch, said he must go and hold mass, invited mg to come, too, and said he would like to talk with me some more. Rushing down the street, he yelled: ‘That Judge Rutherford won’t be on the air another six months.’ ”
“FACE THE FACTS” IN HIGH SCHOOL
“Doctor Ward, of ‘Southern’, principal of this small, private high school here in Alabama, after a short interview concerning the work, had the students assemble and listen to the recorded lecture ‘Face the Facts’, with a total of about fifty persons. He said that he knew most educators were afraid to offend the politicians and religionists in. their work, but he was for liberty and freedom and he didn’t care who knew it.”
ARE YOU MISSING “WATCHTOWER” STUDIES? READ THIS:
“At--------, Ga., the company working their territory
ran across a man that had gotten hold of Watch Tower literature but could not get in touch with a study anywhere. They showed him a copy of The Watchtower and told him where they held their studies. The next Watchtower study meeting he was there; he had ridden a mule bareback nine miles, of a cold night. The next meeting his boy ten years of age wanted to go with him. Both could not ride the mule; so he took an old mowing-machine, stripped it of its machinery, fastened him a platform on the axle, cut him some poles, fixed shelves to it someway, fastened on an old buggy seat on that platform, hitched his mule to that machine, and he and his boy drove the nine miles to the Watchtower study; and it was another cold night. He has never missed a study since, and is now a Watchtower subscriber.”
128
THE MORE A TERRITORY IS WORKED^—
“We were in the service two hours fifty minutes, working this highway that was clear of snow. The following are the results: Three Watchtower subscriptions, six bound books, one Bible, twelve booklets, two back-calls, two persons that have some books and want to take The Watchtower but did not have the money right then, but will later; also a back-call for a series of lecture recordings. This particular person was given the book Riches by his brother. He was a member of the Lutheran church, but says that as he read the book he looked up the scriptures and is satisfied the work we are doing is not man’s, but God’s, and wanted to know how we carried on the work, and wants me to eome and see him on my next visit to the local company. He subscribed for The Watchtower. Anyone can see the Jonadabs leaving Satan’s organization now. It is now up to us to give them the Lord’s instruction. All these can now be taken care of through the company here, as their names are on back-call slips. So many times pioneers meet people of good will and neglect to take their names and hand them in to a company. In neglecting to do this it is keeping a person of good will from his rights. Two weeks ago we got two subscriptions for The Watchtower right here in town. My experience is, the more a territory is worked, the more interest we arouse.”
THE CAR DRIVER TRIED TO PREVENT THIS
“As I started to the house, our car honked; so, assuming I was not to work this house, I started toward the car. The car driver blew the horn again, which I took to mean to go ahead and work it; which I did. The lady of the house greeted me with ‘Well, you know I am a Catholic’. I told her our message was for all honest Catholics as well as Protestants and Jews. I presented The Watchtower, which she took, looked through, and then said: ‘Now, how much salary does Judge Rutherford give you to come and present this?’ I had to tell her she had been misinformed about our work; so I explained it thoroughly, that Judge Rutherford as well as every individual in the organization was consecrated to do God’s will; no one was paid a salary to preach His kingdom. I gave her a good picture of what God’s kingdom meant to all the meek. At this she fairly forced me into the kitchen to talk to two young men, whom I took to be her sons. The one son wanted to show me he knew something; so he said: ‘I bet you don’t even know the Songs of Solomon or the Exodus of Egypt is in the Bible.’ I asked him to tell me about the exodus. He couldn’t say a word; so I then showed him how Jehovah used Moses to lead His people out, and that that picture applied to the work we are doing today. This seemed to help him to see the greatness of the Lord’s work today. The mother seemed overjoyed with the information. She contributed for Face the Facts. As I came out the workers waiting for me were spellbound; for the woman’s arm was around me and she spoke right up that she hoped the Lord would bless my efforts. Just a few minutes before, this same woman was very rude to another kingdom publisher who called at her door, and had even ordered another publisher off the steps of another home she owned across the street. Afi er getting in the car I understood why the horn was blown twice.”
THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. Van Amburoh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” »Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent In the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed, him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death In order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah's organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the I<ord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth" with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wllL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British..............-......... 34	Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian................-...40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian .................... 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W„ Australia South African ............._.......Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T., under the Act of March 3, 1879.
“NEW EARTH” TESTIMONY PERIOD
June is thus designated, and the activities outlined for the month are related to the work now proceeding of laying the foundation of the new earth. Jonadabs as well as the anointed kingdom publishers will rejoice to have part therein. An attractive special offer should make June outstanding for the placement of booklets, to wit, seven booklets on a contribution of but 25c, three being self-covcrcd and four being colored-cover booklets. People unable to take the combination will be offered the new booklet Fascism or Freedom on any contribution they can afford. This applies to foreign-language booklets also. Fuller details are to be found in the Informant. Your part now is to prepare and equip yourself for an active share in this testimony period. A good report for the month is expected from you.
IMPOSTORS
Persons going about the country, and claiming to be in the truth and Jehovah’s witnesses, present themselves at different places and collect money and get other favors of the brethren. We warn the brethren everywhere to have nothing to do with these impostors.
CONVENTION
At New York City, June 23-25, a convention of Jehovah’s witnesses will be held. Thousands desire to attend who are too far away, and for their convenience arrangements are being made to connect Los Angeles, Chicago and some other cities in the United States, and London, Glasgow and other cities in England, by wire direct from Madison Square Garden in New York City. The president of the Society will address the convention on Saturday the 24th, from 3: 00 to 4: 00 p.m., and on Sunday, June 25, will address the public, 4: 00 to 5: 00 p.m., New York time. Other cities desiring to be tied in to this convention should notify the Brooklyn office immediately. Store details later.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of June 4: “Drama of Vindication” (Part 7), fl 1-28 inclusive, The Watchtower May 1, 1939.
Week of June 11: “Drama of Vindication” (Part 7), fl 29-59 inclusive, The Watchtower May 1, 1939.
ANNOUNCING JEHOVXH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX
May 1, 1939
No. 9
DRAMA OF VINDICATION
PART 7
"Jehovah God of hosts! who like thee is potent, 0 Yah? with thy tokens of faithfulness surrounding thee?” —Ps. 89:8, Rotherham Psalms.
TEHOVAH is always and forever faithful in the I performance of his covenant and in carrying out J his testimonies. When Jehovah takes a creature into a covenant with him, that creature could never have cause for doubt as to Jehovah’s carrying out His part of the covenant. The man who seeks Jehovah with a pure and whole heart is blessed. He must always know that whatsoever Jehovah has promised, that He is certain to perform. Extolling the name of Jehovah the psalmist says: “Righteous art thou, 0 Lord, and upright are thy judgments. Thy testimonies that thou hast commanded are righteous and very faithful.” (Ps. 119:137,138) Every creature taken into a covenant with Jehovah must prove his faith and faithfulness if he would receive Jehovah’s approval. That means that the creature must be put to the test and under the test prove his integrity toward God. Those who are faithful have part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name. When the crucial test is applied and the creature seems overwhelmed with the burden, he must take courage and know that, if his faith remains strong and he continues faithful, Jehovah will bring him through in safety. “For the Lord preserveth the faithfiil.” (Ps. 31:23) As God’s people near the end of their earthly journey, and just preceding Armageddon, the tests upon them increase in severity; but that is no reason to be dismayed. “God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted [tested or tried] above that ye are able.” (1 Cor. 10:13) The remnant are a called people, taken out from amongst men for Jehovah’s purpose: “Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it.” (1 Thess. 5:24) The Word of Jehovah repeatedly assures his covenant people of his own faithfulness; and such he records for the aid and comfort of those who love him. In the prophetic dramas recorded God has performed that which emphasizes his own faithfulness and has stressed the necessity for his people to be faithful. These are days of great peril; in these days Satan is desperately attempting to destroy those
who have made a covenant to do Jehovah’s will. Therefore the people of God have need to strengthen their faith and prove their faithfulness.
2 The trespass of Achaij had given great distress to Joshua; and this is shown by the fact that Joshua prostrated himself before the Lord and cried unto the Lord “until the eventide”. (Josh. 7:6) The entire camp of Israel was in distress and their faith put to the test. The faith of Joshua did not fail, and, when commanded by the Lord, he arose, stood up, and was diligent to obey God’s commandment to cleanse the camp. Jehovah foreknew that a time would come when spiritual Israel would be defiled by wrongdoing of some in the camp or congregation, and in his faithfulness he made a picture thereof, and now in his due time he has revealed the meaning thereof; and this he does for the aid and comfort of his people. Let no one who today truly loves and serves God be dismayed by any trials that come upon him. If faithful in the performance of our commission, we may be entirely certain that Jehovah in his faithfulness will preserve us and deliver us.
2 Immediately following the cleansing of the camp of Israel God caused his people to make another part of the drama picturing and foretelling the vindication of his name. “And the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear not, neither be thou dismayed: take all the people of war with thee, and arise, go up to Ai; see, I have given into thy hand the king of Ai, and his people, and his city, and his land.” (Josh. 8:1) Thus Jehovah foretold that the vicious and malicious acts of the “evil servant” class, pictured by Achan, could not succeed and will not be permitted to retard the advance or increase of His witness work, which work must be done preceding Armageddon. The wrongful acts of the “evil servant” temporarily had an adverse effect upon the people of the Lord, but that is no reason to be afraid or dismayed. Jehovah commanded Joshua to go up to Ai, and this was proof that the camp of Israel had been cleansed and his covenant people was ready for
131
132
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N.Y.
war. A call was immediately issued, not for a few thousand to engage in the war, but for “all the people of war” to prepare for and go into battle. Likewise, as set forth in the text for the year 1937, the command is given to all of the remnant and the “camp”: “Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.” (Obadiah 1) That part of the drama recorded in Joshua the eighth chapter is another picture of what God brings to pass at Armageddon and immediately preceding the battle of the great day of God Almighty. It is another picture of Armageddon, separate and distinct from that of Jericho. Joshua there played the part picturing Christ Jesus, who commands the forces of Jehovah of hosts. That part of the battle forces that was concealed in ambush against Ai pictured the invisible host of the Lord, which host does the real slaughter work. While the ambuscade was set, the other part of Israel stood before the city of Ai and enticed the enemy to attack, and thus pictured those who fearlessly carry on the witness work just preceding Armageddon, and which brings on the attack of the enemy. The following part of the eighth chapter of the book of Joshua discloses God’s purpose to destroy all those who oppose him and to completely remove the reproaches that the Devil has brought upon His name, and the drama shows the means by which He will accomplish that purpose.
4 Just before starting on the march to Ai Jehovah gave Joshua assurance of what would be the result of the assault upon that city of the enemy: “And thou shalt do to Ai and her king as thou didst unto Jericho and her king: only the spoil thereof, and the cattle thereof, shall ye take for a prey unto yourselves: lay thee an ambush for the city behind it.”—Josh. 8:2.
6 That the same fate was to befall Ai as that which had befallen Jericho shows that it also is a picture of Armageddon. Jericho, being the first city of Canaan to be assaulted and taken, was the first-fruits of the land unto the Lord, and the spoil thereof was to be completely destroyed. Ai being the second city of Canaan to be taken, the spoil thereof was not to be destroyed, because not devoted exclusively to Jehovah; and this is shown in the text, which says: “Only the spoil thereof, and the cattle thereof, shall ye take for a prey unto yourselves.” In preparation for the assault upon Ai God commanded Joshua: “Lay thee an ambush for the city behind it.” An ambush is a military term meaning that troops are concealed from view in order to make a surprise attack upon the enemy. This, prepared by Jehovah, is the first ambush recorded in history. This shows that the forces that will do the slaughter work at Armageddon are hidden or unseen by the organization of Satan on the earth
for the reason that the enemy do not believe what God has recorded in his Word. It is further proof that God’s witnesses may publicly and repeatedly declare God’s purpose concerning his enemies and their testimony will not be believed by the ungodly. The forces of the Lord are so stationed in the battle of Armageddon that, when the fight begins, all avenues of escape are cut off and none can escape.
8 Ai was north and west of Jericho. Still on farther west, and somewhat to the north of Ai, was Bethel. On the north side of Ai was a valley, and on the east thereof a desert plain. No doubt Joshua had inspected the country round about Ai, and he moved his troops into position to the best advantage, as directed by the Lord: “So Joshua arose, and all the people of war, to go up against Ai: and Joshua chose out thirty thousand mighty men of valour, and sent them away by night.”—Josh. 8:3.
T In the fulfillment that means a command from the Greater Joshua: “Forward! March toward Armageddon, always facing the foe and never turning back.” Joshua moved his forces by night march to locate them in strategic points. This suggests that Jehovah’s witnesses are not to disclose everything of their movements to the enemies and to thus permit the enemy to forestall their activities. Let the enemy draw their own conclusions by their distorted minds and then take whatsoever course they may choose. It appears that Joshua moved his troops in different divisions and at different hours in the night. Those forming the ambuscade were located in the hills on the west of Ai and between that city and Bethel. That division under the immediate command of Joshua, and with which he encamped, moved out also in the nighttime and took their position on the east of the city of Ai in the desert plain, and later on that night moved about to the north and pitched camp at a point where there was a valley between the Israelite troops and the city of Ai.
8 Joshua issued his orders to each division. That division hiding on the west side of Ai received the following orders: “Behold, ye shall lie in wait against the city, even behind the city: go not very far from the city, but be ye all ready.” (Josh. 8:4) It appears from verse twelve that there were five thousand in this division concealed in ambush; and that division seems clearly to picture the invisible part of Jehovah’s battle organization, and which division is ready under the Lord’s command to attack and do the destruction work against Satan’s visible crowd, and that at the appointed time. The further orders were issued by Joshua: “And I, and all the people, that are with me, will approach unto the city; and it shall come to pass, when they come out against us, as at the first, that we will flee before them.” —Josh. 8: 5.
May 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
133
•At the proper time that division was to appear before Ai as if to make an attack. This shows all Jehovah’s witnesses on the earth, the “remnant” and those associated with them, their “companions”, who appear before “Christendom” by going from house to house and doing the witness work, which in fact invites the attack by the enemy, and who, at the proper time and when commanded to by the Lord, perform some maneuvers that seem to the enemy like a retreat: “(For they [the conceited and boastful enemy] will come out after us,) till we have drawn them from the city; for they will say, They flee before us, as at the first: therefore we will flee before them.” (Josh. 8:6) The fulfillment of this part of the drama may take place when the enemy forces feel fully assured that Jehovah’s witnesses are hard-pressed, and then they determine to viciously go after them and destroy Jehovah’s witnesses.
10	Furthermore Joshua instructed those in the ambush that, when they saw the enemy chasing the fleeing Israelites of the other division that were with Joshua, those in ambuscade should come forth and begin the attack: “Then ye shall rise up from the ambush, and seize upon the city: for the Lord your God will deliver it into your hand.” (Josh. 8:7) This shows that Christ Jesus, the Greater Joshua, in command of all the forces of Jehovah of hosts, is maneuvering the invisible, heavenly hosts so as to co-ordinate them with the movements of Jehovah’s witnesses on the earth. Every movement of both will be harmonious. Considering this in connection with the instructions given by the Lord at Ezekiel 9:1-7, the movement of the invisible force will begin immediately after the witness work is completed, and the invisible force will attack and destroy Satan’s visible organization. Thus it is seen that the invisible forces of the Lord take the organization of Satan and destroy it. Joshua issued further instructions to the invisible ones, or the ambuscade: “And it shall be, when ye have taken the city, that ye shall set the city on fire: according to the commandment of the Lord shall ye do. See, I have commanded you.” (Josh. 8:8) As to destroying the city by fire, as stated in this text, this symbolically pictures the destruction that comes upon Satan’s organization at Armageddon, and which is named by the Lord in another prophecy of Ezekiel, showing the invisible forces of the Lord attacking Satan’s organization. Also by another prophet of the Lord (Habakkuk 3:5): “Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his feet.”
11	Joshua had issued his orders to both divisions, and now the first division of the army moved out to its position: “Joshua therefore sent them forth: and they went to lie in ambush, and abode between
Beth-el and Ai, on the west side of Ai: but Joshua lodged that night among the people.” (Josh. 8:9) The army moved by night, and this division of five thousand went to the west side of the city and were concealed from the view of the enemy. Joshua then moved the large division, containing approximately 25,000 troops, out by night, and this division was placed on the east side of the city. This larger division of Joshua’s forces pictured Jehovah’s witnesses on the earth moving into action following the general convention of 1937, when the Lord’s people throughout the earth were moved to greater activity: “And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered [inspected] the people, and went up, he and the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai.” —Josh. 8:10.
12	As it appears according to the record of verse twelve, that division put in ambush contained only 5,000 men. It follows, then, that the other division must have been made up of approximately 25,000. Thus was foreshadowed all the witnesses of the Lord rising up in 1937 and marching to their positions for war. Those who were privileged to assemble at Columbus, and other thousands assembled elsewhere on the earth at that time, well remember the conditions and enthusiasm of Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions, moving into their position for action. The slogan on that occasion was the chosen year text, which, no doubt, was chosen by the Lord and was provided for the occasion: “Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.” As Joshua inspected his troops early in the morning, before daylight, likewise the 1937 convention was an inspection of Jehovah’s people, the receiving by them the battle instructions, and such inspection was made by the Lord Jesus throughout the entire earth. The “elders of Israel” that accompanied Joshua were not such as the “elective”, self-important type of modern time, but those Israelite elders pictured the ones who are wholly devoted to Jehovah and his kingdom, and who are likewise on the alert to carry out instructions.
18	It appears that after the early morning inspection made by Joshua he then moved his forces from the east to the north side of the city of Ai and pitched his camp there. That was immediately across the valley from the city of Ai. “And all the people, even the people of war that were with him, went up, and drew nigh, and came before the city, and pitched on the north side of Ai: now there was a valley between them and Ai.” (Josh. 8:11) On the north the camp was right before the city gates and in sight of the city. The north appears to be the position, symbolically, from which Jehovah’s Executioner comes. The Israelites’ there appearing before or in sight of the city pictures what Jehovah’s
134
THE WATCHTOWER.
witnesses have been doing since 1937 by increasing the house-to-house witness work, both inside and outside of “Christendom”. The valley between the city and the camp of Israel on the north was selected as the point from which the attack would begin, and evidently the Canaanites expected the attack to be from that point, from what afterwards came to pass. The land sloped from the north down to the bottom of the valley and then up, upon the south side or that side next to the city; and that would make it appear to the Canaanites that the attack on the city would be very difficult for Joshua by reason of his forces’ being compelled to climb up the steep embankment and attack the city walls. The ambush had already been prepared, and is described as follows: “And he took about five thousand men, and set them to lie in ambush between Beth-el and Ai, on the west side of the city.”—Josh. 8:12.
14 Thus the ambuscade was on the right side of Joshua’s main force as he faced Ai. These positions are important, and hence described in detail, and show that Jehovah maneuvers the forces before Armageddon, both his own and that of the enemy, and he puts them exactly where he would have them before the battle begins. The invisible angelic forces are the right-hand support and defense of Jehovah’s witnesses on the earth, while the earthly force work and walk in “the valley of the shadow of death”, and there the invisible forces serve as Jehovah’s protection provided and give assurance to them that no evil shall befall. (Ps. 23:4) Concerning those on the right hand, and which forces are concealed from the enemy’s view, the Lord caused to be written in his Word: “Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation ?”—Heb. 1:14.
“After pitching camp on the north of the city early in the morning, and even before daylight, Joshua moved down into the valley with his troops: "And when they had set the people, even all the host that was on the north of the city, and their liers in wait on the west of the city, Joshua went that night into the midst of the valley.” (Josh. 8:13) As the darkness lifted and the daylight began to appear the watchers on the walls of Ai discovered Joshua and his army in the valley in front of the city gate; and seeing Joshua there the watchmen would immediately sound the alarm. The king of Ai, no doubt, was in command of all the fighting men of Ai, and the information that the Israelites were preparing to attack the city would immediately be brought to the king’s attention: “And it came to pass, when the king of Ai saw it, that they hasted and rose up early, and the men of the city went out against Israel to battle, he and all his people, at a time appointed, before the plain; but he wist not that there were
Brooklyn, N.Y.
liers in ambush against him behind the city.”— Josh. 8:14.
18 The quick rushing of the Canaanites to battle showed their self-confidence and their total ignorance of Jehovah’s purpose against them. They would have in mind the previous battle, when the Israelites fled. Even so the Devil and his forces are self-reliant and now ignore the warning, ignorantly, and are completely ignorant of what Jehovah will do to them. The king of Ai and his men would be flushed with the former rout of the Israelites and would be eager to rush out of the city and again defeat the attacking forces. As to the fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama, no man could now tell how and when it will come to pass, because we can understand prophetic pictures only after they have been fulfilled. But it does plainly appear that the fulfillment is in the near future and that not yet has the time arrived for the enemy to give the signal for a general attack upon Jehovah’s witnesses. The Lord’s people, thus being forewarned, may be better prepared for the attack. When the Fascist-Roman Catholic Hierarchy - dictatorial element have fully overrun the democracies of the world, and the dictators are in complete control, then would appear to be the time when the signal is given, that is, the “time appointed” and agreed upon by the enemy when there will be a general movement by those combined elements to crush the witnesses of Jehovah. The conspiracy and overt acts performing that conspiracy are described in Psalm eighty-three and appear to fit the time here mentioned : “They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation; that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance. For they have consulted together with one consent: they are confederate against thee.”—Ps. 83:4, 5.
” The ones pictured that will join in this united movement against the Lord’s people include the “evil servant” class, who, together with the others, are determined to completely crush and destroy Jehovah’s witnesses. God’s people then totally relying upon him pray to the Lord as set forth in the Psalm concerning the enemy: “Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to shame, and perish.” (Ps. 83:17) The purpose of this prayer is that the name of Jehovah may be vindicated. As to the present movement of the enemy, while these words are being here written the enemy all over the world is preparing for an attack on the Lord’s devoted ones and the enemy’s machinery is being oiled and put in running order. Daily the enemy’s newspapers publish accounts that strongly point to the fact that religionists and their allies, the political and trafficking element, together with the “strong
May 1, 1939	THE WATCHTOWER.	135
arm squad”, are acting together to destroy the witnesses of the Lord.
” The surprise appearance of Joshua and his army in the valley before Ai was a warning that the attack upon the city was imminent. Likewise today in fulfillment the enemy's visible organization and forces have been warned that Armageddon is the battle of Jehovah God, and that he will destroy all the enemy at that battle. That warning, however, is ignored by the visible representatives of the Devil. They laugh at the warning and make no provision against that which they are warned is coming, because they are ignorant of the Scriptures and have no faith in what they have read concerning them. The enemy senses an impending danger moving upon them, but they do not know what it is. They hear Jehovah’s witnesses announcing it, and they hate to hear it. They do not fear Jehovah’s witnesses, but they hate them because they sound the warning. They do not believe that Jehovah is backing up such witnesses, who are now proclaiming the message of the kingdom. The prophetic drama has been performed and fulfilled up to this point sufficiently to show that the battle of Armageddon is very near.
18 Concerning the position of the opposing force, those in ambush and the main army under Joshua, the description of a well-known authority on Bible history may here be properly considered and that with profit (McClintock and Strong’s Cyclopaedia, Volume 1, page 193):
"Joshua, encamping within sight, but with a valley intervening, when he came up to make a false attack, necessarily appeared to disadvantage, the enemy being above him, and his retreat toward his own camp rendered difficult by its being likewise above him on the other side, and both sides no doubt very steep, as they are in general in the hills of this region. His men therefore fled, as directed, not toward the north, where the camp was, but eastward, toward the plain and desert; while in the hills, not behind, but on the west side, lay the ambuscade, in sufficient force alone to vanquish the enemy. This body of Israelites had not therefore the objectionable route to take from behind the city, a movement that must have been seen from the walls, and would have given time to close the gates, if not to warn the citizens back; but, rising from the woody hills, it had the shortest distance to pass over to come down directly to the gate; and, if an accident had caused failure in the army of Joshua, the detachment could not itself be intercepted before reaching the camp of the main body; while the citizens of Ai, pursuing down hill, had little chance of returning up to the gates in time, or of being in a condition to make an effectual onset.”
80 The hour has struck, and the battle begins. The gates of the city of Ai are flung wide open, and the entire fighting force in that city, under the com
mand of the king, rush out and expect to quickly dispatch the Israelites. "And Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before them, and fled by the way of the wilderness.”—Josh. 8:15.
81 As Joshua’s men fled, the enemy reasoned that the Israelites would flee back toward their camp on the north, but here Joshua fooled them by immediately withdrawing all of his forces eastward into the plain or desert. That drew the army of Ai down the steep slope into the valley, away from the city gate and farther away from the position of the 5,000 men in ambush. The chase is on, and with eagerness and self-confidence the army of Ai left the city behind entirely unguarded, with the gates wide open, and rushed on after the Israelites. Up to this point in the drama Joshua had not struck a blow against the enemy. As to the fulfillment:
88 It is now only a short time before Armageddon, and Jehovah’s witnesses are in the open before the enemy, with no carnal weapons and no means of striking a mortal blow, if they had such a desire, and they do not desire nor are they permitted to use carnal weapons. The situation seems clearly to indicate that the combined force of the enemy, political, judicial, legislative, commercial, military, police, propagandists and others, will make a combined attack upon Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions. This may come about by restrictions being placed upon Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions; and that, from the enemy’s viewpoint, would put God’s people apparently on the run, and an effort of the enemy would then be made to completely crush those who are on the Lord’s side. The Greater Joshua, Christ Jesus, the Commander-in-Chief of the forces of the Most High, will permit it to be so, that Jehovah’s witnesses apparently are on the run, and this in order to draw the enemy into the open and cause a combined assault upon those devoted to the Most High. Then would be the time when the Lord commands his force in ambush, that is, the angelic host of heaven, to go into action, and that invisible force obeys the command.
83 The king of Ai pictured Satan, and his closely associated officers would picture Gog and other wicked angels: "And all the people that were in Ai were called together to pursue after them: and they pursued after Joshua, and were drawn away from the city.” (Josh. 8:16) Here Satan is pictured as bringing into action all his visible forces against Jehovah’s King, the kingdom message, and those who bear that message, and the attack is made with the wicked determination to wipe out completely the forces of Jehovah from the earth. Every fighting man in Ai was ordered out and went forth to engage in the battle: “And there was not a man left in Ai or Beth-el that went not out after Israel:
136
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and they left the city open, and pursued after Israel.” —Josh. 8:17.
**The town of Bethel joined also in the attack. Those of that town probably represented the religious element. All forces of the enemy were called into action to make a complete clean-up of natural Israel; thus foretelling the determination to wipe out spiritual Israel, that is to say, Jehovah’s witnesses and those who associate with them. The enemy left their city with no protection; and this shows that the enemy played into the hands of the Lord, who is wiser than any creatures. As the enemy of natural Israel at Ai relied upon their own strength, so at Armageddon the Devil and his forces rely upon their own strength. “They that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy.”—Jonah 2:8.
* Evidently the Lord had instructed Joshua as to the time and manner of giving the signal to the forces in ambush for them to get in action; and so now, as shown in the picture, this was the time for them to act. “And the Lord said unto Joshua, Stretch out the spear that is in thy hand toward Ai; for I will give it into thine hand. And Joshua stretched out the spear that he had in his hand toward the city.”—Josh. 8:18.
‘•Jehovah timed the maneuvers of the battle forces, and so he gave command to Joshua to stretch out his spear, and Joshua obeyed exactly at the appointed time. The sign of the glittering spear was doubtless the spearhead, and the shining of the rising sun on that spearhead would be reflected to the men in hiding on the west of the city, where those men were eagerly waiting for the signal directing them to go into action. A similar manifestation of the Lord’s power was given in another battle fought shortly thereafter at Gibeon (Josh. 10:12-14), and concerning which it is written (and which scriptures foretell Armageddon), to wit: “The sun and moon stood still in their habitation; at the light of thine arrows they went, and at the shining of thy glittering spear.”—Hab. 3:11.
,TIn flashing his spearhead Joshua would have to turn about with his face toward the pursuing enemy; and immediately the men in ambush, seeing that flash of his spear, advanced to the attack. This part of the prophetic drama pictures the signal given by the Commander-in-Chief, Christ Jesus, the Greater Joshua, to the angelic host of Jehovah to attack and destroy God’S enemies: “And the ambush arose quickly out of their place, and they ran as soon as he had stretched out his hand; and they entered into the city, and took it, and hasted and set the city on fire.”—Josh. 8:19.
“ The great battle of Almighty God will grow with intensity. Fiery destruction will reduce Satan’s organization to a burnt-crisp ruin. It is the battle
of the Almighty Jehovah for the vindication of his holy name, and he will wipe out the enemy. Concerning that fight it is recorded in Jehovah’s Word: “And it shall come to pass at the same time, when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, saith the Lord God, that my fury shall come up in my face. For in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath, have I spoken, Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel; so that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping things that creep upon the earth, and all the men that are upon the face of the earth, shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground. And I will call for a sword against him throughout all my mountains, saith the Lord God: every man’s sword shall be against his brother. And I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone. Thus will I magnify myself, and sanctify myself; and I will be known in the eyes of many nations; and they shall know that I am the Lord.” —Ezek. 38:18-23.
” Will any of the enemy escape the devastation resulting from the battle of the great day of God Almighty 1 Mark now what follows: “And when the men of Ai looked behind them, they saw, and, behold, the smoke of the city ascended up to heaven, and they had no power to flee this way or that way: and the people that fled to the wilderness turned back upon the pursuers.”—Josh. 8:20.
80	At this point Joshua wheeled his army of superior numbers and began a forward attack on the approaching enemy. Naturally this astonished the enemy and the commander thereof would want to know why, and, looking back, he saw the city of Ai on fire. “Trapped!” would be the astounding cry. Likewise when the Lord Jesus begins his aggressive assault upon the enemy at Armageddon, not one of the enemy will find a way of escape. If some for a time hide themselves, they will be searched out and destroyed. By that time all the opposers of Jehovah on the earth will have donned their fighting garments of identification, and they will be easily found out and no mercy or quarter will be shown them by the fighting forces of the Lord. (2 Ki. 10:22-27) Satan’s representative, the king of Ai, and his army, looking back and seeing their city burning, seemed at this point in the drama to picture those who behold Babylon going down and who stand far off and weep and howl: “Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that mighty city! for in one hour is thy judgment come.” (Rev. 18:9,10) The Devil’s
THE WATCHTOWER
137
May 1, 1939
forces at that point will have abandoned religion and will be going exclusively after Jehovah’s faithful servants, and then will quickly meet complete defeat.
31	At this point in the battle Joshua’s turning back on the pursuing foe also pictures the angelic forces of heaven joining in the destructive work at Armageddon. Thus it is seen that Joshua and those under his immediate command played more than one part in the great prophetic drama at the battle of Ai.
“ Those in ambush rushed into the city and fired it. The smoke arising therefrom warned the forces on both sides that the city was doomed to destruction. “And when Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had taken the city, and that the smoke of the city ascended, then they turned again, and slew the men of Ai.” (Josh. 8:21) The king of Ai and his fighting men, picturing the Devil and his fighting element on the earth, had left behind in the city the women, and the burning of the city at this point of the drama pictures the destruction of the religious element that run to cover and let others do their fighting, and which element suffers complete destruction. (Jer. 51:30) The entire fighting army of Ai and of Bethel, that had joined them in this fight, were destroyed by Joshua’s forces upon the battlefield; and that pictured the destruction of all the elements of Satan’s visible organization, which go out to destroy the only people on earth who truly serve God and his King.
“The 5,000 men, who had been in ambush, but who had now fired the city of Ai, immediately left the city burning and hurried out to join in the slaughter of the enemy then upon the battlefield: “And the other issued out of the city against them: so they were in the midst of Israel, some on this side, and some on that side; and they smote them, so that they let none of them remain or escape.” (Josh. 8:22) The enemy of God’s covenant people were then surrounded by the Lord’s forces under Joshua, and no one of them was permitted to escape. Here the picture speaks in thunder tones of the battle of Jehovah at Armageddon and what will be the results. Surely now seeing the revelation of this prophetic drama up to this point will cause Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions to be strong in faith, strong in courage, and hope. The combined enemy marching on the faithful servants of Almighty God to destroy them are certain to fail. To his faithful and obedient servants Jehovah now says, as he said to Jehoshaphat: “Tomorrow go ye down against them.” We now are in the “tomorrow” and are going out, facing the enemy with the message of the kingdom. The Lord then shows his people that they have no need to fight with carnal weapons, because he says to them: “Ye shall not
need to fight in this battle; . . . the battle is not yours, but God’s.” (2 Chron. 20:15-17) Like Jeremiah, the faithful servants of Jehovah now on the earth go out before the enemy with the message, and as they go they know that they will meet strong opposition. They know great difficulties are before them, and for their encouragement Jehovah now says to his faithful people concerning the enemy: “They shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee.”—Jer. 1:19.
34	The revelation of these marvelous truths to God’s people at this hour of stress is proof of Jehovah’s grace and loving-kindness; and those who serve him faithfully, the true followers of Christ Jesus, now will not fear or be dismayed, but with full faith and confidence in the Lord and with real courage they will advance to the work and do so without slacking their hand or efforts. Let the faithful now be strong and very courageous. Victory is certain 1
35	The only creature permitted to see the complete slaughter of the last man of Ai was the king himself. There he pictured Satan the Devil, who is the last to see his forces destroyed: “And the king of Ai they took alive, and brought him to Joshua.” (Josh. 8:23) This is exactly in harmony with Revelation 20:1, 2. The king, being brought alive to Joshua, was held for the time to see the complete finish of all his fighting men: “And it came to pass, when Israel had made an end of slaying all the inhabitants of Ai in the field, in the wilderness wherein they chased them, and when they were all fallen on the edge of the sword, until they were consumed, that all the Israelites returned unto Ai, and smote it with the edge of the sword.”—Josh. 8:24.
38	As to the fulfillment, some of the “male women”, who have been wearing skirts while collecting money on the strength of “purgatory” and other parts of their racket, may, as Armageddon starts, change their garments, that they may appear like farmers, in order to hide their identity, with the hope of escaping. (Zech. 13:4-6) But that will avail them nothing. They cannot deceive the Greater Joshua, because he will search out all of God's enemies. Those would-be ‘farmers’ will be completely wiped out: “And so it was, that all that fell that day, both of men and women, were twelve thousand, even all the men of Ai.”—Josh. 8:25.
37	The number twelve thousand mentioned in this verse evidently referred exclusively to the fighting men, and not to the non-fighters, they being not worthy to be counted. The picture shows the complete and thorough slaughter of all of God’s enemies, which form Satan’s organization. Players in a prophetic drama often picture different things at dif
138
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ferent times. All the forces of Joshua now engaged in the slaying work at this point represented all of the unseen or angelic forces fighting under the command of Christ Jesus at Armageddon. In that fight none of Jehovah’s witnesses on earth will have any part. Their part of the work is to participate in God’s “strange work”, to sing forth his praises; and since it does not appear that there was any singing after the slaughter began, this supports the conclusion that appears in other scriptures that the “strange work” will be done when the slaughter work begins. The destruction of Ai was so complete that it pictures complete extermination at Armageddon of every part of Satan’s visible organization in order that the earth may be entirely clean preparatory for the execution of the divine mandate concerning the filling of the earth.—Gen. 1:28; 9:1.
88	The Jericho picture discloses the people of good will that form the “great multitude”, and which were shown in the saving of Rahab and those of her household. The battle of Ai makes no specific mention or picture of the “great multitude”; but, since Rahab and her household had been absorbed in the organization of Israel, the presumption must be indulged that the “great multitude” will be closely associated with the remnant at the battle of Armageddon as it progresses. This is further corroboration that the gathering of the “great multitude” must be completed before Armageddon. Other prophetic pictures show the “great multitude” in the “cities of refuge” at the time of the battle of the great day of God Almighty and that they are under the protection of the Lord Jesus Christ, and that they must abide there until the battle is completed.—Num. 35:9-32; Josh. 20:1-9.
88	It is stated in the record that, when those men of ambush had fired the city and rushed out to attack the enemy in the open field, the men of Ai “were in the midst of Israel, some on this side, and some on that side”. This shows that the host of heaven, under the immediate command of Christ Jesus, will completely encompass the enemy and wipe them out. Joshua did not give a signal to stop fighting, but commanded that the fight go on; and this is shown by the fact that “Joshua drew not his hand back, wherewith he stretched out the spear”. (Josh. 8:26) Jehovah had commanded Joshua to “stretch out the spear that is in thy hand”. (Verse 18) It is not specifically recorded that the continuous success of the battle over the enemy depended upon Joshua’s keeping his spear outstretched, but the presumption is that he continued to signal with that spear to go on with the battle. At Rephi-dim, where Joshua led the battle as field marshal under the superior command of Moses, fighting the
Amalekites, the continued success of that battle depended upon Moses’ hands’ being upraised. (Ex. 17:8-16) Probably the continued success of the battle of Ai depended upon Joshua’s constantly signaling with his spear. At least, his outstretched spear was a sign to keep on fighting until the last man was wiped out. This seems to mean that the Lord Jesus Christ, the Field Marshal in command at Armageddon, will continue to signal his forces to continue the fight until every vestige of the Devil’s organization is completely done up. Joshua wanted to be fully obedient to the command of Jehovah of hosts and to completely exterminate the enemy regardless of how long the fight had to last. With him there would be no unfinished job, such as when, years afterwards, Saul left unfinished the commands of the Lord to exterminate the Amalekites. Had Saul profited by the experiences of Joshua he would never have spared a single one of the Amalekites.
40	The fight and complete slaughter of the inhabitants of Ai was not an act of fiendish and needless slaughter, as critics would have it appear. No proper appreciation of that battle of the Lord nor of Armageddon can be had until one gets an understanding of Jehovah’s purpose. The name of Jehovah is the great issue to be determined. Satan had challenged Jehovah and defied him to put on earth men that would remain true and faithful and who would thereby show the supremacy of Jehovah. The Amo-rites and other Canaanites that held possession of Palestine were entirely on the side of the Devil and were practitioners of the Devil religion, and hence the judgment of Jehovah is that all such shall be destroyed. At the great deluge of Noah’s day Jehovah had wiped out all the human race, saving only eight persons. Had men thereafter profited by that expression of God’s wrath, and the exercise of his power, they would not later have turned to Devil religion. Having done so, they are in line for destruction. In the battle of Ai Jehovah was making a prophetic picture foretelling his purpose to wipe out at Armageddon all of the Devil’s supporters. That prophetic picture is certain to be fulfilled, and now those who believe God and who love and serve him profit by the record of the battle of Ai, and hence put themselves entirely on the side of God and the Greater Joshua, Christ Jesus. All such consist of the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses and the “great multitude” and are the only ones that God will permit to survive Armageddon. This information is now disclosed by the Lord for the benefit of all who desire righteousness, and who desire to continue to live. It is the great privilege and duty of those who receive an understanding of the truth and profit thereby to carry that message to other peo-
May 1,1939
THE WATCHTOWER,
139
pie who are of good will, that they too may seek the only place of safety. The battle of Armageddon will be entirely in favor of the Lord and result in the vindication of Jehovah’s name. With Joshua and his army at Ai Jehovah was making a dramatic picture of the vindication of his name, and which drama is certain to be fully enacted in reality in the very near future. The fight between the Lord and the Devil began in 1914; and then in 1918 Jehovah stopped that fight, thus ‘shortening those days of tribulation’, and the interim of comparative peace furnishes the opportunity for the witnesses of the Lord to go about in the earth and warn the people and serve those of good will that they may find the way of safety and salvation. That good and “strange work” is now in progress and is drawing near to an end; and when it is ended, there will immediately follow ‘great tribulation such as the world has never known, and which will be the last. (Matt. 24:7-22) That means the complete blotting out of all of Satan’s forces and the complete vindication of Jehovah’s name.
41	At the battle of Ai Jehovah invoked a rule different from that at Jericho, sparing the cattle from destruction: “Only the cattle, and the spoil of that city, Israel took for a prey unto themselves, according unto the word of the Lord, which he commanded Joshua.” (Josh. 8:27) According to the rule and practice announced at Numbers 31:25-31 a tribute was levied upon the prey which was to be used by the priesthood of Israel to the glory of the Lord. There will surely be a fulfillment of this part of the picture. And while we may not know just how this will come to pass, we do know that those who actively share in kingdom service against the enemy will reap durable riches, that is, treasures that will never vanish. The faithful servants of the Lord are therefore now laying up treasures that shall endure forever.
42	The work of Joshua discloses the approaching fate of Satan’s wicked world. “And Joshua burnt Ai, and made it an heap for ever, even a desolation, unto this day.” (Josh. 8:28) As to the fulfillment of this part of the drama, note Jehovah’s judgment against Satan’s organization: “Behold, I am against thee, 0 destroying mountain, saith the Lord, which destroyest all the earth; and I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a burnt mountain.”—J er. 51: 25.
43	The Devil himself then receives attention: “And the king of Ai he hanged on a tree until eventide: and as soon as the sun was down, Joshua commanded that they should take his carcase down from the tree, and cast it at the entering of the gate of the city, and raise thereon a great heap of stones, that remaineth unto this day.”—Josh. 8:29.
44	The gate of the city was the place of judgment. The fate of the king of Ai, therefore, proclaims that Satan, after witnessing the total destruction of his organization, shall be executed as an accursed thing and upon his name there will remain everlasting reproach. Other scriptures show that Satan will be brought forth at the end of the thousand years; and some have very unwisely suggested the impossibility of his being brought forth, assigning the reason that there is no ransom for Satan. The ransom is not at all necessary in order for one to be brought out of death. God’s power knows no limitation. It is within his power to do as he has announced, that is, to awaken Satan at the time when the earth is filled with righteous creatures and then show Satan what a great fool he has been all the time.
45	Immediately after the battle of Ai Joshua proceeded to march his army about twenty miles farther north, to a historic spot. Abram, upon entering the land of Canaan, made his first stop there, the location being near the site or place of Sichem, and which is between Mount Ebal and (on the south) Mount Gerizim. At the command of Jehovah Abram entered the land of Canaan: “And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh. And the Canaanite was then in the land.”—Gen. 12: 6, 7.
48	Moses, transmitting God’s instructions to the Israelites before entering Canaan, had said to them: “And it shall come to pass, when the Lord thy God hath brought thee in unto the land whither thou goest to possess it, that thou shalt put the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse upon mount Ebal. Are they not on the other side Jordan, by the way where the sun goeth down, in the land of the Canaanites, which dwell in the champaign over against Gil-gal, beside the plains of Moreh?”—Deut. 11:29,30.
47	Thus it is seen that the locality was one of historic interest and was sacred to those who loved Jehovah. “Then Joshua built an altar unto the Lord God of Israel in mount Ebal.” (Josh. 8:30) The time had come to obey God’s instruction to build an altar at the identical place where God had promised Abram, “Unto thy seed will I give this land,” and which promise had at that time begun to have a fulfillment upon the natural seed of Israel, who had just entered Canaan.
48	Joshua was carrying out the command given by Moses: “As Moses the servant of the Lord commanded the children of Israel, as it is written in the book of the law of Moses, an altar of whole stones, over which no man hath lift up any iron: and they offered thereon burnt offerings unto the Lord, and sacrificed peace offerings.” (Josh. 8:31) This was near where Abraham built his first altar. (Gen. 12:7; Ex. 20:25; Deut. 27:5,6) With great
140
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N.Y.
gratitude to Jehovah for the fulfillment to Abraham’s natural seed, and for giving them the victory over their foes, Joshua there offered sacrifice upon that altar. Now Jehovah’s faithful remnant, the spiritual seed of Abraham, God’s anointed children, are in the "land of promise”. They are “living stones” placed in the temple. (1 Pet. 2:5, A.R.V.) Now they ‘offer sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving to Jehovah by Christ Jesus, even the fruit of their lips’, by faithfully proclaiming the name of the Most High and his kingdom. Jehovah has already given the “remnant” victory in his kingdom country, and with the “great multitude” they thank him and praise his holy name.—Heb. 13:15.
48	Joshua did not write a message on the altar stone, but upon stones prepared and plastered over for that purpose: “And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses, which he wrote in the presence of the children of Israel.” (Josh. 8:32) The stones upon which he wrote were prepared in obedience to the command received by him through Moses: “And it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over Jordan unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, that thou shalt set thee up great stones, and plaister them with plaister; and thou shalt write upon them all the words of this law, when thou art passed over, that thou may-est go in unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, a land that floweth with milk and honey; as the Lord God of thy fathers hath promised thee. Therefore it shall be, when ye be gone over Jordan, that ye shall set up these stones, which I command you this day, in mount Ebal, and thou shalt plaister them with plaister.” “And thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law very plainly.” —Deut. 27:2-4,8.
80	This act magnified Jehovah’s law and stressed the importance thereof, and the record made thereof was a testimony to all coming that way, and that could not be ignored, and none could plead ignorance of the law and the covenant of Jehovah. “It pleased Jehovah, for his righteousness’ sake, to magnify the law, and make it honorable.” (Isa. 42:21, A.R.V.) His law is his Word, and by it Jehovah vindicates his name. Since the spiritual Israelites have crossed the antitypical Jordan, and particularly since 1936, Jehovah has caused his law to be magnified against religion and its tradition; showing that his law is honorable. Religion transgresses and nullifies God’s Word or law. (Matt. 15:1-9) The booklet entitled Protection, published by the Society in 1937, specifically calls attention to this, and which testimony furnishes a warning to those who practice religion, that they may have no excuse to plead ignorance in justification of their action in practicing religion.
81	Now behold the company of people that hear
the blessings and the curses the law of God has set forth: “And all Israel, and their elders, and officers, and their judges, stood on this side the ark and on that side before the priests the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, as well the stranger as he that was born among them; half of them over against mount Gerizim, and half of them over against mount Ebal; as Moses the servant of the Lord had commanded before, that they should bless the people of Israel.”—Josh. 8:33.
82	All the Israelites were there. It seems certain that Rahab and her household were there, as they could not have been safe elsewhere. The father-inlaw of Moses and his descendants had come along on the journey, and hence those “children of the Kenite”, the forefather of Jonadab, was there. (Judg. 1:16; 1 Chron. 2:55) The “mixed multitude” that came out of Egypt with Israel was there. (Ex. 12:38,39) All of such were there, seeking protection by remaining with the covenant people of God. If those “strangers” wanted a share in the privilege and protection of the Lord they must subject themselves to the one law of God. (Ex. 12:48,49; Num. 9:14,15; 15:14-16) It was therefore vital for them to learn of God’s law and what the requirements are. Those strangers pictured the “great multitude”, who today must learn God’s righteous law, the same as the anointed are required to do, and they must be anxious and willing to learn. Such is the means of seeking righteousness and meekness. (Zeph. 2:1-3) The place of assembly was about in the heart of the land of promise.
83	Now note the fulfillment, at least in part, of this part of the drama: Jehovah’s witnesses are now within the mountains of God’s kingdom under the immediate command of the King, the Greater Joshua, Christ Jesus. They are assembled at the temple to learn the law of God. The 1937 convention at Columbus was a marked expression of this. The remnant stood in the Lord’s presence to hear and rehearse the blessings and the curses of the law of God. The prophetic truths, which Jehovah caused to be published in 1937, emphasize these things. Particularly, here note the articles “Understanding” (published in The Watchtower of May 15.1937) and “The Kingdom Interests” (published in The Watchtower December 15, 1937), as well as the warning messages in The Watchtower of that year entitled “His ‘Work’ and His ‘Act’”. The remnant and their companions, the Jonadabs, walking together, have together learned the law and the testimony of God from that time onward.
84	The blessings were read from Mount Gerizim, on the south, and the curses were read from Mount Ebal, on the north, according to the assignment of the Lord. (Deut. 27:11-13) “And afterward he read
May 1, 1939	WATCHTOWER.
all the words of the law, the blessings and cursings, according to all that is written in the book of the law.” (Josh. 8:34) Thus all the Israelites and the “strangers” were duly forewarned and were responsible from that time on; foreshadowing that the remnant and the people of good will who will form the “great multitude” are warned and are responsible for the outcome of the course taken by such.
M The message of the Lord was not censored for fear of offending the religious susceptibilities of anyone, nor for any other reason: “There was not a word of all that Moses commanded which Joshua read not before all the congregation of Israel, with the women, and the little ones, and the strangers that were conversant among them.”—Josh. 8:35.
M The faithfulness of Joshua was shown by careful attention to every word of the text of God’s law. All the people were required to remain still and listen. Even the “little ones”, that is the “tripping”, little children, were there with the grownups, and all were required to listen, whether they could understand or not. That was an important occasion. Even so now, the Lord brings to the attention of the people through the Watch Tower publications his message of warning and instructions, to the end that all who love God and his kingdom may be instructed in that which is necessary that they may escape the curse and may receive the blessings of the Lord. The faithful grownups are seeing to it that this information and knowledge is transmitted to their children. (See The Watchtower April 15, May 1, 1938.) The people of good will are being helped to understand by those faithful witnesses who call back upon them and help them to get a start in the study of God’s Word. Many readers of The Watchtower will call to mind that large number of “strangers” who stood up at the 1937 convention, thus forcefully illustrating to many that those of good will today are walking and working with the anointed “remnant”.
" This marvelous drama, which Jehovah caused his covenant people to enact long ago, was recorded in the Bible for the learning and comfort of his people now on the earth. (Rom. 15:4) Those who are now hearing and appreciating the Word of God know full well that the battle of the great day of God Almighty is near. The Devil also knows it, and he is desperately attempting to plunge the entire race into destruction. He is applying the whip of affliction on God’s people, causing some of them at least much distress. He is gathering all of his forces under the immediate command of Gog to engage in the final conflict. While this copy is being prepared
the evidence is hourly piling up proving beyond all doubt that the dictator element under Satan’s command is assembling for the final conflict. Stalin, who is the representative of Communism; Mussolini, the representative of Fascism; and Hitler, the representative of Nazism, are all traveling the same road and are all anti-God and anti-Kingdom. They place the state above Jehovah God, and for the time being they accept the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the Devil’s chief religious representative, as their spiritual guide. Even the hated and persecuted Jew, under the Devil’s cruel lash, is bowing to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, being apparently entirely ignorant of the history of the persecution of that people. The entire combine is the fruit of Satan’s work. The liberties of the people are about gone, and the woes that weigh them down are daily increasing; and some are learning the reason why, to wit, as it is written: "Woe to the inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time.”—Rev. 12:12.
58	Whether they know it or not, the leaders of Communism, Fascism, Nazism, and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy are all under the command of the Devil, bent on the destruction of God’s people that they might defeat Jehovah and his King. Standing there against all of this ungodly and cruel horde of Satan are those forming the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses, and their companions, the people of good will, and who are proclaiming the warning to the people; and for that reason these are the objects of Satan’s attack. (Rev. 12:17) All of Satan’s force are marching to the open attack of Jehovah’s faithful people on earth. But let no one on the side of Jehovah and his King be dismayed. The Lord Jesus Christ, the Greater Joshua, is in command, and the King of Eternity says to his faithful witnesses : ‘The enemy shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee. Be of strong courage.’
69	For the encouragement of his people Jehovah is disclosing his truths to them at this time. Appropriately the dramas of vindication considered in these seven Watchtower articles lead up to the great and dramatic battle of Gibeon, as foretold in the book of Joshua, chapters nine and ten, and which heretofore have been considered, in The Watchtower of 1936, pages 245-251, 259-267, 275-282, which God’s people may again study with profit. Note this for a certainty: that the time for the battle of the great day of God Almighty is nigh at hand and that Christ Jesus, the Commander-in-Chief, leading that battle, will gain complete victory, to the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
Great and marvellous are thy works, 0 Lord God, the Almighty: righteous and true are thy ways, thou King of the ages.
—Revelation 15:3, A.R.V.
KINGDOM WORK
ATCHTOWER readers now appreciate the fact that the theocratic government is functioning in the earth in so far as those who are consecrated to Jehovah are concerned. Both the anointed remnant and the Jonadabs have the privilege, by the Lord’s grace, of participating in bearing the legitimate expenses for carrying forward the kingdom work. Their contributions made direct to the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, at 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N. Y., is assurance to them that the money will be used to the best advantage in advancing the kingdom interests.
This notice is not a solicitation of money, but a reminder to all who have a desire to support Jehovah’s kingdom that it is well to make advance provision to participate in the work and do so by laying aside a specific sum each week according to the manner in which the Lord prospers them financially. The work of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society is to use the money contributed in the most economical way to make known Jehovah’s name and his kingdom. If informed in advance as to the probable amount that will be contributed during the year by those who are interested, that makes it possible to outline the work and the expense connected therewith accordingly. It is therefore suggested that upon receipt of this issue of
The Watchtower you address a post card to the Society and keep a copy thereof as a reminder to yourself as to the amount you have promised and post that to the Society immediately. Write nothing upon the card except the following :
By the Lord’s grace I hope to be able to contribute to the work of announcing the kingdom of Jehovah during the ensuing year the amount of $......,	which I will remit in such amounts
and at such time as I can find it convenient as the Lord prospers me.
Signed ...........................................
Address your card to
Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society Treasurer’s Office
124 Columbia Heights Brooklyn, New York.
Those residing outside of the United States and who desire to participate in contributing to the necessary expense will please address your letters or cards to the Society’s office in the respective country in which you live.
Have in mind our need for guidance by the Lord and present the matter before the throne of heavenly grace that the money contributed may be used to the best advantage to announce the kingdom.
ON EARTH AFTER ARMAGEDDON
THE PEOPLE want peace; but the prediction is freely made that when another war is declared they will respond because they are commanded to do so and are put in fear and jeopardy by the governments if they fail to respond.
War engenders hatred. One of the great benefits the people will have under the righteous theocratic government of Christ Jesus is that he will stop all war and plant love in their hearts. Lasting peace will be the result, and this the people of good will shall for ever enjoy who shall survive that final, universal war, the battle of Armageddon, now near. Nineteen centuries ago the angelic host proclaimed this message of gladness in the hearing of the shepherd witnesses : “Glory in the highest unto God! and on earth peace, among men of good-will.” (Luke 2:14, Rotherham) This definitely settles the matter that those who will enjoy “his government and peace” are the people of good will toward God. All such must and will believe Jehovah is the Almighty God, Christ is the King, and his kingdom is man’s hope.
Through his prophet (Isa. 2:2-4) Jehovah foretells the establishment of his righteous government, exalting it above all the earthly governments which must pass away in Armageddon, and he declares that unto it the people of good will of “all nations” shall flow: “And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain [symbolic of the government] of the Lord, to the house [temple] of the God of Jacob [Israel] ; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths [of righteousness] ; for out of Zion [God’s capital organization] shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem [the New Jerusalem]. And he shall judge among
142
the nations, and shall rebuke many people; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.”
Concerning his King, whom Jehovah, in A.D. 1914, placed upon the throne to rule the world, it is written (Isa. 9:6, 7): “The government shall be upon his shoulder” ; he is “the Prince of Peace”; and “of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end”. That will mean to the people of earth universal peace. The horrors of war will be gone for ever, and there will never be another war. When people of good will learn and understand this truth they sing for joy.—See Psalm 97:1.
The animals of the mountains and of the forest are at enmity with man. They try to kill man, and man kills them. Under the Lord’s righteous government peace shall for ever be established between even the wild beasts and man. God, of course, knows the language of the animals and of the fowls of the air, and he will speak to them in their own language and quiet their fear of man, and peace will be for ever established between the wild beasts and man. The prophecy of Hosea 2:18, concerning spiritual Israel, also refleets man’s future state on earth under the government of Him who says: “And in that day will I make a covenant for them with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground: and I will break the bow, and the sword, ami the battle out of the earth, and will make them to lie down safely.” Concerning his righteous government and its peacefulness it is written of Christ the King: “And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the
May 1,1939
THE WATCHTOWER
143
girdle of his reins. The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf, and the young lion, and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice’ den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain [government] : for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.”—Isa. 11: 5-9.
Under the present unsatisfactory governments the people in general do not feel secure in their property, in their limbs, or in their lives. Totalitarian, dictatorial rule obtains in many lands, yet in some lands the people go through the form of electing their representatives to the various departments of government, but these are overreached by the selfish interests. Such conditions, however, will not be possible under God’s government, because that government will be a righteous one and all the people shall have an equal show. There will be no rich and no poor. The haughty will have been brought down from their exalted positions and the poor and meek will be lifted up, that all may have an equal and common standing before the great, just and righteous Judge. A man will be secure in his home and in his property. Then men will build houses and live in them as their own. They will not build for another to take it away from them. (Read Isaiah 65: 22.) The oppressor and extortioner will not be permitted then to operate. The conditions will be favorable and equitable and everyone will have a fair opportunity. Under the righteous government of the great Theocrat man will not fear. “But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken it.”—Mic. 4:4.
“Earth,” as used in the Scriptures, symbolically represents the visible organization of mankind under God’s kingdom. Psalm 85:11 says of that time: “Truth shall spring out of the earth; and righteousness shall look down from heaven.” God made the literal earth for man. (See Isaiah 45:12,18.) God put the electricity in the earth and around the earth for the benefit of the people of good will. The power that is in the waves of the sea belongs to Jehovah, for “the earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof”. (Ps. 24:1) The power of the ocean waves will operate the great machines that may be invented, and will produce the electricity that will light all the homes, provide the heat for all the homes as well as generate the power for all the necessary machines in the homes and upon the farms. No one will be permitted to reap a selfish profit therefrom, because none will be permitted to oppress or hurt in all that holy kingdom.—Isa. 11: 9.
All the wealth and all the power in the hand of the Righteous Ruler will be used for the general welfare. Then there will be no heavy burdens laid upon anyone, and no men and women seeking employment that they might earn their bread. The theocratic government will carry on a great reconstruction work for the general welfare. He will restore the waste lands and make the places that once were desolate blossom like the rose and bring forth in abundance. The people will feel secure in their property, in their lives, and in their liberties; and all will learn to do right. Isaiah
65:23 tells us, “They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for trouble.” They will all enjoy the fruits of their work. Thorns and thistles have long encumbered the ground and made it difficult for man to obtain a good yield from the soil. The Lord will show man how to remove these hindrances, that his crops may be raised in abundance. Famine has been one of the great enemies of man under Satan’s rule over man. There will be no famines when Jehovah’s government under Christ is in full sway in the earth. Psalm 67: 6 foretells: “Then shall the earth yield her increase; and God, even our own God, shall bless us.”
Conditions will be entirely different when the Righteous One has full sway and exercises it. Then the people will have plenty and will rejoice. As stated at Proverbs 29:2: “When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice: but when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn.” With the production and distribution of food and raiment carried on in justice and righteousness the people will be contented and happy. Isaiah 25:6 announces: “And in this mountain [government] shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, ... of fat things full of marrow.”
The health of the people is of very great importance. If all the people could have health, that would be a great benefit to them. The present governments take some steps to safeguard the health of the public, but in so doing the people are exploited. Many who claim to serve the sick connive at making even the well sick that they may be able to reap pecuniary gain therefrom. Foods are adulterated to sueh an extent that much sickness results therefrom. However, under the Lord’s righteous government the people will be taught what is proper to eat and howto eat it; they will be taught proper sanitary conditions, how to sleep and exercise, and no one will be permitted to deceive them. They will be told the truth; and, knowing that they are receiving the truth, they will be encouraged and benefited and will progress rapidly. God will cure the sick that they may remain well, and, according to Isaiah 33:24, “the inhabitant shall not [any more] say, I am sick.”
Among the enemies from which man has long suffered are fraud, deception, exploitation, extortion, robbery, war, and religion. Man has suffered at the hands of grafters, oppressors and religionists. He has suffered because of famine, pestilence, sickness and death. All these enemies God will destroy through Christ by his “strange act” at Armageddon and by the operation of his righteous government. Of Jehovah’s King, Christ Jesus, it is written (1 Cor. 15:25,26): “For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies under his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.”
Sorrow and pain shall pass away, and “there shall be no more death”. (See Revelation 21:4-6.) The people will learn that God in his loving-kindness has bestowed all these benefits upon them. The faithful and obedient will have strength and health and life in their perfection. They will stand upon the earth in the image and likeness of their great Creator, and their prayers of thanksgiving will ever ascend unto Him through Christ Jesus. They will delight themselves in the Lord Jehovah God and express their heart’s sentiments to him.—Psalm 145:1-17.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
A CENSORED LETTER FROM WAR-TORN BARCELONA
“My dear Sirs: It is just a month, that I received at the same and duly time the books and your letter. I cannot tell with your language my thanks, and it is a great pleasure for me to be able to congratulate you for the favor, that I cannot pay today with money. I have 17 years and at this young age I have had the fortune to know the God’s Word, and the truth of this near Kingdom. Perhaps, after this cruel war, I shall can give you my thanks personally. In the interim meanwhile, receive many blessings, and the assurances of my friendship for you.” (Dec. 1,1938)
SHE HAD READ THE SAMPLE “WATCHTOWER”
“A lady had accepted a copy of The Watchtower. Upon calling back a week later she was able to intelligently discuss the article. We now have a Model Study in her home; her husband is as much interested as she is, he being formerly a Catholic. The children, one girl age twelve and another age eight, sit in on the Model Study and take part therein; and the family is now taking The Watchtower. The man told me last week: ‘My wife studies The Watchtower all the time and she arranges to give the children a daily lesson from The Watchtower and assigns them paragraphs to read out of it.’ It is joyful to observe how this entire family is doing as the Lord commands: ‘Seek righteousness, seek meekness.’ The fact that the children offer intelligent comments during the study shows they are progressing too.”
THIS ACTUALLY HAPPENED IN NEW JERSEY
“Sunday, January 15, while witnessing in Ventnor City, N. J., I witnessed to a very bigoted Roman Catholic family. The name is Mr. and Mrs. Frank Sterling, 201 N. New Haven Ave. Ten minutes after my departure, a police officer accosted me and took me to City Hall. At first the officer said I was not under airest, but after telling him I had an important message of God’s kingdom and that I must continue on my way, he then said I was under arrest. When brought before Judge Bruno, without my having spoken a single word he arose and shook hands with me, making this statement to me: ‘Be assured that you are not under arrest.’ He asked for my name and address and what I was doing for a living during the week. After stating to him my secular employment, he then asked what I did on Sundays. I told him I preach the gospel of God’s kingdom, going from house to house. He then said: ‘It is a pleasure to meet people of your type, and there should be more like you.’ Prior to my leaving he wished me good luck. I then asked him for the name and address of the complainant, whose name appears above.”
“DOORSTEP METHOD” IN EASTERN PENNSYLVANIA
“By the Lord’s grace, have more than made the quota on Watchtower subscriptions, having a total number of 21 to date. I’m hoping to bring up the number of booklets placed during the remainder of the campaign. The doorstep method with the phonograph seems very appropriate and this method had been employed here last summer; but found it difficult in cold weather to get the people to stand and listen. However, now that it is getting warmer, now and then, I have good success in giving an effective witness in that manner. To illustrate: On Monday, Feb
ruary 27, the doorstep method was employed eight hours. Results were as follows: 21 setups, 35 sound attendance, 28 booklets placed and contributions amounting to $.33. Seldom is the time available to engage in the service a full day, due to the many back-calls which make it necessary to spend practically every afternoon in going back to those of good will, and naturally this brings down the number of books and booklets placed. I attempted to get my 200 hours [as a pioneer] during the month in spite of the car breaking down and being sick one afternoon.”
CATHOLIC ACTION FIGHTS FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
“It was at 5 o’clock, three hours before the recorded lecture ‘Fascism or Freedom’, that the manager of the theater called and said: ‘I can’t let you have the theater for that lecture tonight.’ I went down to him and soon found out who was protesting. The Hierarchy, working through prominent citizens, had been calling in protest after protest. I outlined to the manager the responsibility that rested upon him, showed him the Hierarchy had lied to him and misrepresented the lecture to have him break the agreement to rent us the theater. It took him a long time to decide, but the weight of threats of boycott, etc., was too heavy. He said: ‘Here is your money, and if you will bring me a bill of your advertising expense, I’ll be glad to pay for that too.’ There is a small hall in Grand Island [Nebr.] that is always available for Jehovah’s witnesses, regardless of opposition, but we figured it was too small. It was all we could get on such short notice, so we engaged it. We had a large sign made telling what had happened, mounted it on a stick and paraded it back and forth in front of the theater. At the curb were six cars ready to take people to the other meeting place. It was interesting to heai1 some of their expressions when they found out what had happened. Still the Hierarchy wasn’t satisfied. They sent three thugs up to cause a disturbance at the new meeting place; but since the police force are not under Hierarchy control, we soon had a cop there, and when the men found we had police protection they went away. We had good attendance under the circumstances, all accepted free Face the Facts booklets, and almost all contributed toward printing more as they left the hall. March 2 was set for the second lecture to be given in Grand Island. Before any advertising was done for that lecture the company servant there was found along the side of the road north of Grand Island, unconscious and all cut and bruised up. He doesn’t remember ever leaving town or anything about what happened. Another brother, who works for a grocery store, went to collect a bill from the fellow who painted our signs, and the fellow hit him and broke his nose. ... We may have to call in the [kingdom publishers of the] whole zone to finish the job there.”
NOW PREFERS BUSINESS TERRITORY
“One brother, very timid in this part of the work and having usually worked in the rurals, came out and tried it for the first time last December. Now he would rather work the business than the rurals. He obtained many back-calls, and placed quite a few bound books with the business people. In reaching the managers of many of the leading finns he uses the City Directory.”
144


TO
'I -	Atrf. —
■.V



k"
,
>S ■-£)••, ■>
.’.m


<
r<
K


1
Mil
y/_


a
1
t'i

fc/Msgii
fcs..'


1

&

..‘■*R5pSir<i
.f#6'

WATCTTOWEK
£
yj

t
iy.
SA
1
3

'
Announcing ' "W Jehovah’s Kmjdcmtj
'«$Ti
j><£& ii

■-rv
ft




9^i-
“They shall know that I am Jehovah?
"Ezekiel 35:15.
5«
4^13
r

Bi
,(/&'■
Vol. LX
Semimonthly
MAY IS, 1939
CONTENTS
No. 10
■
.<//#
J	1 ,

The Ransom (Part 1) _____________147
“For All”......................150
“Exagorazo” _________________  152
Third Trumpet....................155
Zeal for New Government..........158
Hasten While Opportunity Is with Us

1
ctw
61
4
(Letter) ..................
Field Experiences............
“New Earth” Testimony Period Convention...................
“Watchtower” Studies ........
Remittances .................
159
160
146
146
146
146
3
[?• /

7:;
tJ!


ffssjTWT&tt

, : ©W.TB.&T.S.



THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street »	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F, Rutherford, President W, E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in giory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and Is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
■United States, $1.00; Canada and miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by Intenmhor :l Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ..................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian ................. 40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian........... 7 Beresford Road, Strathfleld, N. S. W., Australia
South African ...............   Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of tho Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the suitscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank . (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of Atarch S, IStt).
“NEW EARTH” TESTIMONY PERIOD
June is thus designated, and the activities outlined for the month are related to the work now proceeding of laying the foundation of the new earth. Jonadabs as well as the anointed kingdom publishers will rejoice to have part therein. An attractive special offer should make June outstanding for the placement of booklets, to wit, seven booklets on a contribution of but 25e, three being self-covered and four being colored-cover booklets. People unable to take the combination will be offered the new booklet Fascism or Freedom on any contribution they can afford. This applies to foreign-language booklets also. Fuller details are to be found in the Informant. Your part now is to prepare and equip yourself for an active share in this testimony period. A good report for the month is expected from you.
CONVENTION
At New York City, June 23-25, a convention of Jehovah’s witnesses will be held. Thousands desire to attend who are too far away, and for their convenience arrangements are being made to connect Los Angeles, Chicago and some other cities in the United States, and London, Glasgow and other cities in England, by wire direct from Madison Square Garden in New York City. The president of the Society will address the convention on Sat
urday the 24th, from 3: 00 to 4: 00 p.in., and on Sunday, June 25, will address the public, 4: 00 to 5: 00 p.m., New York time. Other cities desiring to be tied in to this convention should notify the Brooklyn office immediately. More details later.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of June 18: “The Ransom” (Part 1) fl 1-17 inclusive, The Watchtower May 15,1939.
Week of June 25: “The Ransom” (Part 1)
fl 18-43 inclusive, The Watchtower May 15, 1939.
REMITTANCES
Enclosing coin or currency with an order for books or other publications often results in disappointment when the sender is notified that neither order nor remittance has been received by us. In this day of disturbed financial conditions even the use of checks involves a needless risk. We suggest that everyone use the money order (either postal or express). Keep each money order receipt for reference. For all remittances the money order should be made payable to the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, with a memorandum attached as to how much is desired for The Watchtower, for Consolation, or for anything else. Do not remit to International Bible Students Association.
WTCHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX
May 15, 1939
No. 10
THE RANSOM
PART 1
"For God is one, and there is one mediator of God and men, that man, Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom in behalf of all, the testimony in its own seasons; for ivhich I ivas appointed a herald and an apostle."—1 Timothy 2:5-7, Emphatic Diaglott.
JEHOVAH GOD is the Savior of men, and he has provided and revealed to man the sure foundation for hope of salvation: “For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.” (1 Cor. 3:11) “This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other; for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.”—Acts 4:11,12.
2 Why did God lay the foundation for salvation of sinful men ? For the vindication of his holy name. The challenge of Satan put God’s name at issue. Imperfect men, when relieved from inherited disability, and who then prove their integrity toward God, are a vindication of the name of Jehovah and a complete refutation and disproval of Satan’s challenge. The judgment entered against Adam was just. It must stand forever. Adam’s offspring are sinners by reason of inherited sin. God could consistently permit another to purchase the offspring of Adam; and those men who would exercise faith in God and in the purchaser and render themselves in obedience and who would then maintain their integrity toward God would be a vindication of God’s name. God exercised mercy towards sinful man by laying the foundation for man’s salvation. How is the foundation for man’s salvation laid ? It was laid by permitting the man Jesus to bring the required price for the purchase of mankind, that is, the descendants of Adam, and pay over that purchase price for the relief or release of such offspring of Adam from bondage.
• What price is required for the purchase of mankind? The life of a perfect human creature. God’s law requires a life for a life. (Deut. 19:21) Adam was a perfect man when he willfully and deliberately sinned in violation of God’s law, and the law of God required the forfeiture in death of that perfect human life. (Gen. 2:17) Nothing less and noth
147
ing more could be required to purchase the offspring of Adam, but only a perfect life. The life of an angel could not furnish the perfect price, because an angel is greater than man. Because all of Adam's offspring are by inheritance imperfect, no one thereof could bring the required purchase price. (Ps. 49:7) All men, being imperfect, could live only a short space of time and then die and remain dead forever, unless God makes provision for such to have life. What has been done for man’s relief from death and for his salvation to life?
* The answer to the foregoing question is found in the scripture, to wit: “But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour: that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man.” (Heb. 2:9) Since Jesus always does the will of God, it must have been understood between God and his beloved Son that Jesus should become a man, “lower than the angels,” and suffer death, thereby proving his faithfulness unto God even to an ignominious death, and by his death also providing the required purchase price for man’s salvation from death. The original name of the Son was Logos, and from the beginning the Logos was with God and, by God’s direction, carried into operation God’s purpose. He was the spokesman of Jehovah God. He was a spirit. By the miraculous power of Almighty God a virgin conceived and gave birth to the man-child Jesus. (Matt. 1:18-23) It is written that from the beginning the Son was “the Word”, or Logos, “with God,” and by him were all things created.—John 1:1-3, Diaglott.
8	The time came to begin laying the foundation for man’s salvation and God caused the Logos to become a man: “And the Logos became flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, a glory as of an Only-begotten from a Father, full of favor and truth.” (John 1:14, Diaglott) “But when the completion of the time arrived, God sent forth his
148
THE WATCHTOWER
Son, having been produced from a woman, born under law.” (Gal. 4:4, Diaglott) “And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom; and the grace of God was upon him.”—Luke 2:40.
‘When the man Jesus was thirty years of age he presented himself unto God in full and complete consecration or agreement to do the will of God, and this was symbolized by his immersion in the Jordan river. (Luke 3:21-23; Ps.40:7,8; Matt. 3:16) Jesus was then a perfect man possessing all the qualifications requisite to the furnishing of the purchase price of sinful man. Was there an agreement between Jesus and his Father, Jehovah God, that he, Jesus, the man, should die! The answer is written: “As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father; and I lay down my life for the sheep.” “Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father.”—John 10:15,17,18.
’From the beginning, it clearly appears, it was agreed between the Father and the Son that Jesus should become a man, suffer contradiction and indignities and reproach upon his name, prove his integrity toward God, die as a sinner, and, proving his faithfulness, then be resurrected out of death and take life again, which would mean that by his death Jesus did not forfeit his life or the right thereto, as Adam had forfeited life. Jesus laid down his life and received life again in full accord with the commandment he had received from Jehovah God, and which commandment Jesus fully agreed to obey. Carrying out that agreement, God raised Jesus out of death and gave him life as a spirit. (1 Pet. 3:18; Acts 3:26; 1 Cor. 15:3,4,20) Jesus, not having forfeited his right to human life, still possessed that right to human life when he was raised from the dead; and that right to human life constitutes the purchase price for sinful man. When God raised Jesus from the dead he clothed Jesus with all power in heaven and in earth; that is to say, God made Jesus Christ his Executive Officer, fully equipped with all necessary power and authority to carry into operation the purpose of Jehovah, both in heaven and in earth. (Matt. 28:18; Phil. 2:9-11) When Jesus Christ was exalted to heaven he presented to God in heaven the value of his human life; and that asset, which was exactly equal to what Adam had forfeited, was received by Jehovah God as the offering of Jesus for sin, that is to say, as the purchase price offered and presented by Jesus in behalf of sinful men. This God caused to bo shown in type or picture in the sacrifice performed at the tabernacle in the wilderness. (See
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Leviticus chapter 16.) On the typical atonement day the picture was made in this manner: A bullock without spot or blemish, which represented the man Jesus, was brought into the court of the tabernacle and slain there, which court of the tabernacle pictured the earth. The blood of the bullock, representing the lifeblood of Jesus, which lifeblood was poured out as an offering for sin (Isa. 53:10), was then carried by the typical priest into the Most Holy of the tabernacle and thereafter sprinkled upon the mercy seat. (Lev. 16:14) The Most Holy of the tabernacle pictured heaven itself, where Jesus Christ appeared, presented and offered the asset or valuable thing, his right to human life, as the purchase price for the offspring of Adam. (Heb. 9: 3-25) The sacrifice offered at the tabernacle in the wilderness once each year on the typical atonement day foreshadowed or pictured the work of Jesus in offering himself, that is, his human life, as the purchase price for man. Concerning the type, or picture, and the reality, it is written: “Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. But into the second [the holiest of all, or Most Holy, picturing heaven] went the high priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people.” “It was therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these; but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us. Nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the high priest entereth into the holy place every year with blood of others; for then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the world; but now once in the end of the world hath he appeared, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.” (Heb. 9:6,7,23-26) Thus it is seen that Christ Jesus, God’s great High Priest, the spirit creature, when he appeared in heaven, presented and offered unto Jehovah the asset he possessed, to wit, his right to human life, as the purchase price for man, which offering was accepted by Jehovah, and Christ Jesus became the owner of all of Adam’s offspring that willingly comply with the rules of Jehovah governing salvation. Thus God laid the foundation in Christ Jesus for the salvation of man, and there is no other possible means of salvation.
8	The lifeblood of the man Jesus is the ransom price for man. As God declares in his law: “The life of the flesh is in the blood: . . . the blood of it is for the life thereof.” (Lev. 17:11,14) So the lifeblood of the man Jesus is the asset, the valuable thing, by which he ransomed sinful men. The Eng
May 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
149
lish words ransom, redeem, redeemed and redemption are often used in the Bible, but do not always mean the same thing exactly. That part of the Bible written by the inspired followers of Christ Jesus and which for long has been commonly called “the New Testament” is translated from the Greek into the English, and in our Authorized Version of the Bible different Greek words are translated ransom. While comparatively few persons read the Greek, it will be profitable to here call attention to the different Greek words used and translated “ransom”, and these words appearing herein in English will enable all students to get an understanding. A well-known authority is Parkhurst. Parkhurst’s Greek and English Lexicon says concerning “ransom”: ‘‘Anti'lytron is from anti [meaning] in return, or correspondency; and lytron, a ransom.—A ransom, price of redemption, or rather a correspondent ransom. ‘It properly signifies a price by which captives are redeemed from the enemy; and that kind of exchange in which the life of one is redeemed by the life of another.’ [Hyperius] So Aristotle uses the verb antilytro'o for redeeming life by life.”
9	The word anti'lytron appears only once in the Scriptures, and that in the following text, to wit: “Who gave himself a ransom in behalf of all [whom God wills to be saved (verse 4)], the testimony in its own seasons; for which I was appointed a herald and an apostle.” (1 Tim. 2:4-7, Emphatic Diaglott) According to Parkhurst: “Who gave himself a correspondent ransom.” This text does not say or mean that Adam was or is ransomed, but does mean that the human perfection once possessed by the perfect man Adam (and which human perfection carried with it the right to life, which life and right thereto were forfeited by the willful disobedience of Adam) is purchased or bought back or ransomed for Adam’s offspring, who were prevented from receiving that life and right thereto by reason of Adam’s sin. The offspring of Adam who accept God’s provision for their purchase, and who comply with God’s fixed rules concerning the same, are privileged to receive the benefit of the ransom price. By his own lifeblood Jesus ransomed or purchased life and the right to human life for those of Adam's offspring that are saved. The clear meaning of the Scripture is this, to wit: That God desires all men to be saved and to come to an accurate knowledge of the truth who comply with his fixed and unchangeable provisions. “For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour; who will have all men to be saved [by availing themselves of the ransom price, because God is impartial], and [then] to come to [an accurate] knowledge of the truth [in order that they might continue to walk in the right way]. For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself
a ransom for all [who will be saved], to be testified in due time.” (1 Tim. 2:3-6, A.V.) It is this gracious provision that God has made for the salvation of men, concerning which the apostle then adds: “Whereunto I am ordained a preacher, and an apostle.”
10	The man Jesus, by the will of God his Father, turned his perfection and right to life as such a man into a thing of value with sufficient purchasing power to purchase or buy back all the rights which Adam forfeited for himself and which his offspring lost by reason of Adam’s sin. That does not mean that Adam was purchased, but that every right that Adam once possessed was purchased. It was not the will of God to send Jesus to the earth to give his life a ransom price and that in so doing Jesus should for ever go out of existence in the place or stead of Adam, in order that Adam and his offspring might exist forever; but that the man Jesus might lay down his life as a man and thereafter take life again, as Jesus said: “Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. . . . This commandment have I received of my Father.” (John 10:17,18) Life or existence Jesus did take again, not as a man, but as a spirit. At the same time he still held the right to life as a man because he had not forfeited that right. God raised Jesus out of death a spirit; and, Jesus still possessing that right to life as a man, that asset or thing of value he paid over to Jehovah God as the price required, and thereby became the owner of Adam’s offspring who had not willfully sinned as did Adam, and who should in due time avail themselves of the value of that ransom price. Jesus then could release or deliver Adam’s offspring from the bondage of sin and death which had come upon them by reason of Adam’s sin, by which the right to life had been denied Adam’s offspring. That means that the ransom sacrifice would inure to the benefit of the worthy ones of Adam’s offspring; by “worthy ones” meaning those who would follow God’s rules. For instance, Abel was a worthy one and had God’s approval, but could not receive life or the right thereto until the ransom or purchase price was paid over and accepted by Jehovah. Being murdered a long time before the ransom price was paid, he must await God's due time to be awakened out of death and receive the full and complete benefit of the ransom price. When Jesus Christ paid over the value of his perfect human life he then by right of purchase became the owner of obedient mankind. He did not become a substitute for Adam in death, but he became the purchaser of Adam’s offspring by paying over a thing exactly similar to that which Adam forfeited; therefore the life of the man Jesus, which he gave up, is a price exactly corresponding to the life of
150
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
perfect Adam. Jesus purchased for Adam’s worthy offspring the right to life, and it is his privilege to minister life according to the will of God; as it is written: ‘Life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord.’ (Rom. 6:23) Who is to determine what ones of Adam’s offspring are worthy? The Lord Jesus Christ, who acts with full authority from Jehovah God. Christ Jesus is “the Everlasting Father”, or “Life-giver”. (Isa. 9:6) As a father he has power and authority to bring creatures into life who have died and to give life to as many as he will according to the pleasure of Jehovah God. Such rescued life Jesus Christ could rightfully bestow on those only, and no others than the ones for whom Adam had lost the right to life; and since Adam lost the right to life for all mankind, He can bestow life on only such of Adam’s race as meet the required rules made by Jehovah.
“FOR ALL”
11	Does not the ransom price of Jesus result to the everlasting benefit of all? Does not the scripture at 1 Timothy 2:6 above quoted prove that Jesus gave his life a ransom for all? and is not that a guarantee that all of the human race must have the full benefit of the ransom sacrifice or ransom price? No; such a conclusion is not correct. Some of the human race, the offspring of Adam, are willfully wicked, and such are not benefited by the ransom. If they comply with God’s rules concerning the ransom they might become righteous, and then they would receive the benefit of the ransom price. Concerning this Jesus said: “As thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him. And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.”—John 17: 2, 3.
'* Those persons who refuse to know God and Christ Jesus cannot receive life. Many persons to whom the truth is presented and who are shown God’s provision for life and salvation spurn such truth and say, in substance: “I am not at all interested. I am satisfied with what I have.” There is no reason to expect Adam to receive life, because he was a willful and deliberate sinner; nor is there any reason to expect any of Adam’s offspring to receive life who willfully refuse to hear of God’s provision for life. To give Adam the benefit of the ransom sacrifice would mean that God would thereby show that his judgment against Adam was not just; whereas the Scriptures plainly say: ‘Justice is the foundation of God’s throne.’ (Ps. 89:14) To give Adam’s offspring the benefit of the ransom sacrifice, which offspring spurn God’s provision, is wholly inconsistent with God’s purpose expressed in the Scriptures. The text at 1 Timothy two above quoted
shows that “God is no respecter of persons” (Acts 10:34), and hence the ransom is for the benefit of all who conform themselves to God’s will or law; and because there is only one Almighty God, whose name is Jehovah, there is one mediator between God and men and that One is the man Jesus, who gave his life a ransom for all, meaning, of course, as stated, all who God wills shall be saved and who comply with the requirements that God has laid down. There is no authority to say that the ransom sacrifice automatically operates for the benefit of all.
18 The English words buy, benight, purchase and redeem are translated from the Greek agorazo (derived from the word agora, meaning “the town square” or “market”, and ageiro, meaning “gather”, as to the town square or market place). Thus agorazo literally means to go to market and hence to purchase and redeem that which is sold. As an example: Slaves were bought and sold at the market place; concerning which the word agorazo properly is applied. Note here an example of the use of the word, to wit: “Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field; the which when a man hath found he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.”—Matt. 13:44.
14 Many who have tried to interpret the Scriptures have said that the word field, used in the foregoing text, symbolizes the entire human race, the wicked and all others. Certainly that is wrong. Mark this: the scripture says “the kingdom of heaven is like”, and so on. It is the kingdom of heaven which is bought, and certainly the entire human race is not the kingdom of heaven. Nor is the kingdom of heaven hidden within the folds of the sinful human family. The kingdom of heaven is the hidden treasure, and it is that which is bought. It is the treasure within God’s universal organization, which is holy and in no wise sinful. The “kingdom of heaven” is the hidden mystery. (Eph. 1: 20-23; 5:32) “Even the mystery which hath been hid from ages and from generations, but now is made manifest to his saints.” (Col. 1:26) Christ Jesus, by rendering himself in full obedience to his Father’s will, became the heir of all things, including the hidden mystery, the kingdom of heaven. (Heb. 1:2; Rom. 8:16,17) God made known to Jesus his purpose to have a capital organization, to wit, his government, “the kingdom of heaven,” which for ages was a mystery and which mystery was hidden from all others of God’s creation until God’s due time to reveal it. When Jesus learned of this, he sold his all to become the heir thereof and the head of the kingdom. It was not his human life as the ransom for humanity that bought that estate of the kingdom of heaven; it was his sur
THE WATCHTOV^EK
May 15, 1939
render of everything, including human life, to maintain his integrity and faithfulness to God under the greatest pressure, even unto an ignominious death; which he did for that field and its hidden treasure. The suffering of Jesus had nothing to do with the purchase price of mankind, but it was by his suffering that he learned obedience and proved his integrity and faithfulness and became the heir of eternal salvation and of the kingdom.-Heb. 5: 8, 9.
15 The same Greek word, agorazo, is translated “bought” in the following text: “Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchantman, seeking goodly pearls; who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it.” (Matt. 13:45,46) This has the same meaning as the parable stated in the preceding verses forty-three and forty-four. Those two parables include the body members of the body of Christ, because they form a part of the kingdom of heaven. If the purchase or buying that is mentioned in the foregoing text concerning the kingdom of heaven referred to the ransom price the body members would have no part therein, because they do not have any part in the purchase of the human race. That the body members of Christ have a part in the kingdom is true beyond any doubt. (Rom. 8:16,17; Rev. 1:6; 20:4) Those who faithfully follow Christ Jesus and become a part of the kingdom of heaven are first bought by the precious blood of Christ Jesus before they can start on their way to be made a part of the kingdom. (1 Pet. 1:18,19) “What! know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy [spirit] which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye are bought with a price; therefore glorify God in your body, ...” (1 Cor. 6:19,20; the remaining words in that twentieth verse are spurious. See Diaglott.) This text refers only to the anointed Christians as the ones that are bought. This text could not be construed to mean that it drags along with those purchased every member of the human family, wicked and otherwise, and that these are automatically bought. Would a slave be bought and be given his freedom who refused to obey his master? Note that the agreement with Joseph in Egypt by the people was this: that the people first came to Joseph and asked to be bought before Joseph would buy them for Pharaoh. This is a picture of the purchase and redemption of those of the human race who come to Christ Jesus to be bought. (Gen. 47:19-23) Those who become members of the body of Christ first come to Christ Jesus and agree to do whatsoever is his and the Father’s will. Then his purchase price applies to them, and they become his and no longer belong to themselves. They are his bond servants or bond slaves, thereafter obligated to do his will and obey his commandments.
151
They were not purchased against their will, but because they desired to be purchased. God’s rule is the same at all times.
10 Whether the person is called by the Lord and granted life in the spirit or whether his hope of life is on the earth, the course of procedure concerning his purchase is exactly the same. The following text is directed to those of the little flock: “For he that is called in the Lord, being a [man’s] servant, is the Lord’s freeman; likewise also he that is called, being free, is Christ’s servant [that is, the bond servant or slave of Christ], Ye are bought with a price; be not ye the servants of men.” (1 Cor. 7 : 22, 23) These were not called until they first surrendered themselves in consecration to do God’s will, and then the purchase or ransom price operated toward them and they were bought and the Lord became their owner. Being accepted in the Lord, such became his bond servants because they have willingly and voluntarily agreed to be bought on the Lord’s terms. They have sold themselves to the King.—1 Ki. 21: 20, 25.
17	Those who are wicked are not purchased: “But there were false prophets [in Israel] also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you [who are Christians], who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.” (2 Pet. 2:1) Such were first bought, but afterwards became wicked, denying the Lord and the value of his blood by which they were bought; and for such there is no salvation, as is plainly stated in the Scriptures. (See Hebrews 6:410; 10:26-29.)
18	The Scriptures refer to mature and faithful Christians as “elders”, who are bought and redeemed: “And they [the twenty-four elders named as members of the body of Christ] sung a new song, saying, Thou [Christ Jesus] art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people and nation.”—Rev. 5: 9.
’’’This scripture could have no application to the wicked, because they are not redeemed unto God. The language of this text shows conclusively that none are automatically redeemed, because the elders were redeemed, as stated, “out of every kindred.”
20	The members of the body of Christ are the ones ransomed and redeemed, as stated, in the following text: “And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders; and no man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth. These are they which were not defiled with women; for they are virgins. These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he
152
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
goeth. These were redeemed from among men, being the firstfruits unto God and to the Lamb.”—Rev. 14:3,4.
*	* The fact that these were “redeemed from among men” shows that all men were not automatically redeemed. The members of the body of Christ, here mentioned, first consecrated themselves by agreeing to do God’s will, and hence asked to be bought. The purpose and provision of God is for the redemption of men without discrimination, but all who are redeemed must first have faith in God and in Christ Jesus, and then fully consecrate themselves to do God’s will. This rule of God applies to all. Furthermore, these members of the body of Christ are “the firstfruits” unto God and Christ; which proves that there will be others who will see the privilege of being bought and who will avail themselves of that privilege by willingly exercising faith in God and in Christ by fully consecrating themselves to do God’s will.
“EXAGORAZO”
•	* Another Greek word, exagorazo, and which is stronger and more emphatic than agorazo, means “to buy or redeem from; to buy up entirely; to get the whole, all; to ransom; to rescue, and to release’’. It is applied both to the redeeming of creatures and to buying back time as to creatures. Note Galatians 3:13,14: “Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree; that the blessing of Abraham [as to Abraham’s seed] might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ; that we might receive the promise of the spirit through faith.”
*	* Disobedient and unwilling Jews were not redeemed from the curse of the law, neither are the unwilling Gentiles redeemed from the curse or bondage of sin. This text says: “That we might receive the promise of the spirit through faith”; which shows that they that are Christians willingly believe on and follow Christ Jesus. All others of the Jews remain under the curse of the law. Again, it is written: “But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.” (Gal. 4:4,5) According to this text only those of the Jews who ‘received the adoption of sons’ are those who were redeemed. This is fully supported by the scripture, to wit: “He [Jesus] came unto his own, and his own received him not. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name: which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.” —John 1:11-13.
84 It follows that those who did not believe were not bought, and those who did believe and devoted themselves to Christ were “bought up entirely”. That same Greek word, as applied to buying back of time, is used in the following text: “Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.”—Eph. 5:16.
25 The Greek verb lyo, which means simply “to loosen”, is the base or root of the Greek words rendered “redeemed” in the following texts: “But we trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed [lytro'o] Israel; and beside all this, to day is the third day since these things were done.” (Luke 24: 21) “Forasmuch as ye [elect] know that ye were not redeemed [(Greek) lytro'o] with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot.”—1 Pet. 1:18,19.
20 This last scripture is addressed only to those who had fled from Satan’s organization and devoted themselves to God by and through Christ Jesus. The Greek word lytrosis, which means to ransom or “redemption” by paying over a price, is used in the following text, to wit: “Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for he hath visited and redeemed [literally: wrought redemption for] his people.” (Luke 1: 68) None except those who have become the Lord’s are included. Again in Luke 2: 36-38 mention is made only of those who “looked for redemption” through the One whom Jehovah had promised. In Hebrews 9:12 it is written: “By his own [Christ’s] blood, he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us.” Here the apostle is not classifying himself with the entire human race, but speaking of “us” (9:24), who have fled to Christ and joyfully consecrated ourselves to do God’s will.
27 Apolytrosis, meaning “to loosen away from”, particularly the act of loosening; “the redemption; a releasing on payment of a ransom price; a ransoming,” is translated “redemption” and “deliverance”, as used in the following text: “And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption [(Dia-glott) deliverance] draweth nigh.” (Luke 21:28) The redemption here is such a deliverance as was experienced by the Israelites when they were delivered from Egypt (Ex. 6: 6; 15:13; Ps. 106: 9-11); also such as the faithful followers of Christ Jesus being released from Satan’s organization, that is, Babylon. After 1918 the faithful remnant of the seed of the Lord’s organization were released or delivered from Satan’s organization by the exercise of the Lord's power. (Ps. 107:2,3; Isa. 52:9-11; Jer. 31:10-12) “Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe; for there is no difference: for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God;
May 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
153
being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.” (Rom. 3:22-24) Here again the redemption applies only to them that have faith and believe, which results in justification to such believers. Such are set free or loosened from bondage, and this applies to none other.
18 In the following text the same Greek word is translated “redemption”: “Not only they [the people of good will, the Lord’s ‘other sheep’], but ourselves also, which have the firstfruits of the spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body.” (Rom. 8: 23) In this text it is “our body”, of which Christ Jesus is the Head, that is, The Christ, including Christ Jesus, the Head, and 144,000 body members, that experiences redemption or deliverance. The visible manifestation of this redemption is by the deliverance of the faithful on earth from the bondage of Satan’s organization, where they had been captives and prisoners down to 1918, at which time the Lord came to his temple and gathered the faithful into it. Again those only who are in Christ Jesus are considered in the following text: “But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.” (1 Cor. 1:30) Certainly this does not apply to those who spurn God’s provision through Christ Jesus.
89 At Ephesians 1: 7,14 the same word is used: “In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace.” “Which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory.” At verse fourteen the words “purchased possession” here translate the one Greek word peripoiesis, the same as used at 1 Peter 2:9, which describes the “people for God’s own possession”. (A.R.F.) The “purchased possession” here mentioned is the body of Christ, and none other. At Ephesians 1:7,14 “redemption” is limited to those who apply to God for the blood of Christ as the only means of salvation, and who receive the forgiveness of sins and then receive “the earnest” (a hand payment, to bind the bargain) of the spirit. When Satan’s organization is destroyed such “purchased possession” experience complete deliverance.
80	Again, at Colossians 1:14: “In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins.” The “redemption” here mentioned is not applied automatically to anyone, but only to those who first voluntarily seek and ask for such. It is broad enough to cover all persons that do come to God desiring salvation.
81	At Hebrews 11: 35 the same Greek word is rendered “deliverance”, and according to Young, “redemption.” “Women received their dead raised to life again; and others were tortured, not accepting
deliverance; that they might obtain a better resurrection.” The faithful ones of old refused to accept any redemption that purchased deliverance from torture and at the price of a compromise with the Devil’s agents or organization. When those faithful ones are raised from the dead they will gladly and with intelligence accept redemption through Christ Jesus. They exhibited faith in God and in his promise to send them the Messiah, and they maintained their integrity.
32	The Greek lytron, which means “something to loosen with”, that is, a redemption “price”, is translated “ransom” in the following text, to wit: “And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant; even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.” (Matt. 20:27,28) The word lytron here is followed by the preposition anti, meaning instead of, corresponding to, or in behalf of, and the last more correctly translates the same. This is the very reverse of the compound word antilytron at 1 Timothy 2: 6. At Matthew 20: 28 the anti could not mean “exactly corresponding” in price, because the lifeblood of Jesus was not exactly corresponding to the “many”, but was “in behalf of” the many. God’s law as stated at Deuteronomy 19:21 shows that the life that buys must be the price exactly corresponding to that which was forfeited; and hence the life of Jesus must be equivalent to what Jesus ransoms for the many. The same matter is correctly stated at Mark 10: 44,45: “And whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be servant of all. For even the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for [lytron anti] many.” Jesus gave his life a ransom in behalf of many, and he bought for such the full and complete life, with the right thereto, for as many as comply with God’s fixed rules relating to salvation. Certainly Jesus did not come to save and to give his life for the willfully wicked. It is true, as written at Romans 5: 8,10, that Christ died for us while we were enemies. “But God com-mendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.” “For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.” The persons referred to in the word “we” in these texts do not include everyone, but only those who are “called to be saints”.—Rom. 1:7.
33	The epistle of 1 Timothy is addressed to Timothy, who was commissioned and sent forth to instruct those persons who had already made a consecration to do the will of God, which includes, of course, those taken out of the world for Jehovah’s name. The sum of the inspired statement of the apostle is this: God is no respecter of persons, but
154
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
it is his will that ‘all men might be saved, and come to a knowledge of the truth, for there is one God and one mediator between God and men, and that one is Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom in behalf of all’; meaning, of course, all of those who seek the Lord. The meaning here manifestly is that Christ Jesus is the Mediator of all who have first entered into a covenant to do the will of God. From all the foregoing Scripture texts it is seen that the ransom sacrifice of Jesus does not automatically affect every man, whether he wishes it or not, but only those receive the benefits resulting therefrom who first seek the way of righteousness and believe on God, that He is the Almighty and that the blood of Christ Jesus is the means of salvation, and who then voluntarily agree to do the will of God. Without Christ Jesus the Mediator, no man could be reconciled to God. Jesus has bought the race with his own blood, and he relieves from the disability of sin only those who are willing to be delivered and saved.
M God has shown his mercy to sinful men, the offspring of Adam, and such is the result of his loving-kindness. Therefore, says the scripture: “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” (John 3:16) Only those who believe in him are rescued from perishing: “For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved.” (Verse 17) This manifestation of God’s mercy is that men “might be saved”, and not that they must be saved whether they desire, believe or do otherwise.
38	Without the ransom sacrifice no man could be saved, because he is a sinner by inheritance from Adam and upon all sinners the “wrath of God”, that is, God’s just condemnation, falls because of imperfection resulting from sin. God cannot approve an imperfect thing. Not by the exercise of justice, but by the exercise of his loving-kindness God provides that Jesus may buy men and that, when men exercise faith in God and in Christ, such will have the benefit of being released from the bondage of sin and given an individual opportunity to prove their integrity toward God and, so doing, receive salvation to life by and through Jesus Christ. But certainly those who fail or refuse to believe could not have salvation. If they could, then it would mean that the conditions of belief are of no effect. Therefore says the scripture plainly: “The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand. He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.”-John 3: 35, 36.
88	There is no way for man to escape the just punishment of everlasting death except by and through
the merit of Christ Jesus applied to and received by him. The doctrine, therefore, of ‘a ransom for all regardless of belief’ is entirely without Scriptural authority.
37	The ransom price is the valuable thing or price provided for the purchase of mankind, and which price exactly corresponds to that which the perfect man Adam forfeited for himself and lost to all of his offspring.
38	The sin offering is the presentation of and the paying over to Jehovah God of that asset, valuable thing or purchase price. Jesus died on the earth. His lifeblood was poured out as the ransom price. God raised Jesus out of death a spirit and exalted him to heaven, fully clothed with all power and authority to carry out God’s purpose. Christ Jesus, the Divine, in heaven, presented to Jehovah God the valuable asset, to wit, his right to human life, as an offering for sin. Such is the sin offering. The act of ransoming includes both the providing of the purchase price and the presentation and paying over of that purchase price. The entire work of providing the valuable asset and paying it over is performed by Christ Jesus according to the will and command of God. It therefore follows that Christ Jesus alone and separate and apart from the members of his body performed the act of ransoming mankind.
38	The prophetic picture made on the typical atonement day in the sacrifices performed at the tabernacle in the wilderness fully supports the foregoing conclusion. The bullock, which was a type of the man Jesus, was brought into the court of the tabernacle and was slain there, which pictures the earth where Jesus was slain. Israel’s high priest, in the type, took the blood of the bullock and carried it into the “holiest of all”, corresponding with heaven, and there sprinkled the blood, which pictured the life of the slain man, Christ Jesus. In fulfillment of that part of the picture Christ Jesus, the great High Priest, ascended into heaven itself and presented and paid over the valuable asset, to wit, his right to human life, to God. In the type the blood was sprinkled on the mercy seat by the priest seven times. “Seven,” being a symbol of completeness in heaven, shows that the blood was sprinkled in heaven in completeness by the Lord himself, that is, that Christ Jesus fully and completely paid over the purchase price for the human race. (See Leviticus chapter 16.) The high priest in the type went alone into the Most Holy, and no one was permitted to be there with him.
40	Note now the text: “But into the second [holiest of all], the high-priest alone, once annually, not without blood, which he offers on behalf of himself, and the sins of ignorance of the people.” (Ileb. 9: 7. Diaglott) “And there shall be no man in the taber
May 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER.
155
nacle of the congregation when he goeth in to make an atonement in the holy place, until he come out, and have made an atonement for himself, and for his household [the priestly anointed class in the type], and for all the congregation of Israel.” (Lev. 16:17) Likewise in the antitype Christ Jesus, the great High Priest, presented the value of his human life, the purchase price, in behalf of the royal house, which God selects, and also for the sins of the people.—Heb. 9:17,24.
41	It has been repeatedly said that the church, that is, the glorified members of the body of Christ, by reason of their sacrifice, have a part in the sin offering; and in support of that theory the following scripture is offered: “Then shall he kill the goat of the sin offering, that is for the people, and bring his blood within the vail, and do with that blood as he did with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the mercy seat, and before the mercy seat.” —Lev. 16:15.
4t Neither the foregoing nor any other scripture sustains the conclusion that the body members of Christ have any part in the sin offering. It is the lifeblood of the man Jesus alone that is the valuable thing, the purchase price, and which price is presented and paid over as a sin offering. What, then, will be asked, does the sacrifice of the Lord’s goat and the sprinkling of its blood, as shown in the type, mean, if not sprinkled in behalf of mankind as a part of the sin offering? It is true that the blood of the Lord’s goat was taken into the Holy the same as that of the bullock. In the type the goat did not sacrifice itself, but the sacrifice was done by the high priest. In the antitype no man sacrifices himself, but the Lord Jesus, the great High Priest, does the sacrificing. The meaning of the sacrifice and sprinkling the blood of the Lord’s goat manifestly is this: That everyone of the humankind that is called to the “high calling” must bear the reproaches that fall upon Christ Jesus and must therefore suffer with him and die with him as a condition precedent to reigning with him in heaven. In support of this are the inspired words of the apostle: “Who now rejoice in my sufferings
for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body’s sake, which is the church.” (Col. 1:24) “It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he also will deny us.” (2 Tim. 2:11,12) “For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps.” (1 Pet. 2:21) In the type the Lord’s goat pictured those who are begotten of the spirit and who therefore as human creatures must die and must be faithful unto death, that they may participate with Christ Jesus in his kingdom, enjoying the highest element of life and reigning with him: “Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer: behold, the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.” (Rev. 2:10) “And they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.”—Rev. 20: 4.
43 The following cannot be successfully contradicted, to wit: That God has provided salvation by and through his Son, Christ Jesus; that the lifeblood of the man Jesus poured out at Calvary is the purchase price of sinful man, which price purchased all the right that Adam lost for his offspring; that such purchase price was presented in heaven and paid over to God as a sin offering in behalf of as many as do believe on the Lord Jesus Christ; that such was done and performed by Christ Jesus in obedience to God’s will; that Christ Jesus, having paid over the ransom price, is the owner of all men, and all receive the benefit thereof who believe and obey; that life everlasting is the gift of Jehovah God through Jesus Christ our Lord, because salvation belongs to Jehovah and Christ Jesus is his means of administering the same; that there is no other means of gaining life; and that no man can gain life or receive life everlasting unless he believes God and believes on the Lord Jesus Christ and asks for salvation by making an unconditional agreement to do the will of God.
(To be continued)
THIRD TRUMPET
BEGINNING with the year A.D. 1922 a series of seven pronouncements, of world importance and in the form of Resolutions or Declarations, began to be adopted and published by the annual international conventions, each year in a different city, of Jehovah’s witnesses, who were then known as International Bible Students. A close examination of these seven annual convention Resolutions, together with the public speeches in support of them, and a comparison of them with sacred prophecy, proves, in the
light of the historic events that followed, that these things had been foretold. They were the fulfillment of a prophetic symbolic picture, to wit, the “seven trumpets” sounded one after another by the “seven angels” that came forth from the temple of God. (See The Revelation, chapters eight to eleven.) The blowing of each trumpet was followed by strange events, described in symbolic language, and they are now understandable in the light of the above seven annual blasts of truth and what accompanied them.
156
THE WATCHTOWER.
Accordingly, the first trumpet began to sound at the 1922 convention of Jehovah’s witnesses at Cedar Point, Ohio, in September of that year. The second trumpet began to blare forth its resounding message the following year at the international convention of Jehovah’s witnesses at Los Angeles, California, in August of 1923. Jehovah’s invisible angels, under the command of Christ Jesus at His temple, had to do with these, spiritual matters.
Again God put it in the mind of his people, by his angel, to act and to carry out his purposes. In July, 1924, at an international assembly of God’s people at Columbus, Ohio, a resolution designated “Indictment” was adopted, which, together with the supporting discourse, “Civilization Doomed,” was later printed and widely distributed amongst the peoples of earth and was shortly thereafter followed by a world-wide series of discourses by many speakers.
“INDICTMENT
“We, the International Bible Students, in convention assembled, declare our unqualified allegiance to Christ, who is now present and setting up his kingdom, and to that kingdom.
“We believe that every anointed child of God is an ambassador for Christ and is duty-bound to give a faithful and true witness on behalf of his kingdom. As ambassadors for Christ, and without assuming any self-righteousness, we believe and hold that God has commissioned us to ‘proclaim the day of vengeance of our God and to comfort all that mourn’.—Isa. 61:2.
“We believe and hold that it is God’s due time for his displeasure to be expressed against wicked systems that have blinded the people to the truth and thereby deprived them of peace and hope; and to the end that the people might know the truth and receive some comfort for future blessings we present this indictment, based upon the Word of God, and point to the divine provision as the remedy for man’s complete relief:
“We present and charge that Satan formed a conspiracy for the purpose of keeping the peoples in ignorance of God’s provision for blessing them with life, liberty and happiness; and that others, to wit, unfaithful preachers, conscienceless profiteers, and unscrupulous politicians, have entered into said conspiracy, either willingly or unwillingly ;
“That unfaithful preachers have formed themselves into ecclesiastical systems, consisting of councils, synods, presbyteries, associations, etc., and have designated themselves therein as popes, cardinals, bishops, doctors of divinity, pastors, shepherds, reverends, etc., and elected themselves to such offices, which aggregation is herein designated as ‘the clergy’; and that these have willingly made commercial giants and professional politicians the principal ones of their flocks.
“We present and charge that the clergy have yielded to the temptations presented to them by Satan and, contrary to God’s Word, have joined in said conspiracy, and in furtherance thereof have committed the overt acts as follows, to wit:
“(1) That they have used their spiritual powers, enjoyed by reason of their position, to gratify their own selfish desires by feeding and exalting themselves and
Brooklyn, N. Y.
failing and refusing to feed or teach the people God’s Word of truth;
“(2) That loving the glory of this world, and desiring to shine before men and have the approval of men (Luke 4:8; Jas. 4:4; 1 John 2:15), they have clothed themselves in gaudy apparel, decked themselves with jewels, and have assumed a form of godliness while denying God’s Word and the power thereof;
“(3) That they have failed and refused to preach to the people the message of Messiah’s kingdom and to point them to the evidences relating to his second coming; and being unwilling to await the Lord’s due time to set up his kingdom, and being ambitious to appear wise and great, they have, together with their coconspirators, claimed the ability to set up God’s kingdom on earth without God, and have endorsed the League of Nations and declared it to be ‘the political expression of God’s kingdom on earth’, thereby breaking their allegiance to the Lord Jesus Christ and declaring their allegiance to the Devil, the god of evil; and to this end they have advocated and sanctified war, turned their church edifices into recruiting stations, acted as recruiting officers for pay, and preached men into the trenches, there to suffer and die; and when the Lord presented to them the clear and indisputable proof that the old world has ended and that his kingdom is at hand, they have scoffed at and rejected the testimony, persecuted, arrested and caused the imprisonment of witnesses for the Lord.
“doctrines
“We further present and charge that the clergy as a class have constituted themselves the fountain of doctrines which, in the furtherance of said conspiracy, they have sent forth to the people, claiming sueh doctrines to be the teachings of God’s Word, well knowing the same to be untrue, in this, to wit:
“(1) That they falsely claim to be the divinely appointed successors to the inspired apostles of Jesus Christ; whereas the Scriptures clearly show that there are no successors to the Lord’s apostles;
“(2) That they claim the sole right to interpret the Scriptures, and that therefore they alone know what the people should believe; and by this means they have kept the people in ignorance of the Bible; and now in this time of increased knowledge and much reading, when the people might read and understand, these self-constituted 'successors to the apostles’ discourage the people from reading the Bible and Bible literature, deny the inspiration of the Scriptures, teach evolution, and by these means turn the minds of the people away from God and his Word of truth;
“(3) That they have taught and teach the divine right of kings to rule the peoples, claiming such rule to he the kingdom of God on earth; they hold that they and the principal of their flocks are commissioned of God to direct the policy and course of the nations, and that if the people do not submissively concur in such policies then the people are unpatriotic or disloyal;
“(4) That they are the authors of the unreasonable and false doctrine of the trinity, by which they claim and teach that Jehovah, Jesus, and the holy spirit are three persons in one, which fallacy they admit cannot be understood nor explained; that this false doctrine has blinded the people
May 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER,
157
to the true meaning of the great ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ, through which men can be saved;
“(5) That they teach and have taught the false doctrine of human immortality; that is to say, that all men are created immortal souls, which cannot die; which doctrine they well know to be false, for it is based exclusively upon the statement of Satan, which statement Jesus declares to be a great lie (Gen. 3:1-6; John 8:44);
"(6) That they preach and teach the doctrine of eternal torment; that is to say, that the penalty for sin is conscious torment in hell, eternal in duration; whereas they know that the Bible teaches that the wages of sin is death; that hell is the state of death or the tomb; that the dead are unconscious until the resurrection, and that the ransom sacrifice is provided that all [not willfully wicked] in due time may have an opportunity to believe and obey the Lord and live, while the willfully wicked are to be punished with an everlasting destruction;
"(7) That they deny the right of the Lord to establish his kingdom on earth, well knowing that Jesus taught that he would come again at the end of the world, and that the fact of that time would be made known by the nations of ‘Christendom’ engaging in a world war, quickly followed by famine, pestilence, revolutions, the return of God’s favor to the [ones spiritually or inwardly] Jews, distress and perplexity of the nations; and that during such time the God of heaven would set up his kingdom, which will stand forever (Dan. 2:44); that ignoring and refusing to consider these plain truths and evidences, they have willingly gone on in darkness, together with their allies, profiteers and politicians, in an attempt to set up a world power for the purpose of ruling and keeping the people in subjection; all of which is contrary to the Word of God and against his dignity and good name.
“The doctrines taught by the clergy, and their course of action herein stated are admitted; and upon the undisputed facts and upon the law of God’s Word they stand confessedly guilty before God and in the eyes of the world upon every charge in this indictment.
“Upon the authority of the prophecy of God’s Word now being fulfilled, we declare that this is the day of God’s wrath upon ‘Christendom’; and that he stands in the midst of the mighty and controlling factors of the world, to wit, the clergy and the principal of their flocks, to judge and to express his righteous indignation against them and their unrighteous systems and doctrines.
“We further declare that the only hope for the peace and happiness of the peoples of earth is Messiah’s kingdom, for which Jesus taught his followers to pray.
“Therefore we call upon the peoples and nations of earth to witness that the statements here made are true; and in order that the people might, in this time of perplexity and distress, have hope and comfort, we urge upon them the prayerful and diligent study of the Bible, that they might learn therefrom that God through Christ and his kingdom has a complete and adequate provision for the blessing of mankind upon earth with peace and prosperity, liberty, happiness and eternal life, and that his kingdom is at hand.”
Thus in his own due time God fulfilled his prophecy by and through his organization, and his faithful people
on earth had a small part therein, even though without their knowledge at the time that it was a fulfillment of prophecy. It was at that same Columbus convention that the proof brought forth conclusively showed that Satan is not bound (Rev. 20:2,3), as some then claimed, but is actively endeavoring to turn all creation away from God. The “indictment” charged that the faithless clergy, the profiteers and the politicians were in a conspiracy with Satan to keep the people in ignorance of God’s Word and his kingdom. God’s consecrated people at that convention and following it began to announce what the angel of the Lord had sounded by his trumpet:
“And the third angel sounded, and there fell a great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters; and the name of the star is called Wormwood: and the third part of the waters became wormwood; and many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter.”—Rev. 8:10,11.
The “great star” falling from heaven as a burning lamp was Satan. “I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven,” said Jesus, at Luke 10:18. He was one of the great stars before Jehovah God (Job 38:7), and, being cast out of heaven, and seeing civilization in great distress, he pretended to become a light-bearer and the torchlight of civilization. (2 Cor. 11:14) His purpose was to deceive the people, but God sent his angel and caused the announcement to be made that Satan’s ‘civilization is doomed’. This was done in the “Indictment” and in the world-wide witness that followed it and by the distribution of upward of fifty million copies of the resolution. It was about that time that God revealed to his people that there had been a great war in heaven and that Satan was cast out of heaven; which truths were later published in The Watchtower under the caption of “The Birth of The Nation”. (A.D. 1925, page 67) The exact time of Satan’s falling from heaven is not stated, but manifestly it was between 1914 and 1918, and was afterwards revealed to God’s people.
“The star,” Satan, fell upon the “third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters”, which evidently refers to the professional ruling group as distinguished from the agricultural and artisan group of the people. The ruling group is made up of those who attempt to tell the people how the world shall be operated, and who claim to be divinely assigned to the work of conducting earth’s affairs. They are the “fountains of waters” who have ignored Jehovah as being “the fountain of living waters”. According to Jeremiah 2:13, they have hewn out water holes of their own, which hold no truth. They have attempted to dictate to the people concerning their every affair of life, and Satan has complete charge of all such, as shown at Revelation 12:12.
The name of this “star” is called “Wormwood”, which word means bitter. Being cast out of heaven Satan is, like Simon Magus, in the “gall of bitterness”. (Acts 8:23) He has tried to make the lives of God's people bitter and to turn all people to bitterness against Jehovah God. He is bitter against Jehovah and against the Christ, the ‘seed of promise’ (Gen. 3:15), and is making the existence of the people bitter.—Rev. 12:17.
The record says: “And the third part of the waters became wormwood.” The many policies and theories that
158
THE WATCHTOWER,
have been brought forth by the ruling factors and tried out on the people have eventuated in bitterness to the people and to the chagrin of the authors of such schemes. They are the ones “who turn judgment to wormwood, and leave off righteousness in the earth”. (Amos 5:7; 6:12) This ruling group, and particularly the fraudulent, religious profiteers, are a wicked crowd, having turned away from the light which they once had. Proverbs 25:26 states the rule concerning them thus: “A righteous man falling down before the wicked is as a troubled fountain [bitter waters], and a corrupt spring.” The prophetic record adds: “And many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter.” The policies adopted and carried on since the World War by the ruling group have prolonged and increased human suffering, causing great wastage and a tremendous loss of human life. At the same time some who were consecrated to the Lord and begotten of his spirit, being de-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ccived and filled with bitterness of the Devil, have also died. Since the World War the ruling group have held over several hundred conferences on political matters, all of which have failed, much to their chagrin. The Lord is giving these governing factors, and particularly the false clergy and the principal of their flock, a dose of their own medicine. To each other they say in the language of Jeremiah 8:14: “Why do we sit still ? assemble yourselves, and let us enter into the defenced cities, and let us be silent there; for the Lord our God hath put us to silence, and given us water of gall to drink, because we have sinned against the Lord.”
The sounding of these trumpets exposes Satan’s organization and discloses God’s organization and some of the work being done preparatory to the great and final conflict of Armageddon.
ZEAL FOR NEW GOVERNMENT
JEHOVAH put his name on Jerusalem, and in 536 B.C. for his name’s sake he brought back the faithful remnant of the Jews or Judeans from their captivity in Babylon. Jehovah is now likewise jealous (or zealous) for his capital organization, Zion, the new government, of which Christ Jesus is the Head. Hence it is written in the prophecy of Zechariah 8:1,2: “And the word of Jehovah of hosts came saying: Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, I am jealous for Zion with a great jealousy, yea, with great wrath am I jealous for her.” (Rotherham) After Satan was cast out of heaven there was great persecution upon God’s organization on earth, during the period of the World War, and especially the years 1917 to 1919. “Christendom” rejected Christ Jesus the King, and for these things Jehovah’s wrath will be expressed against “Christendom”. His zeal does not tarry long before taking action for the relief of his organization Zion. (Jer. 25:12) After the “king of Babylon” (which is Satan) and “that nation” (the invisible part of Satan’s organization) had been cast out of heaven after 1914 with great fury, Jehovah’s zeal for Zion moved him to make preparation for the final punishment of the wicked organization of Satan, which punishment he will inflict at the battle of Armageddon.
Jehovah gave his word that his organization, symbolically spoken of as his “woman”, should bring forth a seed that would destroy the enemy. (Gen. 3:14,15) For six thousand years since then that promise was apparently forgotten; but it was not in fact forgotten. During that period the heavenly part of Jehovah’s organization was like a widow. By his prophet Isaiah (54:5-8) Jehovah declares: “For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I [at my return to Zion] gather thee.” At A.D. 1914 the Lord returned his favor to his heavenly organization, symbolized by his “woman”. As for the earthly part of his organization, Jehovah did not return until 1918, when his Messenger, Christ Jesus, straightway came to God’s spiritual temple for judgment work. (Mal. 3:1-3) In harmony with this Zechariah prophesied: “Thus saith the Lord, I am returned unto Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem; and Jerusalem shall be
called, A city of truth; and the mountain of the Lord of hosts, The holy- mountain.”—Zech. 8: 3.
By the mouth of other prophets Jehovah made known his purpose to return his favor to Zion, which he has done, as foretold at Psalm 102:13-16. In Zion his faithful remnant of witnesses now take refuge. (Isa. 14:32; 24:23) As written at Isaiah 59:20,21 (A.R.V.): “And a Redeemer will come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith Jehovah. And as for me, this is my covenant with them, saith Jehovah: my spirit that is upon thee [that is, Christ, the Greater-than-Isaiah], and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed [God’s remnant, as pictured by Isaiah’s three sons], nor out of the mouth of thy seed’s seed [the newer part of God’s remnant added since 1922], saith Jehovah, from henceforth and for ever.” (Mic. 4: 7, 8; Isa. 33: 5, 6) This prophetic promise Jehovah has fulfilled to his faithful ones on earth and has made them his witnesses.
Jehovah’s organization, symbolized by Jerusalem, shows prosperity thereafter. “[It] shall be called, [The] city of truth,” that is, the organization of fidelity and steadfastness, first by the earthly remnant, the Judah class, and then by their companions, the Jonadab class, the “great multitude”. But the angel of the Lord will gather out all offenders and workers of iniquity, as mentioned at Revelation 22:15. The prophet Isaiah (33:20-22) foretold: “Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tent that shall not be removed, the stakes whereof shall never be plucked up, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken. But there Jehovah will be with us in majesty, a place of broad rivers and streams, wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall gallant ship [Satan’s commercial-religious power, particularly represented in the Roman Catholic Hierarchy] pass thereby. For Jehovah is our judge, Jehovah is our lawgiver, Jehovah is our king; he will save us.”—A.R.V.
Jehovah will for ever be a refuge unto his people, and no “strangers” in army formation will pass through her
May 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
159
again. (Joel 3:16,17,21, A.R.V.) God’s remnant people now see these blessings, and they rejoice; and to them Jehovah says: “Thou shalt not fear evil any more. . . . Fear thou not; 0 Zion, let not thy hands be slack.” (Zcph. 3: 1417, A.R.V.) Jehovah has sent his Judge, Christ Jesus, to the temple; therefore he has now fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah 1: 26 and ‘restored thy judges as at the first’ and has sent his “Wonderful Counsellor”, Christ Jesus, and henceforth his organization shall be called, The Faithful City of Righteousness. (Isa. 30:20) Those born of Zion are taught of God and are in great peace and joy.—Isa. 54:13; Zeph. 3:13.
Many prophecies show that many people will discern God’s organization before Armageddon and will acknowledge that Jehovah is not at all responsible for the woes and wickedness now in the earth and that the kingdom of Jehovah under Christ is the world’s true remedy. The day of great distress is here for those who fight against God. The day of prosperity, joy and blessings is here for those who take their stand on Jehovah’s side and remain true and steadfast for him. The people of good will shall come with gladness to Zion, the new government, and give joy to Christ the King.—Jer. 31:23; Ps. 48:1, 2; Joel 3 :17.
Eighteen years after the remnant of Judeans came back from Babylon to the land of Judah this prophecy was uttered by Zechariah (8:4,5): “Thus saith the Lord of hosts, There shall yet old men and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff in his hand for very age. And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls playing in the streets thereof.” This could not be referring to the dreamers mentioned in Joel’s prophecy (2:28) as “old men”; for Jehovah is against them that prophesy false dreams and tell them and cause the people to err by their lies; and these he clears away. (Jer. 23:32) The prophecy of Zechariah therefore shows in figurative language that in the old age of the true church of Christ, that is, at the end of the world, where we now are, God will restore his remnant of faithful witnesses to his organization and they shall then be fruitful. (Pss. 37:25; 92:14,15) The faithful remnant shall abide in Jehovah’s organization, as it were in old age, and they shall have protection and shall not be cut off therefrom by the enemy.—Ps. 31:23.
Mordecai the Jew and Naomi the widow were both old at the time the respective dramas of Esther, Mordecai’s cousin, and of Ruth, Naomi’s daughtcr-in-law, were per
formed; and the “boys and girls [that is, the younger ones] in the streets” foreseen by Zechariah suggests that the Esther and Ruth class are there in God’s organization as members of the remnant. (See the book Preservation.) These younger ones are children of Zion, hence they certainly picture a portion of God’s remnant yet on earth. (Isa. 66:8; Pss. 113:9; 127:3-5) At the fulfillment of Zechariah’s prophecy Zion says according to the prophecy (Isa. 49:19-22, A.R.V.): “Who hath begotten me these [the Esther and Ruth class], seeing I have been bereaved of my children?” Happy children play in streets. The prophetic statement that these children are playing in the streets shows that they are care-free, trustful, and joyful in the Lord. Says Psalm 149:2, 3: “Let the children of Zion be joyful in their King. Let them praise his name in the dance.”
These blessings bestowed upon Zion at the present time are marvelous, and the faithful see it proceeds from the Lord. Zechariah foretold this, saying: “Thus saith the Lord of hosts, If it be marvellous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these days, should it also be marvellous in mine eyes? saith the Lord of hosts.” (8:6) With Jehovah nothing is impossible. The fulfillment of the prophecy is due to the fact of Jehovah’s returning his favor to Zion and bringing his covenant people that prove obedient and faithful unto the temple of which Christ Jesus is Head, and there anointing and enlightening them; and they exclaim : “This is the Lord’s doing; it is marvellous in our eyes.”—Ps. 118:23.
The people of Jehovah are those who gladly obey him, and he protects and blesses them: “Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, I will save my people from the east country, and from the west country, and I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem; and they shall be my people, and I will be their God, in truth and in righteousness.” (8:7,8) To save them he first brings forth his King, Christ Jesus, in A.D. 1914, and then ousts Satan and his organization from their position in heaven, and stops the World War for the sake of his elect (Matt. 24:21,22), and then sends forth his obedient ones prepared and equipped as his witnesses to represent him in further preparation for the battle of Armageddon. The remnant dwell safely because they have taken their refuge in the name of Jehovah. (Prov. 18: 10) No longer do they give honor and glory to men. They worship and serve Jehovah.
HASTEN WHILE OPPORTUNITY IS WITH US
Dear Brother Rutherford:
The first zone assembly of thirteen companies comprising Rhode Island Unit No. 1 desires to express their sincere love and thanks to Jehovah, the all-wise Creator and Giver of all good and perfect gifts, and to Christ the King over the whole earth; and our appreciation and thanks to you as well as all coworkers at headquarters for the preparation and execution of “food convenient” for us as well as instruments for a swift and successful witness to all people residing within our territory limits.
The great opportunities and resulting responsibilities that are before us are truly seen and appreciated. By Jehovah’s strength and grace, we propose to follow faithfully the well-ordered, harmonious Theocratic arrangement now in operation.
We also deeply feel the incarceration and persecutions of our brethren in many lands, and for this reason we propose to hasten to carry the message to people of good will while the opportunity is with us. A sincere and fervent desire to honor Jehovah and magnify his King and Kingdom, in harmony with organization instructions, is firmly embedded in the hearts of everyone in our zone.
We truly hope that Jehovah’s wisdom, strength and joy which he constantly gives his loyal servants will continue to be richly and abundantly given you in your warfare against our common enemy.
Please accept our very best Christian wishes and the genuine co-operation of all in our zone.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
COURAGE TRIUMPHS AT SPALDING, NEBRASKA
"A publisher remained in the sound-car with her two-year-old baby while the other witnesses went out to work the town. In a short while the town marshal, incited by the priest and businessmen of the same creed and caliber, came to the sound-car and insisted we get out. With no ordinance to convict us on, his only excuse was: ‘The people here don’t want that.’ Noon the witnesses came back for lunch, but no marshal appeared. After lunch all went out to work again with the sound-car taking the outlying scattered homes. The publisher with the baby drove from place to place. Soon eight or ten men, loaded inside and out of a car, spied the sound-car after having hunted all over the town. They drove up, stopped, and were heard to say: ‘Well, all we can do is tell him they’re still here.’ They left, only to return in a few minutes with three more carloads and the marshal. All rushed out immediately, manifesting a most malicious spirit. The brother whom the marshal accosted presented the Supreme Court’s decision re work of J w’s. He asked the marshal if the mob with him were the law of the town and just what authority he had to interfere with our work. The marshal, apparently the only non-Catholic in the bunch, shamefacedly admitted they were relief workers out of anything else to do that day. Amid occasional threats from the mob the brother informed him that since our work was legal and vitally necessary to the townspeople we would continue. With that he left the conspirators and went on to the next house. After working the town the brother in charge of the sound-car interviewed the mayor and found the marshal and his henchmen already conferring with him. With the willing help of the town papa, news was spread that Jehovah’s witnesses had been run out of Greeley, the county seat, a few days previous: just another sample of the lies that religious leaders resort to in order to keep the people in darkness. The mayor ’phoned the county sheriff and found to his amazement that we had worked the entire town of Greeley (also about 75-percent Catholic) without hindrance and that nothing could be done, since our work was not illegal. The brother then informed the marshal, mayor and all the others present that our work required that the people be visited often with the message of God’s righteous kingdom, and that we would be baek again soon.”
HOT TIMES DUE IN PROVINCE OF QUEBEC
“I received my records and feel very thankful to Jehovah for his wonderful gift to the French Canadian people. These [phonograph] records arc surely good, nearly perfect I should say; very plain spoken and with authority. I am sure they will prove disastrous to the Hierarchy and her agents here in Quebec. I have been using these new French records for two days and they are taking effect. As it is written in Ezekiel 33:9, now these people won’t have any excuse, and now with this new equipment we can go joyfully, boldly against the Devil and his agents, knowing that they cannot gainsay what is said on these records. For many years Canadians have been prejudiced against the Frenchman from France, because they [ Frenchmen] have driven the Hierarchy from France and are still looked upon as bad people, and [it] will astonish the authorities when they hear their own people speak like that.”
BOW TWO BOYS CO-OPERATE
“Two boys, one fifteen and the other thirteen, are regular witnesses. The older boy hands in the Testimony card, while the younger one opens the phonograph and gets everything ready by the time the householder is through reading the card. One day they placed fifteen bound books and forty booklets. A girl, in her ’teens, was quite worried about not being able to attend parties or dances if she took her stand on the side of the truth. Now, after a few times in the witnessing work, she says witnessing is one grand party after the other and the other things hold no allure at all.”
COUNTERACTING THE RECORDED LECTURE FADE-OUTS
“The Society sent a list of Watchtower and Consolation subscribers for back-calls. One took me out of town about four miles. While there I inquired about interest among the neighbors. Since then I have conducted phonograph meetings there for three Sundays, with from seven to ten of an attendance. I explained the Alodel Study to them and they are quite enthusiastic, so I will be following up with that. A method I have found very good in handling the ‘Face the Facts’ lecture and following series is to ask the listeners to follow the lecture in the booklet and take a pencil and underline any statement they would like to question or discuss afterwards. This overcomes the difficulty in understanding the parts of the records that almost fade out [due to wavering of transatlantic radio beam]. Also it is easy to determine the extent of the interest of each individual by noting the parts he underlines and the part he takes in the discussion. In one instance, after playing the series for a man and wife I had a solid hour and a quarter discussion. He seemed unwilling to leave the subject until he had everything thrashed out, and invited me baek for the next series.”
AT ASSEMBLY IN NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN
“It was held at a farm home. Eleven vans, two horses drawing each van, reported and all the vans went out Sunday in the service, leaving a large number of bound books and booklets with the people. It was a sight to see 22 horses pulling the publishers through the deep snow to the rural homes with the Kingdom message. The weather gets very cold at times. A businessman, approached with the special offer, was too busy to listen to the phonograph. I showed him the Watchtower sample copy, told him of two copies per month for a year; showed him contents; then showed him Enemies and opened it to page 163 and asked him to read. Then showed him the chapter on the ‘Song of the Harlot’; showed him the index. Showed him Face the Facts booklet and asked him to read page 23. He asked: ‘How much did you say? Why, the book Enemies alone is worth the subscription price.’ He took out $1.50 [Canadian money] and I wrote out the subscription blank.”
FIRST THOUGHT NOBODY INTERESTED IN TOWN
“Publisher living in a little town thought none other was interested in his town but himself. When the back-call work was stressed he started making back-calls in his town. He reproduced the speech ‘Face the Facts’ and other series to whosoever would listen. With amazement he s3es now two families taking deep interest and who previously were prominent churchgoers. The net result for the publisher is that he has more work than he figured.”
•A --' -Y-'1.*.?-:■ ■	?-W\.■■

IB
I 'I >,
j*^

/ fjfrl

I?
■•3






‘•^Sv' & •»*£?£«
* ••■'J UW visa
?i
* <
P



■!t w
a
3

>&
► - • •«*»**• •

hi
3jj$l
W1
^C^F*’
s
S’
I ? f z


w?
!«
£




XJS^/5>
t.
xJ-
I &•
«.* I
1
■&F
11 3^1
&
Ba™

y f-.-j
>*.* '-1—
»5
a
■£rf'

.r/jf •»» .
?t-


.£■ -^■•■■e^:
*54
*&'&

%



f
“XJrS&esiL'. •: *• -'> p.-SwW//

$!
fSwJ 'z




.t


W
w 0
Zd
/<'
/
U
3
I
"Th^yshall know that lam Jehovah’’
-Ezekiel 35:15.
Vol. LX
Semimonthly
JUNE 1, 1939
CONTENTS
No. 11
The Ransom (Part 2) ...............163
Cities of Refuge.................166
To Cover ......................  167
Excluded ........................168
Firstborn .......................169
Bringing Baek....................170
Three Days in Hell and Out Again....172
Letters ...........................174
Field Experiences .................176
“New Earth” Testimony Period.......162
Convention.........................162
Vacation...........................162
“Watchtower” Studies...............162
isi
ii-

fe
K*
i»

6
s I
'■ i
B-tp $ %


iri~iiifiw«^'iaMiar

Sairttrifr^rii_______________________-	. -	_



?«
i

THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford,- President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah §4:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earthy and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS Journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wllL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Pbice
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British...................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian...................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian............ 7 Beresford Eoad, Strathfield, N. S. VV., Australia
South African _________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with tho journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, 1879.
“NEW EARTH” TESTIMONY PERIOD
June is thus designated, and the activities outlined for the month are related to the work now proceeding of laying the foundation of the new earth. Jonadabs as well as the anointed kingdom publishers will rejoice to have part therein. An attractive special offer should make June outstanding for the placement of booklets, to wit, seven booklets on a contribution of but 25c, three being self-covered and four being colored-cover booklets. People unable to take the combination should be offered the new booklet Fascism or Freedom on any contribution they can afford. This applies to foreign-language booklets also. Fuller details are to be found in the Informant, which consult concerning your active share in this testimony period. A good report for the month is expected from you.
CONVENTION
At New York City, June 23-25, a convention of Jehovah’s witnesses will be held. Thousands desire to attend who arc too far away, and for their convenience arrangements are being made to connect Los Angeles, Chicago and some other cities in the United States, and London, Glasgow and other cities in England, by wire direct from Madison Square Garden in New York City. The president of the Society will address the convention on Sat
urday the 24th, from 3: 00 to 4: 00 p.m., and on Sunday, June 25, will address the public, 4:00 to 5:00 p.m., New York time. More details in Informant.
VACATION
Notice! The Brooklyn factory and office will be closed for the two weeks beginning Saturday, July 22, and concluding Sunday, August 6. This will enable the Bethel family, after a year of consistent strenuous activity here, to get away for a temporary change and to enjoy opportunities of field service in common with the other Kingdom publishers. All publishers will therefore order in advance enough supplies of literature to last them over the Bethel vacation period, and to the end of August. Do this in good time to allow for shipment from here before the factory closes Friday evening, July 21. No orders will be filled and shipped, nor mail be opened and answered, during this vacation period.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of July 2: “The Ransom” (Part 2),
1-27 inclusive, The Watchtower June 1, 1939.
Week of July 9: “The Ransom” (Part 2),
28-48 inclusive, The Watchtower June 1, 1939.
fteVWOroWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LX	June 1, 1939	No. 11
THE RANSOM
PART 2
“But now thus saith the Lord that created thee, 0 Jacob, and he that formed thee, 0 Israel, Fear not; for 1 have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine. For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour; I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable, and I have loved thee: therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life."—Isa. 43:1,3, 4.
JEHOVAH’S revealed purpose is first to ransom and deliver the church, that is to say, those who constitute the members of the body of Christ, which selected ones shall reign with Christ in his kingdom. Second, after the selection of the elect ones is completed to the required number, then follows the work of the Lord in gathering and delivering his “other sheep”, and which latter work is now in progress. Long before the coming of Christ Jesus to earth as a man God, by the mouth of his holy prophets, told of His provision for the salvation of humankind that would believe and obey him. This matter is of such vital importance to those who believe that it appears well to here consider somewhat in detail the prophetic scriptures written before the ransom price was actually provided, and which part of the Holy Scriptures have been long designated “The Old Testament”.
1	The English word “ransom” (translated from the French) is from the Latin word redemptio (French: rangon). Thus the two words ransom and redeem are related one to the other, and such is also true in the Holy Scriptures. Because the English word ransom is used in our studies, the definition of ransom as given by Webster, the lexicographer, is here set out, to wit: “Ransom,” as a noun, means “act of ransoming; a redeeming or releasing of a captive by payment of a consideration. The money, price, or consideration paid or demanded for the redemption of a captured person or persons; a payment that releases from captivity, a penalty, or a forfeit. One who or that which ransoms or redeems.” As a verb: “To redeem from captivity, slavery, punishment, or the like, by paying a price; to buy out of bondage. To deliver, as from sin, its penalty, or the like; to be the redeemer of.”
*	The word redeem is defined: “To regain possession of by payment of a stipulated price; to repur
163
chase. To ransom, liberate, or rescue from captivity or bondage, or from any obligation or liability to suffer or to be forfeited, by paying a price or ransom. To recover or regain, as pledged or mortgaged property, by the requisite fulfillment of some obligation as by the payment of what may be due. To rescue; deliver; reclaim.”
*	In the original of the Holy Scriptures various Hebrew words are translated by the words “ransom”, “redeem,” “redeemed,” “deliver,” and like words above used. For instance, the Hebrew words khopher and pidhion are translated “ransom”. The Hebrew words gaal and pahdah are translated “to ransom” and “to redeem”. There must be some simple rootmeaning of each Hebrew word, making it fitting and usable in all the various connections; that is to say, that of freeing or delivering. Examples are given herein.
8 The Hebrew word gaal, translated “redeemed”, is first used in the Scriptures at Genesis 48:16 in connection with Jacob: “the angel which redeemed me.” The Lord gave command to Moses: “Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am the Lord, . . . I will redeem you [not with sacrifices, but] with a stretched out arm.” (Ex. 6: 6) After crossing the Red sea Moses said to Jehovah: “Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast redeemed.” (Ex. 15:13) In the following texts the same Hebrew word is translated “redeemed”: “Remember thy congregation, which thou hast purchased of old; the rod of thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed; this mount Zion, wherein thou hast dwelt.” (Ps. 74:2) “Thou hast with thine arm [not by sacrifice] redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph.” (Ps. 77:15) The prophetic words in the Psalm next quoted are concerning Jesus our Redeemer, to wit: “Draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it; deliver me, because of mine enemies.” (Ps. 69:18) Jesus
164
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
is Jehovah’s duly commissioned King, concerning whom it is written: “Give the king [Christ Jesus] thy judgments, 0 God, and thy righteousness unto the king’s [Jehovah, the King of Eternity’s] son.” “He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the souls of the needy. He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence; and precious shall their blood be in his sight.” (Ps. 72:1,13,14) Likewise the same word appears in the following texts: “Bless the Lord, 0 my soul; and all that is within me, bless his holy name. Who redeemeth thy life from destruction; who crowneth thee with lovingkindness and tender mercies.” (Ps. 103:1,4) “Let the redeemed of the Lord [the remnant from Satan’s organization] say so, whom he hath redeemed from the hand of the enemy.” (Ps. 107:2,3) “Hear the word of the Lord, 0 ye nations, and declare it in the isles afar off, and say, He that scattered Israel [spiritual Israel, in the year 1918] will gather him [His favored and faithful ones in 1919 and onward], and keep him, as a shepherd doth his flock. For the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he. Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord.” —Jer. 31:10-12.
•“Jacob” symbolically stands for God’s anointed people on the earth, to whom the Lord Jehovah says: “But now thus saith the Lord that created thee, 0 Jacob, and he that formed thee, 0 Israel, Fear not; for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine. Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen; that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he.”—Isa. 43:1,10.
T Among other scriptures in which the Hebrew word goal is translated “redeemed” is the following: “Sing, 0 ye heavens; for the Lord hath done it; shout, ye lower parts of the earth; break forth into singing, ye mountains, 0 forest, and every tree therein; for the Lord hath redeemed Jacob [God’s elect people], and glorified himself in Israel. Thus saith the Lord, thy redeemer, and he that formed thee from the womb, I am the Lord that maketh all things; that stretcheth forth the heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself.” (Isa. 44:23,24) Likewise in the sixth verse: “Thus saith the Lord, the King of Israel, and his redeemer the Lord of hosts; I am the first, and I am the last; and beside me there is no God.” (Isa. 44: 6) It was in the year 1919 that the Lord delivered the antitypical “Jacob” class, his faithful remnant, from Satan’s organization, and brought them into the kingdom, gathering them into the temple.
•A similar use of the word "redeemed” appears in the following text: “Loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, 0 captive daughter of Zion. For thus
saith the Lord, Ye have sold yourselves for nought; and ye shall be redeemed without money.” (Isa. 52:2, 3) Note that these were redeemed without a purchase price. The remnant have now been delivered or redeemed from Satan’s organization and will be completely free therefrom when the Lord at Armageddon destroys everything pertaining to Satan’s organization, and then all who survive shall see the salvation of Jehovah in behalf of his people. God’s anointed remnant have been free from Satan’s organization since recognizing that Jehovah and Christ are the only “higher powers”. They are still surrounded and opposed by Satan’s organization, however, and will be completely delivered therefrom at Armageddon. Isaiah 52: 9,10: “Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem; for the Lord hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem. The Lord hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God.”
8	Again the remnant is shown as redeemed and delivered in the following text: “Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans, with a voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth; say ye, The Lord hath redeemed his servant Jacob.”—Isa. 48:20.
10	The faithful are shown as redeemed in the following text: “For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come.” (Isa. 63:4) That does not refer to the purchase price, but refers to the deliverance of God’s people at the time he executes his wrath upon the enemy.
11	In the following text a contrast is shown between those who, once enlightened, became unfaithful and who are designated under the symbol of “Ephraim”, and those who remain faithful and true to the Lord and who are born in Zion, hence are the children of Zion, God’s organization, to wit: “The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up; his sin is hid. The sorrows of a travailing woman shall come upon him [meaning the unfaithful who form the 'evil servant’ class]: he is an unwise son [once enlightened and who then takes a wrong course]; for he should not stay long in the place of the breaking forth of children [that is, other children of Zion, beginning in the year 1918 at the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple, when he began to gather them into his temple]. I will ransom [(Hebrew) pahdah: release] them [the faithful who are born in Zion] from the power of the grave: I will redeem them [the children of Zion born from and after 1918] from death: O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction: repentance shall be hid from mine eyes.” (Iios. 13:12-14) Instead of this text’s referring to the ransom of Adam’s offspring by the precious blood of Jesus,
June 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER,
165
it applies to the “new creation”. (2 Cor. 5:17, Dia-glott) In confirmation of this conclusion that the ones here redeemed are the faithful ones brought into God’s organization, the apostle quotes from this very text, to wit: “0 death, where is thy sting? 0 grave, where is thy victory?” (1 Cor. 15:55) These anointed ones of God were redeemed from death at the time they were justified by Jehovah, following their consecration. The redemption here prophesied by Hosea, however, takes place after the spirit-begotten ones have proved their faithfulness and maintained their integrity toward God and are brought into the temple.
11	This text could not be properly applied to the purchase of the entire human race by the shed blood of Christ Jesus, since we see that the language of the text refers only to those who have been justified and begotten of the spirit. (John 3:3,5) The redeemed ones are delivered into the kingdom by being brought into the temple. In 1918 or thereabout Satan attempted to destroy all the consecrated. The “Ephraim” class fell away and became the “evil servant” (Matt. 24:48-51), and God did not permit that class to stay long in Zion; and as to these faithful ones, these were ransomed or delivered from the power of the adversary, who hoped to put them in the grave and destroy them in death. The year 1914 marked the time when Christ Jesus took his power to reign and was sent forth by Jehovah to reign. The war began in heaven and also in the earth. (Rev. 12:7-12) That marked “the beginning of sorrows” upon the earth (Matt. 24: 7, 8), and from then until 1919 God’s spirit-begotten ones were in much distress; and in the year 1919 the Lord redeemed and delivered the faithful ones from Satan’s organization and thus prevented the enemy from overwhelming them. Note further this text that confirms that conclusion: “Be in pain, and labour to bring forth, 0 daughter of Zion, like a woman in travail; for now shalt thou go forth out of the city, and thou shalt d well in the field, and thou shalt go even to Babylon; there shalt thou be delivered; there the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies.”—Mic. 4:10.
18	By his prophet Jehovah tells of a “highway”, called “the way of holiness”, over which the cleansed of the Lord must walk. (Isa. 35:8-10) Prior to the coming of the Lord to the temple in 1918 the faithful were compelled to mingle with Satan’s organization and the faithful believed that the rulers of this wicked world constituted the “higher powers” (Rom. 13:1). When the Lord revealed to his faithful ones his capital organization and their relation thereto, then they discerned the true meaning of the “highway” and they immediately began their march thereupon. All the righteous must go there
upon. The remnant must take the lead upon the highway and teach others who are seeking the way to righteousness, that they may know the way to come to God and to Christ Jesus. The “unclean” are not permitted to enter that highway. Who shall go thereupon and go over the highway ? The “redeemed” of the Lord; as it is written: “No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon, it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk there.”—Isa. 35: 9.
14	The text last above quoted discloses the persons who are redeemed. In the following texts it appears that it is God’s consecrated and devoted ones who are redeemed and that Jehovah God is the redeemer of those who are faithful to him, and that he is not the redeemer of the unbeliever or wicked ones. In support hereof note the following texts: Isaiah 41:14; Isaiah 43:14; Isaiah 44: 6, 24; Isaiah 47: 4; Isaiah 48:17, 20; Isaiah 49:7,26; Isaiah 63:16; Jeremiah 50:33,34.
18	Jehovah God is the Redeemer of Zion: “For thy Maker is thine husband; The Lord of hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth shall he be called. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer.”— Isa. 54: 5,8.
16	The redeemed are brought fully into God’s capital organization: “And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord.” (Isa. 59:20; 60:16) Job pictures or represents those only who are wholly devoted to God, and as such he uses these words: “For I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth.” (Job 19:25) This text shows that the redemption or deliverance takes place in the latter days when Jehovah delivers his anointed people from Satan’s wicked organization, particularly the religious element, which Satan uses to oppose, reproach and persecute them. “For their redeemer is mighty; he shall plead their cause with thee.”—Prov. 23:11.
17	In all the foregoing texts quoted or cited there is no direct mention made of a redemption- or redemptive money price or payment. The clear meaning given to all of such texts is that of liberation, freeing, rescuing, delivering from the hand of the enemy, that is, Satan’s organization, including his agents that oppose and persecute God’s anointed people. None of the enemy organization are ever redeemed, but, on the contrary, the redemption is always spoken of as from the enemy. It is Jehovah, acting by and through his Chief Executive Officer, Christ Jesus, that accomplishes such liberation, rescuing or deliverance from the enemy. The same Hebrew word gaal is translated “redeem” and
166
THE WATCHTOWER
"redeemed”, and used in connection with a purchase price, in the following texts: “If thy brother be waxen poor, and hath sold away some of his possession, and if any of his kin come to redeem it, then shall he redeem that which his brother sold. And if the man have none to redeem it, and himself be able to redeem it [(margin) his hand hath attained and found sufficiency]; then let him count the years of the sale thereof, and restore the overplus unto the man to whom he sold it, that he may return unto his possession. . . . And if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year, then the house that is in the walled city shall be established for ever to him that bought it, throughout his generations: it shall not go out in the jubilee. . . . And if a man purchase of the Levites [(margin) one of the Levites redeem them], then the house that was sold, and the city of his possession, shall go out in the year of jubilee: for the houses of the cities of the Levites are their possession among the children of Israel. . . . After that he is sold he may be redeemed again; one of his brethren may redeem him: either his uncle, or his uncle’s son, may redeem him, or any that is nigh of kin unto him of his family may redeem him; or, if he be able, he may redeem himself. And he shall reckon with him that bought him from the year that he was sold to him unto the year of jubilee; and the price of his sale shall be according unto the number of years; according to the time of an hired servant shall it be with him.” (Lev. 25:25-50) In the following texts, note that the redeemer was required to add one-fifth extra to the price at which the priests valued the thing to be redeemed.—Lev. 27:13,15,19, 20,27, 28, 31, 33.
18	In the foregoing texts the use of the Hebrew word gaal is like that in the book of Ruth, which according to Young’s translation reads as follows: “And Naomi said to her daughter-in-law: ‘Blessed is he [Boaz] of Jehovah, who hath not forsaken His kindness with the living and with the dead’; and Naomi saith to her [Ruth]: ‘The man is a relation of ours; he is of our redeemers.’ ” (Ruth 2:20) In the following text the word “kinsman”, as it appears in the Authorized Version of the Bible, is from the same Hebrew word gaal, which, according to Young, is in each instance rendered “redeemer”. In reading the Authorized Version substitute the word redeemer for kinsman, wherever it occurs in these texts, to wit: Ruth 3: 9,12,13; Ruth 4:1, 3,4, 6,8,14. A similar transaction is described at Jeremiah 32: 7-9, wherein the word is similarly used. In the fulfillment of the picture made by Ruth and Boaz, the class represented by Ruth is the remnant of Jehovah brought to the Lord, after his coming to the temple, by Christ Jesus, the Greater Boaz, who applies his ransom merit from and after the year 1922, purchasing them that they might be jus
Brooklyn, N. Y.
tified and accepted as a part of his royal organization ; which are then brought into his fold and made members of the “body of Christ”.
CITIES OF REFUGE
18	The same Hebrew word gaal is used in connection with the cities of refuge and the avenging of the blood of the slain one. In such case something is required to be paid over that is equal to what was lost, that is to say, a life for a life, the same rule that was applied in Deuteronomy 19: 21, wherein it is written: “And thine eye shall not pity; but life shall go for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.” Referring to the cities of refuge, one who slays a murderer is called “the revenger [or redeemer] of blood”. In the texts following, the Authorized Version renders the Hebrew word gaal “avenger” or “revenger”, and Young translates the same Hebrew word “redeemer”, to wit: Numbers 35:12,19, 21, 24, 25, 27. That redeeming of the blood, in each case, does not refer to the blood-bought redemption at Calvary, but to the paying in kind, that is, a retribution paid out to the deathdealing enemies of the Lord at the battle of Armageddon, and which is paid by the antitypical Revenger or Redeemer, Christ Jesus, as an offset to the blood that was spilled by the enemies of the Lord. Otherwise stated, the Revenger or Redeemer, Christ Jesus, squares Rie account with the enemies of the Lord at the battle of Armageddon.
20	One who had unawares, unwittingly and without enmity or malice slain another might escape the blood-avenger or redeemer by fleeing to and remaining in the city of refuge until the death of the sin-atoning high priest; that is, antitypically he must flee to God’s organization under Christ and there remain under the sin-atoning blood of Christ Jesus, trusting in that shed blood as a means of protection and salvation. Those who in the present time have unwittingly done violence to God’s law and against his people may gain redemption from destruction by and through the redeeming blood of the great High Priest, Christ Jesus. In this picture the destruction of the enemy of God at Armageddon is foreshadowed as a redemptive price for those slain by the wicked. Christ Jesus, the great High Priest and Executive Officer of Jehovah, with the value of his sacrifice, provides redemption for those who flee to him for refuge, and he is the Executioner of those who remain in the enemy camp and who because of their wickedness suffer destruction in order to offset the wickedness done by them to the Lord and his people. In both cases there is a freeing or delivering by means of a meeting or squaring the obligation, that is, meeting the penalty for sin. The redemptive price provided at Calvary was for those who exercised faith
June 1, 1939
Sfte WATCHTOWER,
167
in and obedience to the commands of the Lord. The redemption at Armageddon punishes the deserving ones, that is, the ones who have caused damage intentionally or otherwise. Those who have thus damaged or committed violence against God’s little ones are indebted or obligated on account of their wickedness, and such are bound to pay and they pay at Armageddon with their lives. They cannot pay the debt to the damaged one, because that one is dead, but they must pay to the dead one’s next nearest of kin in flesh and blood. As he who causes the death of the slain one is a debtor, so death must be meted out to that slayer by the slain one’s nearest of kin, “the redeemer,” and the redeemer removes the debt by exacting the life of the slayer. Note now God’s words concerning “Christendom” and all the nations that have willfully violated the everlasting covenant. The account must be squared with all of these, and therefore the Lord says: “The land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled; for the Lord hath spoken this word. The earth mourneth, and fadeth away; the world languished, and fadeth away; the haughty people of the earth do languish. The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.”—Isa. 24: 3-5.
21	In the case of the unwitting slayer, life is not exacted of him, but in the type he is covered and shielded by the high priest, and in the antitype by the great High Priest, Christ Jesus, who makes atonement for those who flee to Christ. In the type the malicious, willful and deliberate slayer could in no wise have satisfaction met or accepted for his life by any other means, but his life must be taken by the avenger or redeemer. This is done upon the wicked by the great Redeemer at Armageddon. This well pictures and foretells the fact that the sacrificed life of the man Jesus does not stand as an atonement for or ransom for the willfully wicked who spurn God and his provisions for salvation. Such as die at Armageddon under such conditions of willful wickedness certainly will never have a redemption. (Num. 35:30-33) All the Scripture texts wherein the Hebrew word goal is used prove that in no case are the wicked redeemed, but that only the Lord’s poor and needy are redeemed. By “poor and needy” are meant those who come to a realization of their own utter inability to save themselves and who desire to be saved, who exercise faith in God and in Christ Jesus, and apply to Christ Jesus to be saved or redeemed. All those who are wicked and refuse to accept God’s provision for salvation abide under the condemnation resulting from Adam’s sin: “The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.”—Ps. 9:17.
TO COVER
22	The Hebrew word khopher is also translated “ransom”. It is derived from the Hebrew khaphar, which means “to cover”. It first appears in the Bible at Genesis 6:14, wherein God said to Noah: “Make thee an ark of gopher wood: rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch [khopher].” This same word describes the cover charge or covering price concerning the owner of a death-dealing ox in the following text, to wit: “But if the ox were -wont to push with his horn in time past, and it hath been testified to his owner, and he hath not kept him in, but that he hath killed a man or a woman; the ox shall be stoned, and his owner also shall be put to death [for willful negligence in not responding to the notice given]. If there be laid on him [the owner] a sum of money [khopher; a price to cover the damage; according to Young: an atonement], then he shall give, for the ransom of his life, whatsoever is laid upon him.”—Ex. 21: 29, 30.
23	As it appears that the payment of a money ransom was allowed only because the owner of the ox was not the deliberate and direct slayer of the one who was killed, but had been indirectly the cause of death by reason of his negligence, a cover charge or atonement money was taken.
24	After the census of the Israelites was taken, a ransom was to be paid, as stated in the following text: “When thou takest the sum [census] of the children of Israel, after their number, then shall they give every man a ransom [(Hebrew) khopher] for his soul unto the Lord, when thou numberest them; that there be no plague among them when thou numberest them. This they shall give, every one that passeth among them that are numbered, half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary: (a shekel is twenty gerahs:) an half shekel shall be the offering of the Lord.”—Ex. 30:12,13.
26	Certainly the ransom named in this text was not a “corresponding price”. The Septuagint renders the Hebrew by the Greek word Lytron, which is translated into the English “ransom”. This shows that the English word “ransom” in itself does not at all times mean “an exact corresponding price”. Not all ransoms are a corresponding price; but that of Christ Jesus, that is, his own precious blood, was and had to be a corresponding price because such was required to purchase for Adam’s offspring that which Adam had lost for them.
26	In the following text in which the word “ransom” appears the translation is from the Hebrew khopher and has often been improperly applied to mankind in general, to wit: “If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to shew unto man his uprightness; then he
168
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
is gracious unto him, and saith, Deliver him from going down to the pit; I have found a ransom [an atonement (Foum#)]. He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light.” —Job 33:23,24,28.
” In this prophetic picture Job represents the faithful followers of Christ Jesus, and the covering ransom is found in the advocacy of Christ Jesus, who is called in this scripture the Messenger or Interpreter. In the year 1918 the anti typical Job class, the faithful followers of Christ Jesus whom Job represented, were in great distress because of oppression heaped upon them by the enemy. In that year the Lord Jesus came to the temple of Jehovah God. The holy spirit that had been the guide of God’s people, having performed its functions, was taken away, and the Lord Jesus himself, being present, represented his people and advocated in their behalf before Jehovah God, that is, in behalf of those who had fallen into distress because of their failure to properly use their lips in proclaiming the truth. That class is pictured in the prophecy of Isaiah, wherein they cried unto the Lord and the Lord heard them and relieved them. (Isa. 6:6,7; 12:1) The faithful who thus cried unto the Lord are the ones who found a covering ransom in the advocacy of Christ Jesus. Certainly this did not apply to the “evil servant” class. Only a faithful remnant were spared from going down into the pit, because for them there was a covering. This text has heretofore been applied as a “restitution” text, that is, to the ‘people that will be restored in the days of Christ’s reign’. But the application in this manner is not correct. It was the faithful who found an atonement or deliverance by and through their Advocate, Christ Jesus.
EXCLUDED
“ That there are those who are excluded from the beneficial results of the ransom is fully shown from the following scriptures. It appears from the context that the unransomed cases appear before and down to the time of Armageddon, and not beyond Armageddon and during the thousand-year reign of the King, Christ Jesus. The provision in relation to the city of refuge is in point of proof, showing that God foretold by this prophetic picture that there are those for whom satisfaction or atonement cannot be made. The text in point reads: “Moreover, ye shall take no satisfaction [atonement (according to Young’s translation)] for the life of a murderer, which is guilty of death; but he shall be surely put to death. And ye shall take no satisfaction [atonement] for him that is fled to the city of his refuge, that he should come again to dwell in the land until the death of the priest.” —Num. 35:31,32.
29	Not even the atonement of the great High Priest, Christ Jesus, could cover the malicious, willful and deliberate man-slayer. Also those receiving the sin-atoning merit of the great High Priest before Armageddon and who get out from under the covering thereof could not hope for any chance of salvation during or after Armageddon, and during the reign of Christ. The prophet Samuel applies this same rule, as noted in 1 Samuel 12:3, margin: “Behold, here I am: witness against me before the Lord, and before his anointed: whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe [(margin) ransom] to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you.” Thus it is seen that some are completely excluded from the benefit of the ransom sacrifice.
30	God’s servant Elihu, in the picture relative to Job, spoke with authority announcing God’s fixed rule, when he said: “But thou hast fulfilled the judgment of the wicked: judgment and justice take hold on thee. Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his stroke: then a great ransom [atonement (Young)] cannot deliver thee.” (Job 36:17,18) Men of great wealth, either of money or of position, influence and honor amongst men, such as the exalted clergy or their rich “principal of the flock”, think themselves especially favored of God and Christ and rely for safety upon their own wealth, honor and position. But what is the end thereof, according to the Scriptures ? “They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches; none of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom [atonement (Young)] for him; (for the redemption of their soul is precious, and it ceaseth for ever;) that he should still live for ever, and not see corruption.” (Ps. 49:6-9) Such men die like brute beasts, because they have no standing above the beast: “Man that is in honour, and un-derstandeth not, is like the beasts that perish.” —Ps. 49:20.
31	In the following texts the word for “envy” (Strong’s) is translated in the Authorized Version “jealousy”. “For jealousy [envy] is the rage of a man; therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance. He [Christ Jesus, the great High Priest] will not regard any ransom [atonement]; neither will he rest content, though thou givest many gifts [from human priests or clergy or intermediary, whether paid for ‘purgatory’ prayers or otherwise] .”—Prov. 6:34,35.
a’Nor can such provide for or purchase their life by throwing their gold into the streets. Their deliverance cannot be bought by themselves in any manner. Man’s riches cannot ransom him: “There is that maketh himself rich, yet hath nothing: there
June 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
169
is that maketh himself poor, yet hath great riches. The ransom [which the guilty would pay] of a man’s life are his riches [which Jehovah rebukes]: but the poor [of the Lord, who is poor in his own estimation, relying solely upon the Lord] heareth not rebuke.”—Prov. 13: 7,8.
" The wicked become the ransom for the righteous in certain conditions. And how? “The wicked shall be a ransom [atonement (Young)] for the righteous, and the transgressor for the upright.” (Prov. 21:18) This scripture applies at Armageddon. In the expression of Jehovah God’s wrath through Christ Jesus at that time the wicked and willful transgressors must be put to death as the price of freedom for the righteous and upright, to the end that the righteous and the upright may be delivered from the abuse and oppression by the wicked and willful transgressors. By the death of the villfully wicked transgressors they ransom the righteous. The reason is, because the wicked and transgressors will not submit to any other arrangement for the freedom of the righteous and the Lord enforces this remedy against them. In support of this, note Isaiah 43:1, 3, 4: “But now thus saith the Lord that created thee, 0 Jacob, and he that formed thee, 0 Israel, Fear not; for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine. For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour: I gave Egypt for thy ransom [atonement], Ethiopia and Seba for thee. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable, and I have loved thee: therefore will I give men [the wicked men] for thee, and people [the transgressors] for thy life.”
M The religious Israelites conspired together to kill Jeremiah, God’s faithful servant and prophet. Likewise the present-day religionists and their allies conspire together to kill Jehovah’s witnesses, of whom the prophet Jeremiah was a type, example or pattern. At the direction of the Lord, God’s prophet records the purpose of Jehovah concerning such: “For they [the religious conspirators] have digged a pit to take me [God’s anointed], and hid snares [traps laid by the clergy and their religious allies against Jehovah’s witnesses] for my feet [the ‘feet’ of Christ Jesus, the last members on earth]. Yet, Lord, thou knowest all their counsel against me to slay me: forgive not their iniquity [thou dost not cover over their iniquity (Young)], neither blot out their sin from thy sight; but let them be overthrown [at Armageddon] before thee: deal thus with them in the time of thine anger.” (Jer. 18:22,23) This shows that such conspirators do not have the benefit of the ransom sacrifice at Armageddon or thereafter.
” The sons of Eli, the high priest of Israel at Shiloh, were wicked; and those wicked sons pic
tured “the man of sin”, made up of the “evil servant”, the religious persecutors of God’s people, and allies, and concerning such it is written: “For I have told him that I will judge his house for ever for the iniquity which he knoweth; because his sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not. And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of Eli’s house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor offering for ever.” (1 Sam. 3:13,14) What befell Shiloh pictures what shall shortly come to pass upon the religionists of “Christendom”, and this is shown by Jeremiah 7:14: “Therefore will I do unto his house, which is called by my name, wherein ye trust, and unto the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh."
80	The Scriptures written under inspiration by the apostles fully corroborate this conclusion, that there is no ransom for those who are knowingly wicked and who purposely persecute others because of the faithfulness of such others in their devotion and service to the Lord. (Heb. 6: 4-6) “For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. He that despised Moses’ law died without mercy under two or three witnesses; of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the spirit of grace?”—Heb. 10:26-29.
FIRSTBORN
87	The Hebrew word pahdah is rendered “ransom”. It means “to let go; to let loose; to ransom”. This word is used at Exodus 13:13,15, and is rendered in the Authorized Version of the Bible “redeem”, and according to Young is translated “ransom”. To Moses Jehovah said: “And every firstling of an ass thou dost ransom with a lamb; and if thou dost not ransom it, then thou hast beheaded it; and every first-born of man among thy sons thou dost ransom. Yea, it cometh to pass when Pharaoh hath been pained to send us away, that Jehovah doth slay every first-born in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of man even unto the first-born of beast; therefore I am sacrificing to Jehovah all opening a womb who are males, and every first-born of my sons I ransom.” (Young’s translation) This shows that the original firstborn of Israel in Egypt were ransomed from death at the hand of God’s destroying angel although a “correspondent price” was not given.
88	Referring again to the man who owned an ox that killed a man and against whom the obligation rested as the owner, it is written: “If there be laid
170
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
on him [that is, the owner of the ox] a sum of money [as a penalty], then he shall give, for the ransom of his life, whatsoever is laid upon him.” (Ex. 21: 30) In such a case his ransom is from the penalty of death; that is to say, he paid a sum of money instead of paying by his life.
89	There is nothing in the typical picture that foreshadows or foretells that Jehovah provides a ransom or redemption for all human creatures down to and including the wicked individuals; and therefore the conclusion must be that during the thousand-year reign of Christ the willfully wicked will not be brought back from death. Note that before the coming of Jesus the “ransom” or “redemption” spoken of in the Scriptures applied as follows: To Israel (Jacob) as shown at Deuteronomy 7:8; 13:5; 21:8; Psalm 25: 22; 1 Chronicles 17: 21; applied to “thine inheritance” (Deuteronomy 9: 26); applied to David, out of adversity and distress (2 Samuel 4:9; 1 Kings 1: 29); applied to “my soul” (Psalm 49:15); to “his soul” (repentant ones) (Job 33:27,28); to Christ Jesus (Psalm 69:18-20); to the remnant, already justified by faith through the ransom price of Christ Jesus, and now needing deliverance from the strong enemy (Jeremiah 15:21), which latter text reads: “And I will deliver thee [the remnant, represented in Jeremiah] out of the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem [have ransomed (Young)] thee out of the hand of the terrible.”—Jer. 15:21.
40	The following texts apply exclusively to those who have previously been bought with the precious blood of Christ Jesus but now have the promise of deliverance from the enemy: Isaiah 35:10; Isaiah 51:11; Isaiah 1:27; Jeremiah 31:11,12; Hosea 13:14. “I "will hiss for them, and gather them [to the temple, that is, Zion]; for I have redeemed them [from Babylon, Satan’s organization]: and they shall increase as they have increased.”—Zech. 10:8.
BRINGING BACK
41	It has been held by many that the Scriptures guarantee that “all must come back from the dead” at Christ’s return and during his thousand-year rule. (Studies in the Scriptures, Volume Five, pages 478486) That conclusion does not appear to have support in reason or in the Scriptures. No one will receive the benefit of the ransom sacrifice or ransom price that has been paid unless he willingly avails himself of that privilege. It appears, then, that God would bring back from death only those who could and possibly would avail themselves of the ransom when coming to a knowledge of the truth, because the ransom is available only for such, and not those who have no desire to be reformed or saved. The gift of God is not forced upon unwilling creatures.
42	Let it be fixed in mind that in the redemption of mankind by the blood of Christ Jesus the attribute of justice is not involved. If the divine rule of justice alone is invoked and applied, then the entire human race must perish because of sin and imperfection. It is the attribute of love that is involved. Mercy is the result of the exercise of God’s loving-kindness. From the viewpoint of justice God is under no obligation whatsoever to ransom sinful men, nor is God obligated to extend his mercy to every creature regardless of whether that creature desires and seeks mercy. With the two sons of Isaac God made a prophetic picture, showing his foreknowledge of the class of persons who seek the way of righteousness and life, and also of that class that takes exactly the opposite course. It is written: “As it is written: Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.” (Rom. 9:13) “Jacob” here represents that class that seek the Lord and find him and faithfully serve him; and such God loves. “Esau” represents the unfaithful class, who do not regard God’s gracious provision for mankind. God foreknew those two classes, and he so foretold the same, because he foreknows everything: “Known unto God are all his works, from the beginning of the world.” (Acts 15:18) Surely God foreknew those human creatures who shall spurn his proffered blessings of life, and he foreknew the class that would gladly accept his gracious provision. It follows, then, that those who have no desire to know God and Christ Jesus, and no desire to receive God’s blessings through Christ Jesus, on such He will not have mercy, and God will not force his mercy upon them. Could it be argued that justice toward all would require God to force his mercy upon all, even though he knows in advance that such persons would reject his loving-kindness? Certainly not. Justice is righteousness, and injustice is unrighteousness. The argument advanced by the inspired Word of God is: “What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid. For he saith to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion. So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy.” (Rom. 9:14-16) This statement is made in connection with the challenge of the Devil made to Jehovah God, and thus God discloses His purpose to extend his mercy toward those who hear the testimony and prove their integrity toward Jehovah. To hold that because God is just he is under obligation to extend mercy to everyone is entirely inconsistent and wrong. To hold that because of justice God is bound to give every creature the benefit of salvation by the ransom sacrifice is wrong, and wholly unsupported either by reason or the Scriptures. To hold that God is obligated to save
THE WATCHTOWER
June 1, 1939
all men in order to fully prove his supremacy is entirely wrong and unsupported by any authority. The challenge of the Devil raised the question of God’s ability to put any man on earth who willingly would remain faithful and true to God when he was subjected to the test imposed by the Devil. Concerning that challenge all the evidence abundantly shows that God has proved Satan a liar and has proved his own supremacy beyond any question of doubt, in this, that many men up to the present time have maintained their integrity toward God. At Armageddon God will completely wipe out everything that Satan has brought forward in opposition to God, and therefore will completely establish His own supremacy. Whosoever, therefore, willingly avails himself of God’s gracious gift will be blessed with life, and he will have an opportunity of proving that Satan’s wicked challenge is a defamation of God’s name and His word, and that Satan is a liar and God is true. Men have gotten themselves into great difficulty concerning the ransom by proceeding upon the theory that the question of justice is involved.
43	When God sentenced Adam to death justice required the forfeiture of Adam’s life. When Adam went down into the dust from which he came justice was completely satisfied. Justice has been satisfied at all times since, so far as Adam was concerned. Adam’s offspring justly came under condemnation by inheritance, but, not being under direct judgment themselves, God could consistently extend his mercy toward them. It was not a question of satisfying justice by the death of another perfect man, and the death of Jesus was not for the purpose of satisfying justice. If Jehovah would accept the perfect life of Christ Jesus in satisfaction of justice, that would mean that either the judgment against Adam was not satisfied or else the lifeblood of Jesus poured out was a double satisfaction; which would be entirely inconsistent and impossible with Jehovah God.
** Viewing the matter now from the point of love: God unselfishly provided, and, without a doubt, Jesus agreed with Jehovah, that he should become a man, and that he should lay down his life and that perfect human life laid down would be equivalent to what Adam’s offspring would have been entitled to and would have received from their father Adam. When that equivalent, to wit, the perfect human life of Jesus and the right thereto, is presented to Jehovah God in heaven, it constitutes and constituted the purchase price of all the rights which Adam’s offspring had lost by reason of Adam’s sin. Therefore Christ Jesus’ receiving life as a spirit creature and paying over his right to life as a human creature made him by right of purchase the owner of every one of Adam’s offspring that would comply with God’s requirements, to wit: have faith in
171
God and in Christ Jesus, and meet the rules subsequently made to govern all who take that step of faith. The ransom sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ is a price exactly corresponding to what Adam lost; but it is not a substitute for Adam, nor was it given for the purpose of satisfying justice, but was given as a purchase price. Jehovah God makes Jesus “the Everlasting Father”, that is to say, the one who administers life everlasting. But upon what condition? That men comply with God’s requirements. (Isa. 9:6) Hence it is written that life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord’. (Rom. 6:23) A gift cannot become operative except by the meeting of the minds of the giver and the receiver. Otherwise stated, the offer must be made, and the one to whom it is offered must willingly accept that offer. It follows, then, that the man to whom the offer is made available and who refuses or fails to accept that offer, the gift does not operate toward him. Consequently the ransom sacrifice inures to the benefit of only those who ask for and willingly receive its benefits.
“ As stated in the Scriptures, all men have come under condemnation, which must result ultimately in death unless provision is made for redemption. (Rom. 5:12) God has graciously provided and placed before mankind the way of escape from death and hence the way to obtain life everlasting. Men must choose either to remain under condemnation that justly rests upon them or to avail themselves of the loving-kindness and mercy of God and seek and willingly accept God’s gracious provision of salvation by which man obtains life. The way of escape from death and the way to everlasting life are by and through Christ Jesus. God laid him as the foundation, and there is no other way and no other name whereby man receives life. Only those who believe that God has made such provision and that Christ Jesus is the means of salvation can possibly be saved. During the centuries past many have been brought face to face with God’s provision for life and have willfully and deliberately spurned the same. They have died in their sins, that condemnation abiding upon them. It is not reasonably possible that God will bring them back and give them another chance to reject his gracious offer of life.
*° What is here said is not in the least contrary to or out of harmony with the Scriptural declaration uttered by John the Baptist concerning Jesus, to wit: “Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world.” (John 1:29) This emphatic declaration cannot be construed to mean that Jesus removes the sin of all those of the world who refuse to avail themselves of the opportunity but who willingly choose the way of wickedness, which means absolute death. In times past there have been many, and there are yet many of such. The words of Jesus
172
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
are emphatic, to wit: “For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved. He that believ-eth on him is not condemned; but he that believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.” —John 3:17,18.
"When Jesus was on the earth he vigorously condemned the Pharisees and their religious allies, telling them that they were the offspring of the Devil and worthy of death. To hold that the ransom sacrifice would apply to such opposers of the Lord and his kingdom would be to deny the sincerity and truth of Jesus’ condemnation of such wicked ones. The loving-kindness and mercy of Jehovah is extended to all men who willingly and voluntarily believe God and faithfully serve him and his beloved Son, Christ Jesus: “Whoso is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the lovingkindness of the Lord.”—Ps. 107:43.
48 There is a class of clergymen throughout “Christendom”, wise in their own conceit, who adopt the words of the bishop of Birmingham, who says: “The story of the sin and fall of Adam, and redemption by Christ Jesus, is folklore.” Those men are known as “higher critics” and deny that there is any value in the shed blood of Jesus. They have an opportunity to know of God’s provision of salvation, and willfully and deliberately shun the same and lead
others into the same error. Those higher critics pose before the people as preachers of righteousness. They call themselves “doctors of divinity”, “clergymen,” “bishops,” and other high-sounding titles. They are religionists and leaders in religious organizations. They have substituted the doctrines of men for the Word of God, and thus they have made the Word of God of none effect. (Matt. 15:6-9) The people must choose either to follow these human leaders of man-made organizations or else to accept the Word of Jehovah God and the Lord Jesus Christ. To follow religionists who thus deny God’s Word, therefore, means that all who do, remain under the condemnation that came upon them by inheritance, and are subjects of God’s wrath. To disregard these worldly-wise men and give full heed to the Word and admonition of Jehovah and his Son, Christ Jesus, means to find life. The scripture upon this point is emphatic: “He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abid-eth on him.” (John 3:36) All by inheritance being under condemnation, and God having provided the one way to get out, there is no other way, and therefore Jesus says: ‘This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.’ (John 17:3) Surely, then, everyone who has a desire for life will eagerly seek to know what God requires of man in order to receive life everlasting.
THREE DAYS IN HELL AND OUT AGAIN
TEMPEST in the Mediterranean sea! Man overboard! Why no rescue line tossed out to him ? He was deliberately thrown to the raging waves by the sailors of that ship in distress. The man is a Jew, Jonah. Now, miraculously, “the sea ceased from her raging.” But what of the prophet Jonah? The man’s own talc of the sea reads: “Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah. And Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights.” (Jonah 1:17) The Lord God Jehovah did not create a fish right then and there and for the purpose of swallowing Jonah, but He appointed and had on the spot at the proper time a great fish, which had no doubt been in existence for a long while, and that fish performed its part in this prophetic picture. That the great fish swallowed Jonah was not for the purpose of punishing him, but as a means of his safety: Jonah could never have gotten to land in safety without the use of that fish.
Concerning a like experience a Greater than Jonah said: “For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale’s belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.” (Matt. 12:40) The spokesman, Jesus, could not have been brought out of the grave and again to the land of the living except by the exercise of
the power of the Almighty God, even as God exercised his power in causing the fish to land Jonah.
Three days and nights in the belly of the fish was long enough for any man to be digested and absorbed by the fish, and hence a miracle was required to save Jonah • and God performed that miracle and thus showed his loving-kindness toward His servant. While taking that strange voyage Jonah had ample time to think, and did so. “Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God out of the fish’s belly, and said, I cried by reason of mine afiliction unto the Lord, and he heard me; out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice.” The record in the American Revised Version Bible reads: “Out of the belly of Sheol cried I, and thou heardest my voice.” In the translation by the Jewish authority, Leeser, the record reads: “Out of the depth of the grave have I cried, and thou hast heard my voice.” The Catholic Douay Version Bible reads: “I cried out of the belly of hell, and thou hast heard my voice.”
In the foregoing comparative readings of the text the word Sheol (A.ZZ.V.) is the original Hebrew word; the words “hell” and “grave” are but the English translations of that one original Hebrew word, as rendered by Catholic, Protestant and Jewish translators. What, then, is
June 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
173
“hell”, according to the Holy Scriptures? If “hell” had been “eternal torment”, then according to religious teachings Jonah could not and would not have gotten out.
There is no place for the eternal torture of men or souls. God is not a fiend, as the clergy would make him appear. God is love. What good could result from torturing one of Jehovah’s creatures? How could love be expressed in such a manner? Furthermore, how could torment in any wise comply with the law which God expressed to Adam, and which provided death as the penalty for sin ? The doctrine of eternal torment is an invention of the Devil for the purpose of supporting his original lie; namely, that there is no death. (See Genesis 3:4.) The Devil saw that if man should believe the doctrine of the inherent immortality of the human soul he likewise must believe that the wicked are somewhere in torment. If he could induce man to believe that God had provided a place for the eternal torture of that soul, then he would succeed in turning man away from God and causing him to hate Jehovah. The doctrines of eternal torture and of inherent human immortality are meant to support each other, and, both being false, both must fall.
Our English Bible was translated from other languages. The “Old Testament” is from the Hebrew, and the “New Testament” from the Greek. The English word “hell” is translated from the Hebrew word sheol in the “Old Testament”, and is translated from the Greek words hades, gehenna and tartaro'o in the “New Testament”. In the King James or Authorized Version Bible the Hebrew word sheol is translated “grave” and “pit” more times than it is translated “hell”, to wit, 31 times “grave” and 3 times “pit”, but 31 times “hell”. In the Catholic Douay Version Bible sheol is translated 62 times “hell”, and once “grave” (3 Ki. 2:9), once “pit” (Job 17:16), and once “death” (Hos. 13:14). In the American Revised Version Bible sheol is left untranslated “Sheol” in all 65 cases. For example, thg Catholic Bible renders 1 Kings 2:6 (in A.V., 1 Samuel 2:6): “The Lord killeth and maketh alive, he bringeth down to hell and bringeth back again”; as in the case of Jonah. Now, if sheol means torment in one place, it must mean this in all. A few scriptures on the point will illuminate the mind on this question.
Jacob, or Israel, was one of the men whom God approved. Jacob’s son Joseph had been taken away and sold into Egypt, and representation had been made to Jacob that his son was killed. His sons and daughters came about him to comfort him; but he said: “I will go down into the grave [sheol; (Catholic Bible) hell] unto my son mourning.” (Gen. 37:35) Years afterward there was a famine in the land where Jacob lived, and he sent his sons into Egypt for corn. They encountered Joseph there. They returned with the request that the father send Benjamin, the youngest son. Jacob responded to their request with these words: “Aly son shall not go down with you; for his brother [Joseph] is dead, arid he [Benjamin] is left alone: if mischief befall him by the way in the which yc go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave [s/ieoZ].”—Gen. 42:38, King James Version. See also Genesis 44: 29, 31.
Here the word sheol is translated “grave”. The Catholic Douay Version Bible renders it “hell”: “I will go down to my son into hell.” And the priest’s comment in the foot
note thereon says: “That is, into limbo, the place where the souls of the just were received before the death of our Redeemer. . . . Protestants here translate it, ‘the grave,’ being unwilling to admit a third place in the other world for the soul.” (Haydock) Such comment is an attempt on the part of the Roman Catholic clergy to hide the plain Bible truth with a lying invention of their own. The Hebrew and Christian writers of the Holy Scriptures nowhere mention or name such a place as limbo. Limbo is an unChristian imagination, and hence is contrary to the Scriptural teaching that the soul dies and at death ceases to exist. Ezekiel 18:4, 20 states: “The soul that sinncth, it shall die.” As concerns the Protestant translators, who believed that after death there remain only two places, either heaven or a hell of conscious eternal torment, they saw that they could not translate sheol in Genesis 37: 35'; 42:38; 44:29, 31 to read “hell”, as they have translated sheol in thirty-one other places; for if they had translated sheol “hell” as applying to Jacob, it would be rather inconsistent to argue that Jacob’s gray hairs would last long in fire and brimstone in a hell of eternal torment. That Jacob, by saying the word sheol, was referring to the grave, and not to a spiritual limbo, is proved by the fact that Jacob said his gray hairs would go down to sheol, which must be the grave, for that is where Jacob's gray hairs actually did go, many years later, when Joseph buried him. (See Genesis 50:7-13.) The modern revision committee, in translating the American Revised Version, left this word sheol untranslated, evidently expecting thereby to deceive the uneducated.
Take now the case of Job in the land of Uz. He was a good man and approved by Jehovah. The Devil boasted he could make Job forsake his integrity and curse God. God let Satan try it. But Satan never succeeded in causing Job to curse Jehovah. Job was afflicted with boils from the top of his head to the soles of his feet; his flesh was putrid; and all his neighbors and friends turned against him and came to mock him. Even his wife repudiated him and said: “Curse God, and die.” Poor Job was left with no one to comfort him. According to the preachers’ description of what hell is, Job was having about as much of it on earth as any creature could have on this earth. If Job had believed, like religionists, that hell means eternal torment, it would seem rather strange that Job should have uttered this prayer, at Job 14:13; 17:13, to wit:
“0 that thou wouldest hide me in [hell (Catholic Bible); sheol] the grave, that thou wouldest keep me secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou wouldest appoint me a set time, and remember me!” Then Job adds: “If I wait, [hell (Catholic Bible) ; sheol] the grave is mine house: I have made my bed in the darkness.” Job wrote those words under inspiration from Jehovah. They are here quoted to prove that the word sheol, translated “hell” in the Catholic Bible, means the grave, the tomb, the condition of silence of the dead.
David, God’s anointed king in Jerusalem, was a type or prophetic pattern of Christ Jesus. In Psalm 16, verse 10 (15 :10, Catholic Bible), David prophetically wrote: “Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell.” This is quoted by the apostle Peter at Acts 2:29-32 and is specifically applied to the Lord Jesus, proving that Jesus went to the hell of the Bible, which means the tomb. Said Peter: “Alen and brethren,
174
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulchre is with us unto this day. Therefore being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of [David’s] loins, according to the flesh, [God] would raise up Christ to sit on [David’s] throne: he, seeing this before, spake of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in hell [(Greek) hades; (Hebrew) skeoi], neither his flesh did see corruption. This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses.”
If hell were a place of eternal torment Jesus would still be there, taking the sinner’s place. But Jesus came out in three days, out of hell. He was resurrected from the dead. “But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept.” (1 Cor. 15:20) The religious preachers may comment: “Jesus went down to hell to investigate and to inform others how hot it is there.” If they are correct Jesus must have been supplied with an asbestos body for the trip. Besides, Jesus spoke of hell (see Matthew 11: 23; 16:18; Revelation 1:18; 6: 8; 20:13,14), but he never indicated that it was a place of torment. Luke 16:19-31 refers to an unfaithful nation, once rich in Jehovah’s favor, but not to an individual man.
The word sheol is also rendered “pit”. (Num. 16: 30, 33; Job 17:16) The context plainly expresses that it means the condition of death.
In the “New Testament” the Greek word hades is translated “hell” in the English Bible, Catholic and Protestant, and has the same meaning, identically, as sheol in the Hebrew. It refers always to the condition of death, spoken of as the grave, the tomb, or the pit. A few proof texts concerning this: Acts 2:27, naming hades, is a quotation from Psalm 16:10, naming sheol. Then, in Matthew 16:18, Jesus uses the word hades, which is translated “hell”, saying: “The gates of hell shall not prevail against [his church].” The word “hell” means the condition of death, the tomb or the grave, while the word “gates” refers to the way of entering into death and the grave. The death penalty was inflicted upon Adam because of sin, and by inheritance all mankind have been born in sin; and thus
the “gates of hell” have stood open to all men and no man could prevail against them.
God made Jesus to be the Redeemer and Deliverer of humankind from death and the grave. Jesus gave his life that those who believe on and obey him should not perish, but live. According to Psalm 16 and Acts 2:27-32 Jesus died and went to “hell”, but he did not remain there. Christ Jesus is the Head and Foundation of the church; and hell therefore did not prevail against him, because Jehovah God raised him up out of death on the third day, just as, centuries before, He had brought up Jonah after three days in “the belly of hell”. (See Aets 10:40.) Jesus then said, as appears at Revelation (The Apocalypse) 1:18: “I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell [AacZes] and of death.” Jesus Christ gained the complete victory over death and hell. His having the keys, as he stated, means that to him, Christ Jesus, has been committed the power to release the redeemed of mankind from death and the grave. Concerning the faithful ones that follow in his footsteps even unto sacrificial death with him Jesus said, at Revelation 20:6: ‘Blessed and holy are they; for over such the second death shall have no power.’ This is proof conclusive that hell shall never prevail against Christ and the members of his body, which is the chureh. These at their resurrection from the dead are made immortal; which means they will then be nevermore in danger of death.—1 Cor. 15:52-54.
At Revelation 20:13 it is written: “Death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them.” Hades is the word here used. It having the same meaning as sheol, it evidently means the grave or tomb, which shall give up the dead at the general resurrection. It manifestly does not mean eternal torment; because if people are there eternally, they could not be brought out. This scripture, be it noted, does not say that hell gives up the living, but says that it gives up the dead. “For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all [the redeemed] be made alive.”—1 Cor. 15:21, 22.
LETTERS
A MIGHTY WEAPON
Dear Brother Rutherford:
My heart is full. ‘I will sing of the mercies of Jehovah for ever: with iny mouth will I make known thy faithfulness to generation and generation. And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O Jehovah: thy faithfulness also in the congregation of the saints. O Jehovah God of hosts, who is a strong Jehovah like unto thee! or to thy faithfulness round about thee?’
Never before have I so keenly appreciated my insignificance and unimportance relative to Jehovah’s theocratic government. By his grace only have I been permitted to have a share in the most precious privileges of sounding the praises of Jehovah with our silver trumpet around the antitypieal walls of Jericho; and by his grace shall I continue until the walls are leveled to the ground and the city is annihilated by the invisible hosts of Jehovah, to the praise of his name.
Any creature who thinks he is an indispensable personage in God’s organization is a veritable fool. Now is the time to
leave aside “self-love” and go into action against the enemy, armed with the armor of God provided for his valiant soldiers! What a mighty weapon we have in Face the Facts, Fascism or Freedom, Enemies, accompanied with our phonograph! ‘Action! Action!! And more action!!!’ says our invisible Greater-than-Joshua, Christ Jesus. Yea, "seven times" more action. Soon we shall see the fruition of our hopes, to wit, the vindication of our Father’s name and the exaltation of Jehovah and his King in the heart of all the creation that shall survive Armageddon battle.
With much love and best wishes, I am
Your brother and servant by His grace,
S. H. Toutjian
JEHOVAH’S GOVERNMENT THE CHIEF THING
Dear Brother Rutherford:
The publishers of Vermont Zone No. 1, at their second zone assembly, desire to express to Jehovah God our grateful appreciation of his loving-kindness manifested toward ns not only in revealing to us, through The Watchtower, his marvelous trutlis,
June 1, 1939	3THE WATCHTOWER.	175
but also granting us the opportunity of telling these truths to others as publishers of the kingdom.
We desire to express to you our fervent love, recognizing that you are wholly devoted to Jehovah and his kingdom interests and that you are laying down your life for the brethren.
We are uncompromisingly opposed to the Devil’s monstrosity and have set our affections wholly on Jehovah, his King and his kingdom.
We appreciate your interest in our welfare expressed in your letter of January last, and will, by the Lord’s grace, endeavor to carry out the instructions therein contained, making Jehovah’s Theocratic Government the chief thing in our lives.
BACK-CALL WORK THE LORD’S WAY
Dear Brother Rutherford:
The Aspermont [Texas] company want to take up a little of your valuable time to express our acknowledgment, thanks, and appreciation of your wonderful letter of instruction of January 1, 1939, addressed “To All Kingdom Publishers”. We have read and studied this letter in several different service meetings. It brings out further proof that Jehovah’s government is a theocratic government and that it is his commandment to us, beyond a doubt, to go forth and inform the people of the earth of this fact and to give the warning that soon, by his King, Christ Jesus, he shall destroy the present wicked rule of Satan, including Satan himself, and establish the righteous theocratic government of his own in its place. We rejoice greatly that Jehovah has put it into practice among his people so soon after revealment.
Although it is difficult for the Aspermont company, owing to certain conditions, to witness regularly each week, we have set this for our goal, and to gradually lead up to the 60 hours a month, trusting that Jehovah will soon provide the opportunity by removing these hindrances.
The last two months has shown an increase in the number of publishers to five (four, to be exact); one brother, whose home is outside of our territory, is associated and works with us nearly half of the year, and we feel that he is really one of us.
The back-call work in our company is growing rapidly. There is.no question that this is the Lord’s way of bringing out the great multitude class. Only recently a publisher was surprised while on a back-call by the statement, “I see now that there certainly is a difference between religion and Christianity. All church people are religious, but very few are Christians.”
Also, dear brother, please accept this letter as an expression of our love to you and appreciation also to Jehovah and his King, Christ Jesus, for all his favors and for understanding of his precious Word and kingdom.
BACK-CALL WORK SHOWS JEHOVAH'S RICH BLESSING
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Some few weeks ago we had your heart-cheering and inspiring message in the lecture “Fill the Earth” reproduced at our service meeting. Then recently we had your timely admonition “To All Kingdom Publishers” in your letter of January 1, 1939. These messages have moved us to express our appreciation to Jehovah for your love and zeal shown for Jehovah, his King and kingdom.
We would like to have you know that we are with you one hundred percent in your courageous fight for right and truth; that we as a small body of the Lord’s people are determined to keep right on until the victory is won by our Great Leader Christ Jesus.
Our unit is making progress in service activity. Especially are we learning how to improve in our back-call work, which shows Jehovah’s rich blessing. We are putting forth real effort to do much more in this avenue of service. In this way we know we will put in much more time in the Lord’s work than ever before dreamed of. We do want to be obedient to Theocratic instruc
tions, as we know that Jehovah the Great Theocratic Ruler will bless us for such obedience.
We send our love and greetings to you, always remembering you in our petition for divine blessing. We desire to express our appreciation to you for your keen interest shown toward the Lord’s people.
Your brethren in Jehovah’s Theocratic Government, Astoria (N. Y.) Unit of Jehovah’s witnesses.
FAITH IN JEHOVAH GIVES COURAGE
Dear Brother Rutherford:
I want to thank Jehovah for the gift of the Year Book. It was read with feelings of joy and sorrow, the feelings of joy predominating.
The January 1 Watchtower will also be a great encouragement to us all. The Scriptures teem with proof that deliverance is guaranteed, and many of the Lord’s people experience periods of deliverance now. A case in point was your experience when giving the speech “Religious Intolerance”.
Personally I have had many periods of deliverance, which show that a real faith in Jehovah and his Word will give courage to one even if naturally a coward. A mob instigated by the parish priest took me out of bed at twelve o’clock midnight and later burned all the literature I had in the public square. They were armed with sticks and behaved like madmen, throwing the burning books into the air while shouting and dancing. I was standing a few yards away as though surrounded by an invisible wall of steel. All I had to do was to get on my bicycle and ride away to the next village, singing and making merry in my heart to God.
Another example: A mob of 200 banging at the door of my lodgings. One woman with murder in her heart threw away the stick she carried, and searched around for a thicker one. The terrified landlady tried to push me under the bed, while she shouted terrible curses through the windows at the crowd. I managed to calm her fears, and a quarter of an hour later the mob vanished like smoke, enabling me to carry on with the work as though nothing had happened.
If I had hidden under the bed, no doubt the Lord would have confounded me before them, as he said at Jeremiah 1:17.
Why should we fear when we have the mighty Warrior leading us?
Much love in the Lord,
Your brother in the kingdom,
J. H. Corr, Dublin.
RENEWED STRENGTH AND ZEAL
Dear Brother Rutherford:
While studying the Watchtower lesson in God’s appointed way and receiving the thrills of seeing the prophecies unfold, I wanted to render praise to Jehovah in a visible manner, so decided to do it through you. Realizing your time is precious because of the much committed to you, I’ll be brief. I wish to identify myself as among God’s people who appreciate you and the work God is permitting you to do.
We receive renewed strength and zeal as God’s message is broadcast or thundered around the world. How we enjoy playing the “Face the Facts” record to those who did not hear! Some say, “I’d think he would be afraid to talk like that”; “It’s a wonder someone doesn’t kill him”; “What do you do when you get into a Catholic home?” We are so glad to hear the words. “Armageddon is near, and the end of the witness work is nearer.” I wish to be numbered with those who are having a part in prov ing Satan to be a liar.
I am including a part of a letter, revealing how some Jonadabs are teaching their children. Thought you might enjoy reading it.
With much love and continually increased courage, because of the “channel”, I am
Mrs. Fred Jeffs, Kansas.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
SOUND-CAR AT MORIEN, CAPE BRETON
“I called on a man at his barn, where he was polishing his horse. He said he had no use for religion. I said: ‘Neither have we.’ That rather jarred him, so I pointed out religion was a racket. He said: ‘Well, why don’t you people do something about the Catholics?’ I showed him warning re the Hierarchy. He said: ‘Yes, but that’s no good. Why don’t you broadcast it ?’ I pointed out that we did, by radio, sound-car and phonograph, and, to prove it, asked if he would listen to one of our records. He took me into the house, and I put on ‘Liars’ and ‘Fathers’. He thought they were fine, but now said: ‘That’s no good; why don’t you write something?’ When I showed him a few pointed statements in Enemies, pages 163 and 177, he said: ‘Yes, but I can’t afford to buy a book like that.’ How much would he care to give ? He would not answer. I asked if he would contribute 25c. He grabbed at the chance to have it. To cap the matter, we were almost done with the town, so we went down the road and put on our wonderful soundcar with four records on ‘Violence’, and we nearly got violence. As the last record was about done, a Catholic woman came flying down the road with blood in her eye. She would have us all arrested and stoned out of town and our car smashed: how dare we say such things about Catholics? We finished the town with literature and placed at most of the calls after that.”
“BACK-SEAT DRIVING” THROUGH TEXAS TOWARD ZION
“This Kingdom publisher took a trip up-state. On his way home he picked up a hitchhiker and struck up a conversation about the Kingdom, then asking if the hiker could drive. He answered ‘Yes’; so he drove while i’ue Kingdom publisher played a whole hour’s lecture on his phonograph, because he had the records and phonograph along.”
WHY THEY SET UP A FIVE-DAY WORK WEEK
“A company servant has a 40-acre vegetable ranch. In the last three months he has replaced all hands working on his place by Jonadabs. Including himself there are now seven Kingdom publishers, and some more will be employed soon as their season comes in. At a meeting of all these interested in the Kingdom the following schedule was adopted: That they all work five days a week raising vegetables, and two days and all their evenings advertising the Kingdom. I never saw a happier ‘family’, nor as many Jonadabs in the making as I found up and down the various roads and canyons in their territory.”
LAUNDRY HELPS TOWARD 60-HOUR GOAL
“I called on Mr. and Mrs. Z-----, who operate a small
laundry. After I played ‘Instruction’ and ‘Miracles’ they said they had heard Judge Rutherford, used to listen to his broadcasts, and had also read some of the books. I asked if they would like to hcai; his latest speeches, and was invited back. Second visit: I played ‘Fascism or Freedom’. With no talking on my part they subscribed for The Watchtower and I left Enemies and Face the Facts. I followed up with recorded lectures ‘Face the Facts’ and ‘Fill the Earth’. On my last visit I started a Model Study on ‘Uncovered’. Just before I was ready to leave, Mrs. Z-said:
‘Mr. Z----and I have talked it over. We want to help in
some way. We have to work here in the laundry from
sun-up till midnight to make our living and pay for our equipment, but we want to do your washing and ironing, anc1, that will give you more time.’ Of course, I accepted and suggested they take some Face the Facts and place them with customers; which they willingly agreed to do. I hope to help them out in the field as soon as I can. When the Watchtower set 60 hours a month as our service mark I thought: ‘Well, I can’t do that; my duties at home are too heavy.’ At the next service meeting the company servant said: ‘The Lord doesn’t give us anything to do that is impossible to do.’ (Ps. 29:11) I increased my time in the field ten hours last month, and now with the opportunity for another full day in the field I can see that 60 hours is not as hard as it sounded. If we do all we can, the Lord will open the way and arrange our affairs so we may.”
JAILED PIONEER WITNESSED TO THIS CONVICT
“Dear Brother: I feel like saying with Ruth, ‘Thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God’; for you have given me new confidence. God bless you. When my time is up next spring, March 15, I shall give my life unreservedly to the great work you are doing, that is, if your folks have love enough to accept an ex-convict. . . . [Later] I will leave for my new temporary home at Lewisburg, perhaps Tuesday or Wednesday. As soon as I get there I will write to you. I shall dedicate every hour to prayer and studying and count the days until my release, then, Jehovah willing, I shall give my every ounce of strength to witnessing for Jehovah. I shall go from house to house. If now I am in jail because I have broken the law, I shall then, perhaps, be in jail for the gospel’s sake.”
FRENCH CATHOLICS ATTEND MODEL STUDY
“Send me 20 French Uncovered booklets. (Rush) I want to use these in conjunction with a Model Study among some French people Saturday evening. The back-call work is coming along by leaps and bounds. In Palmer [Mass.] we now have a study class of from 15 to 25, and still increasing. They come from a radius of 8 to 12 miles. Many of these are now publishers. Likewise in Aldenville the ‘strange work’ of the Lord is causing the French Catholic priests to howl, for ‘their pastures are being spoiled’. To counteract our work, the priests tell the people they will sell them Bibles and not to buy'anything from Jehovah’s witnesses. The result has been that the Bibles sold to the people by the clergy are serving to further expose their racket concerning 'purgatory’, soul, etc. The truth is now spreading among the French people there like wildfire. As the new ones receive information at the first back-call conducted they go out and tell others and bring them.”
ELECTRICAL RECORDING AT A FUNERAL
“The dead man had hoped to be of the great multitude. Learning that he did not have any hope of surviving he made funeral arrangements. They were carried out according to his instructions. The portable transcription machine was used, and a voeal quartet number was played before the record of Judge Rutherford, and followed by another quartet number. Then an announcement telling about the books was read and an opportunity to obtain some of the literature was offered, with the result that over thirty pieces of literature were placed.”
176
THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President____W. E. Van Ambuf.gh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with ali power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death In order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilt It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ..................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian...................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian............7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African _________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have T/ie 'Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid tho needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March J, 1879.
“NEW EARTH” TESTIMONY PERIOD
June is thus designated, and the activities outlined for the month are related to the work now proceeding of laying the foundation of the new earth. Jonadabs as well as the anointed kingdom publishers are rejoicing to have part therein. The attractive special offer should make June outstanding for the placement of booklets, to wit, seven booklets on a contribution of but 25c, three being self-covered and four being colored-cover booklets. People unable to take the combination should be offered the new booklet Fascism or Freedom on any contribution they can afford. This applies to foreign-language booklets also. Fuller details are to be found in the Informant, which consult concerning your active share in this testimony period. A good report for the month is expected from you.
CONVENTION
At New York City, June 23-25, a convention of Jehovah’s witnesses will be held. Thousands desire to attend who are too far away, and for their convenience arrangements have been made to connect, by wire direct from Madison Square Garden in New York City, London, Glasgow, and other cities in England, and the following cities in the United States, the local address of the convention hall being also given:
Chicago, Ill.
Chicago Arena, East Erie and McClurg Sts.
Columbia, S. C.
Columbia Township Auditorium, Taylor St.
Denver, Colo.
Rainbow Ballroom, Fifth Ave. at Broadway
Kansas City, Mo.
Ivanhoe Masonic Temple, Linwood and Park Los Angeles, Calif.
Embassy Auditorium, 9th and Grand Ave.
Mobile, Ala.
Casino Mobile, 208 Conti St.
Oklahoma City, Okla.
Municipal Auditorium
Portland, Oreg.
Benson Polytechnic High School Auditorium San Diego, Calif.
Savoy Theatre, 236 “C” St. (Sunday only)
The president of the Society will address the convention on (Continued on page 191)
EeVWCHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX	June 15, 1939	No. 12
DOOM OF RELIGION
PART 1
“An hypocrite with his mouth destroyeth his neighbour; but through knowledge shall the just be delivered." —Prov. 11: 9.
T EHOVAH made known to Abraham his unilateral I covenant, thereby disclosing his purpose to set
J up a government through which all persons of good will toward God and his government might enjoy everlasting blessings. (Gen. 12:1-3) Every creature or thing that is in opposition to that government of Jehovah is necessarily the enemy of Almighty God. Satan, “that old serpent,” the Devil, is the arch enemy of Jehovah, and long ago Satan chose religion as his chief means of defaming God’s name to the end that he might turn the people against God. Manifestly Satan chose religion for that purpose because it is the most subtle means of deceiving the people. By means of religion Satan has made many hypocrites of men, and such hypocrites by the use of “good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple”. Probably no other man was so well qualified to speak the words above quoted as the apostle Paul, who used the same as a warning to all persons who sincerely desire to walk in the right way. At one time Paul was a practitioner of the Jews’ religion and until the Lord revealed to him the truth, and then Paul became a Christian and an outstanding apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ. He shows that men who practice religion and teach it to others turn away from God those who give heed to their doctrines. Hence Paul wrote to the true followers of Christ Jesus this admonition, to wit: “Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offences, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid them. For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.”—Rom. 16:17,18.
* That a hypocrite is despicable in the sight of God is made sure by that which is written in God’s Word. In the book of Job it is written that three religionists came to Job when he was afflicted and during his period of suffering, and pretended to comfort Job, but, in fact, were there to torment him.
179
Job was truly devoted to and trusted in God. To those hypocrites Job said: “Though he [God] slay me, yet will I trust in him; but I will maintain mine own ways before him. He also shall be my salvation; for an hypocrite shall not come before him.” —Job 13:15,16.
3 Job was a type of those afterwards who have devoted themselves to God. Those who practice hypocrisy prosper temporarily, but not for long. “For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he hath gained, when God taketh away his soul? Will God hear his cry when trouble cometh upon him?” (Job 27:8,9) In God’s kingdom no hypocrite shall have any part whatsoever: “That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people be ensnared.” (Job 34:30) The scribes and Pharisees were the religious leaders of the Jews, and they taught the people the doctrines of men, although they claimed to be servants of Jehovah God. Because of their hypocrisy Jesus denounced them and, amongst other things, said to them: “Ye hypocrites! well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying, This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.” (Matt. 15:7-9) These scriptures show beyond any question that a hypocrite is an abomination in God’s sight and that religion is hypocritical.
* Satan’s name “Serpent” means Deceiver, and he is the great Deceiver of others, and particularly of those who are impressed with their own importance, and those who are of simple mind. From the time of Eve till now the Devil has used religion to deceive people. Religious teachers have fallen into the snare of the Devil, and he has ever used them to mislead the credulous persons, causing them to go into complete darkness. With the nation of Israel God established the true worship of Jehovah in spirit and in truth, and he specifically warned that people to avoid religion because religion is the snare of the Devil. (Deut. 7:16) Jehovah established with
180
THE WATCHTOWER,
the Jews the true worship for their own protection, and thereby established his rule with those who please him; and those who have his blessing avoid religion and worship God in spirit and in truth. The Jewish nation failed to give heed to God’s warning against religion because their leaders were unfaithful to their commission, and the result was that Israel fell into the snare of the Devil and that nation suffered complete destruction. Such is the end of all hypocrites. The “evil servant” class, the Lord declares, will receive the same recompense as that appointed to hypocrites. (Matt. 24:50,51) Those who continue the practice of religion after having received from God due warning are certain to suffer complete destruction. Such warning God causes to be given in his due time to those who practice religion that they might have the opportunity to turn away from religion and serve God in spirit and in truth.
HIS NAME
* In the fight that Satan makes against God it is the name of the Most High that is involved. Jehovah is the source of life, and from him all true blessings flow. Satan has wickedly opposed God, seeking adulation for himself. In due time Jehovah will express his wrath completely against Satan. But before expressing his great wrath against the Devil Jehovah gives full and complete notice of that fact. For that reason Jehovah in the beginning said to Satan: "For this cause have I raised thee up, for to shew in thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.” (Ex. 9:16) The name of Jehovah, which means his purpose toward his creatures, must be proclaimed or declared throughout the earth immediately preceding Armageddon, at which battle of Armageddon the power of Jehovah will be made known to all, and it will result in the complete destruction of Satan and all his agencies. That God must use someone to declare his name is made certain by the Scriptures, because that is his will. Therefore it is written: ‘God at first did visit the nations to take out from them a people for his name.’ This great truth he revealed to his servants in due time, and under inspiration of the spirit of Jehovah his servant uttered these words, as it is written: “Simeon hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles [non-Israelites], to take out of them a people for his name. And to this agree the words of the prophets; as it is written, After this I will return, and will build again the tabernacle of David, which is fallen down; and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will set it up; that the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom my name is called, saith the Lord, who doeth all these things. Known unto God are
Brooklyn, N. Y.
all his works, from the beginning of the world.” —Acts 15:14-18.
8	It is therefore clear that the progressive program of the Almighty is this: God did set up his typical government or nation with David as his chief servant on earth; David was a type of Christ Jesus, the rightful and true ruler of the world; the typical government served its purpose and came to an end, at which time the last king of Israel was overthrown, and thereafter the typical began to have its fulfillment. That typical government ended, and Christ Jesus, having come as the Vindicator of Jehovah’s name and his spokesman, began to take out from amongst the nations a people for Jehovah’s name, and when that people is selected then God sets up or builds up his real government with the anti typical David, Christ Jesus, as the Chief One and Lord thereof. Then follows the work of the Lord in selecting his “other sheep”, which are known as the "great multitude” and who call upon his name. All of this program was known to and determined upon by Jehovah God from the beginning. Those prophetic statements set forth in the Scriptures concerning setting up of the government of Jehovah are now about fulfilled. God has taken out from the nations a people for his name, which people, including the Ruth and Esther class, “the residue,” are made his witnesses, and now the Lord Jesus Christ is gathering unto himself his “other sheep”, who call upon his name. The entire program has to do with the name of the Most High, and will result in the complete vindication of his holy name.
TWhy has God taken out from the nations a “people for his name”? The answer is, as shown by the Scriptures: This he does in order that they may give testimony to the people of and concerning Jehovah’s name and purpose. They must be witnesses to the name of Jehovah, declaring to the people that he is the Almighty God and the only source of life. To those taken out, and who now constitute the remnant of his people on earth, Jehovah says: "Ye are my witnesses . . . that I am God.” (Isa. 43:10,12) Those who have been taken out have no alternative as to what they shall do. They must be witnesses to the name of Jehovah, regardless of what any creature may think or say or do concerning them. It is the will of God that notice must be served upon the nations of the earth, informing them that he is supreme and that his name is above all names and that at Armageddon he will destroy all that continue in opposition to him. Those persons so taken out are designated in the Scriptures as “a peculiar people”, “a people for a purpose.” For what purpose? To show forth the praises of Jehovah God by declaring his name and his kingdom. (1 Pet. 2:9,10) Such witnesses, that is, the people taken out for his name, are commissioned
June 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER,
181
by the Lord Jehovah to declare “the day of vengeance [vindication] of our God”. (Isa. 61:1,2) When must this specific command be carried out? At the time of the return of Christ Jesus, the antitypical David, when he appears and begins to set up the kingdom of Jehovah. The great anti typical David, Christ Jesus, did return in A.D. 1914, and in 1918 he came to the temple and there began the building up of Zion, concerning which all of God’s prophets had foretold. (Mal. 3:1-3; Ps. 102:16) The return of Christ Jesus, and the beginning of his kingdom, was and is good news or gospel to all who love righteousness. Therefore the Lord gave this commandment to the people so taken out for Jehovah’s name, to wit: “And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.”—Matt. 24:14.
8	The foregoing text of Acts 15:14-18 shows that the only ones that are going to be saved before and at Armageddon are those who constitute the kingdom class and the great multitude. The foregoing concerning the setting up of the kingdom is fully corroborated by the following text: “And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you; whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began. For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people. Yea, and all the prophets from Samuel, and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days.”— Acts 3:20-24.
8	It is manifestly clear from the foregoing text that the word “restitution”, or “restoration” (A.R.V.), here does not refer to men who foil because of sin; but it does mean the restoration of the kingdom that had fallen down and concerning which all the prophets foretold in the prophecies uttered by them at God’s command. The setting up of the kingdom is the important thing for the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and those who call upon the name of the Lord then shall have the blessed opportunity to obey him and receive life everlasting. It is the kingdom that the faithful men of old looked for and had hope of its coming, and because of their faith and hope they endured all manner of persecution and yet remained faithful and true to Jehovah God. (Heb. 11:14-16) Of course, the restoration or setting up of the ‘kingdom which has fallen down’ also means the restoration of all the truths concerning the kingdom, which were hidden by reason of men’s resorting to religion and thus being turned
away from the truth. It, therefore, is conclusively shown by the Scriptures that religionists have no interest in the kingdom of God, but are in opposition to it, and that those who practice religion in the name of God and in the name of Christ Jesus are hypocrites.
10	In the foregoing text, Acts 3:19,20, the apostle said: “Times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.” This emphasizes the fact that the second coming of the Lord and the kingdom is the great important doctrine of the Bible, because it is through the kingdom God’s name is vindicated. His coming and his kingdom, therefore, is a time of great refreshing to all who are on the side of Jehovah, first to those who are called according to his purpose to be members of The Christ, and later to the “other sheep” of the Lord, the Jonadabs, who are now being gathered unto the Lord. The remnant and the Jonadabs as companions are now rejoicing together in performing the duties which the Lord has given them to perform.
BATE
11	Particularly since the year 1918 those consecrated persons who are really and truly devoted to God and his kingdom have been obeying the commandment by going among the people and declaring the name of the Most High and his King and kingdom. The declaration of these great truths of and concerning God and his kingdom under Christ has necessarily exposed the wrongful course of the practitioners of religion. The truth has shown up that religion is a fraud and a snare. The religionists, being offended at the truth, have charged and continue to charge that Jehovah’s witnesses carry on a campaign of hate and choose to make others their enemies. Jehovah’s witnesses are not engaged in any campaign of hate. They have no controversy and no fight with men. They have no disposition or desire to do injury to men. They are acting strictly in obedience to God's commandment to proclaim his name and his kingdom. They do not hate men; but they do hate evil or wickedness, which has defamed God's name and brought great sorrow and suffering upon men. They hate what God hates, and God hates wickedness; as it is written: “These six things doth the Lord hate; yea, seven are an abomination unto him: a proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, an heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief, a false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren.'’ (Prov. 6:16-19) It is those who practice religion that indulge in hatred of their fellow creatures who tell the truth.
18	All who love God hate evil or wickedness, but they do not hate the people who have been led into
182
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
wickedness by Satan the wicked one. (Prov. 1:7; 8:13) The proper heart attitude of all who love God is stated by the prophet in these words: “Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate every false way. I hate vain thoughts; but thy law do I love. Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right; and I hate every false way. I hate and abhor lying; but thy law do I love.” —Ps. 119:104,113,128,163.
13	The honest person hates everything that does injury to his fellow creatures and that defames the name of Almighty God. He does not hate any person because that person has been induced to practice any particular religion; but he does hate the religion, for the reason that it is false and defames God’s name and works great injury to mankind. Religion is the creation of the Devil brought into action to defame God’s name, and he deceives men for the very purpose of defaming God’s name and doing injury to mankind. Only the truth can relieve mankind from such condition of blindness, and therefore those who proclaim the truth at God’s command are doing good. Jehovah’s witnesses love mankind, and for that reason they endeavor to inform the people what is for their best interest. The testimony given by Jehovah’s witnesses, which exposes the duplicity and crookedness of religion, they give because God’s will is that they shall do so. Their testimony is not their own, but that which proceeds from Jehovah. If one tells his neighbor that a lion is about to attack him and to destroy him, surely that information is not given because of hatred of his neighbor, but because of love for him. Say the Scriptures: “The devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour.” (1 Pet. 5:8) The Devil is likened unto a great lion, and he walks about promulgating religion as his chief means of bringing about the destruction of men. It is therefore to the best interest of the people that they be warned about the Devil and about his deceptive doctrines and methods, which lead them into darkness and destruction. Because a person is a Catholic, Protestant or Jew is no reason whatsoever, and is certainly no excuse, why that person should be hated. Jehovah’s witnesses, acting at the command of the Lord, are carrying these truths to Catholics, Protestants, Jews, and all others who will hear, that they may know that Jehovah is the only true God, the only means of life, and that Christ Jesus is his great Vindicator and administrator of life to the people.
HIS PROPHETS
14	Jehovah God knew from the beginning all things that would come to pass, and he caused many such things to be foretold and set down in the Bible, and this for the specific aid, comfort and hope of the persons of good will, particularly those who might
be on earth at the end of the world, where we now are. God put his spirit upon faithful men of old called “prophets”, and caused them to write down such prophecy; which prophecies are now in course of fulfillment: “Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the holy [spirit].” (2 Pet. 1:20,21) Said one of these prophets of Jehovah: “The spirit of the Lord spake by me, and his word was in my tongue.” (2 Sam. 23:2) The spirit of God directed those faithful men of old as to what they should write, and for that reason they then wrote things concerning which they had no understanding. They wrote, in cryptic or hidden phrase (1 Pet. 1:10-12), the things about which those faithful prophets did not understand. The things concerning which they wrote at God’s command must be understood at some time, and God discloses in his Word that it is his will that these prophecies shall be understood after the coming of the Lord to his temple and the setting up of the antitypical “tabernacle of David”, as aforementioned. (1 Cor. 10:11; Rom. 15:4) God himself brings to pass certain facts in fulfillment of his prophecies, and by these and his spirit he enables those who love him, and who seek to know the truth, to obtain an understanding and appreciation of such prophecies. As his prophecies are made understandable by his grace the Lord uses the Watch Tower publications to make known the same. Such publications do not attempt to express the opinion of any man, but call attention to the prophecies and to the physical facts which God has brought to pass, and thus enable each one who is devoted to God to see and understand the meaning thereof. Those who now love God bear witness to the fact that since the year 1918 God has unfolded many of his prophecies which before could not be understood because not his due time.
JOEL’S PROPHECY
” The Watchtower now undertakes the publication concerning the prophecy known in the Bible as Joel’s prophecy, citing the facts along with the prophecy that each one may see that we are in the day of the fulfillment thereof. Jerusalem was the capital city of the Jews, or Israelites. It was the place where God had put his name. The Israelites were the typical people of God. They had fallen away from their covenant and indulged in religious practices in violation of God’s specific commandment to them. The Devil had turned the scribes and Pharisees, particularly, into his fold and used them there, and thus those men, as the clergy amongst the Jews, became the chief instruments of Satan to ensnare the Israelites, or Jews. That nation, otherwise called "Jeru
June 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER.
183
salem”, was a type of “Christendom”. Those nations now on the earth that claim to be Christian and that practice what they call the “Christian religion” constitute “Christendom”, which is the antitype of the Jews under their religious leaders. The prophecy of Joel had a miniature fulfillment upon Jerusalem, and its real or complete and final fulfillment is upon “Christendom”. God made the specific covenant with the nation of Israel known as “the law covenant”. The Jews solemnly promised that they would obey all the terms of that covenant, and no doubt the Jews of that early time were sincere in their desire to carry out the terms of the covenant. As time passed on the Jews yielded to the hypocritical practices of religion and fell away from God and became the instruments of the Devil. In the days of the apostles of Jesus Christ groups of sincere persons were formed into companies and were properly called “Christians”, because they followed Christ Jesus and put forth their best endeavors to obey God’s commandment to walk in the way of Christ Jesus, their Lord and Leader. Following the days of the apostles various nations of earth adopted what they called “the Christian religion”, claiming to be Christians, and hence such people or nations voluntarily entered into an implied covenant to obey the commandment of God and to follow in the footsteps of Jesus Christ. Without a doubt those professed Christians of early days were sincerely and diligently endeavoring to fulfill their covenant with God. As time progressed all of those so-called “Christian nations” fell under the seductive influence of religion and since have practiced a religion which they have named “the Christian religion”. In fact, there is no such thing as “Christian religion”, for the reason that Christianity and religion are diametrically opposed one to the other. The so-called “Christian religion” has been carried on contrary to the will of God and in defamation of his name. Hence the willing and intelligent practitioners of religion are hypocrites, and a great crop of hypocrites has been brought forth, and throughout the lands called “Christendom” hypocrisy now is holding sway. Not one nation amongst so-called “Christendom” has any interest whatsoever in God’s kingdom under Christ Jesus, but, on the contrary, opposes the same.
18	God sent his prophets to give warning to Jerusalem that their practice of religion was an abomination in his sight, and he caused them to be informed of his purpose to punish them unless they turned away quickly from religion. Among the prophets whom God used to give such warning was Joel. The prophecy by Joel was “written aforetime” for the specific benefit of those who are today on the earth and who love God, and the final and complete fulfillment of that prophecy takes place after the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple. The reli
gious practitioners amongst the Jew’s charged God’s prophets with carrying on a campaign of hate, and they persecuted the messengers of the Lord for that reason. Likewise today the faithful men and women who at the command of the Lord go about “Christendom” giving testimony to the people of and concerning the fulfillment of the prophecies are charged with carrying on a campaign of hate. The religionists hated Jesus and persecuted him, and he told his followers plainly that they w’ould be hated for the same reason.—John 15:19-22.
1T	The prophecy of Joel is of peculiar interest to the remnant of God’s anointed people and also to his “other sheep”, the Jonadabs, at the present time, and, without a doubt, vTas written and is now made understandable to such, “for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope”. (Rom. 15:4) Joel’s prophecy emphasizes particularly the following things:
18	God’s work, designated in the Scriptures as his “strange work”, he is causing to be done in “Christendom” and which must be completed prior to Armageddon as a witness and a warning to “Christendom”; that God uses in doing this work the people ‘taken out for his name’, together with their companions, and by these he gives warning specifically to all who have looked for individual salvation and honor, and who have been indifferent to the honor and vindication of Jehovah’s name. The prophecy exposes to view the “evil servant” class and “the man of sin”, “the son of perdition.” The prophecy foretells what will be the effect of God’s “strange work” upon “Christendom”. It shows the formation of a totalitarian state, and the full cooperation of the practitioners of the so-called “Christian religion” with the dictators of the world in opposition to God’s kingdom.
19	The prophecy discloses the difficulty into which true Christians fell, and discloses the recovery of the faithful ones from such difficulty, and the outpouring of God’s spirit upon all flesh.
20	The prophecy shows the united effort of the religionists, politicians and commercial rulers to destroy those who faithfully serve Jehovah God. Instead of such conspiracy and united efforts on the part of the enemy to destroy Jehovah’s witnesses deterring them from their work, the prophecy shows that the faithful ones are not dismayed because thereof, but that the anointed remnant and their companions boldly and joyfully march onward, doing the work as commanded by Jehovah God and his King. Furthermore it shows Jehovah inviting all of the Devil’s forces to come on and fight, and that the result is and shall be to the glory of Jehovah and to the vindication of his name. The prophecy shows the complete destruction of religion and the triumph of God’s kingdom of right
184
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
eousness. These truths, now revealed and when understood by those devoted to the Lord, of necessity bring joy and hope to them.
11 Manifestly it is God’s due time to reveal to his people an understanding of the prophecy of Joel, and it is deemed proper and pleasing to the Lord to examine the same here in detail. Read the Bible texts carefully, together with other appropriate texts cited, as the study in this prophecy progresses.
ARMIES
** The opening words of the prophecy show that it was written according to the commandment of Jehovah God: “The word of the Lord that came to Joel, the son of Pethuel.” (Joel 1:1) The name Joel means "Jehovah [is his] God”. Since individuals are of no importance and the Word of God is not written to exalt individuals, the personal history of Joel is not recorded. He was an instrument in the hand of God, and to God alone belong and go all credit and honor. In the consideration of a prophecy or prophetic picture it is not necessary or even proper to look upon the prophetic writer or the players and what they do, as acts of wonderment. We should always look to God and upon the work that he does, both in the prophecy and in the fulfillment, as that which is wonderful, and then we shall see and appreciate the prophecy. It is God and his works that are wonderful; and truly he works in a marvelous way in the performance of his will. God used animate and inanimate creatures to make prophetic pictures, and sometimes the one used was devoted to God, and sometimes not, thus showing that the individual is of no importance but God is of all importance. The name of the prophet or players and the meaning thereof are important, because disclosing the fact that God uses such to do and to perform his work.
*• Joel was "the son of Pethuel”, which name means "enlarged of God”. The name appropriately calls attention to the things that come to pass in connection with the fulfillment of the prophecy. Joel, being a witness of Jehovah, represented the faithful remnant of the anointed, who are made and constituted the witnesses of Jehovah. The father of such witnesses is Jehovah God, because they are his children ; and the meaning of the name of Joel’s father would therefore call attention to the fact, (1) that the remnant were loosed or released from the bondage of Satan’s organization (Isa. 14:17; Isa. 52:2; Ezek. 37:12,13; Ps. 116:16; Ps. 105:20); and (2) that the mouth of such was enlarged or opened by the Lord that they might deliver the kingdom message (Ps. 51:15; Ps. 78:2; Ezek. 3: 27; Ezek. 24:27; Ezek. 33:22); and (3) that their ears were made to hear and to obey Jehovah’s commandments in delivering his message. (Isa. 50:5; Isa. 35:5) The
names both of Joel and of his father point to the fact that the fulfillment of the prophecy written by Joel is completed after the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple of Jehovah God in A.D. 1918 and within "the day of Jehovah”.
44 The word of the Lord which came to Joel was an emphatic command which Joel must obey, and he must deliver the message as commanded. Likewise the ‘people taken out for his name’ receive their commission from Jehovah God, and they must obey his commandments and carry out the same by delivering God’s message to all to whom he sends them: "Hear this, ye old men, and give ear, all ye inhabitants of the land. Hath this been in your days, or even in the days of your fathers?” (Joel 1:2) It appears that the "old men” mentioned in this last-quoted verse refers to those who rest upon their own laurels, esteeming their wisdom far superior to that of others, and who pride themselves upon what they have gained in the past, and who fail to give honor to Jehovah God. Such, as indicated by the Scriptures, are those who become self-appointed "leaders of the people”, and who teach the doctrines of men, and who therefore lead the people into error. Such are ‘the prophets that teach lies’; ‘the leaders of the people cause them to err.’ (Isa. 9:15,16) "Mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumour shall be upon rumour; then shall they seek a vision of the prophet: but the law shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the ancients.” —Ezek. 7:26.
45 The "old men” and the "inhabitants of the land” who follow their lead do not ask that the message be brought to them, but it is sent to them and they are commanded to hear because it is "the word of the Lord”. The message is addressed to those who have made a covenant to do the will of God but who have become unfaithful and broken that covenant. Today the practitioners of religion which is called "the Christian religion” are in an implied covenant to obey God, but they do not perform their part of the covenant. They are not the servants of God, but, on the contrary, they bring reproach upon Jehovah’s name. God will not permit them to have any excuse for their course of action, but sends them his word and demands that they give heed to the warning. Thus the Lord commands his witnesses to carry his message to “Christendom” at the present time, and even to those who do not ask for it or even want it. Jehovah’s witnesses go to the people, and particularly within the hearing of the leaders, and deliver to them the message of Jehovah. It is not the message of hate, nor is it delivered because of hate, but it is God’s message of fair warning and delivered at his command, notifying all of his purpose to vindicate his name.
“When Jehovah’s witnesses approach such peo-
THE WATCHTOWER
185
June 15, 1939
pie the religionists say: “Strange that Christians should be engaged in such a work of warning the clergy and leaders of ‘Christendom’!” That is the way it appears to them. It is indeed a “strange work”, because it is God’s “strange work”, for the reason that it is God’s time to have the warning given to the ‘dreamers’. To them the Lord says: “Hath this been in your days, or even in the days of your fathers?” The day of calamity upon religion and religious practitioners is at hand. An announcement thereof must be made. Has there before been the like upon earth in the days of “Christendom”? Prior to 1918, when the Lord appeared at his temple, and including the days of the so-called “fathers of the church”, and particularly in the days of the “Elijah period” of the church, when the Lord did the work of preparing the way before Jehovah, was there ever anything like this? Because the work following that time, and which is done at the command of the Almighty God, has never had an equal in the memory of man, it makes that work a “strange work” in the eyes of so-called “Christian religionists”. It is in fact God’s “strange work” and gives notice of the near approach of “his act, his strange act”. The clergy and the “evil servant” class, and those of the “elective elder” spirit, regard it very strange that men and women who claim to be Christian should be indulging in the practice of warning others who also claim to be Christian.
*T Because this work done in giving warning to “Christendom” is so unusual God commands as follows : “Tell ye your children of it, and let your children tell their children, and their children another generation.” (Joel 1:3) It is now so strange to the religionists that it is something to be talked about. There will never be the like of it on earth again, because it is the final warning. Some of the inhabitants of the land hear and give heed to the warning and take their place in the Jonathan or Jonadab class, which constitutes the Lord’s “other sheep” and who will form the “great multitude”, but the number thereof is small compared with the practitioners of religion.
38 Then the Lord gives warning through the prophet of a coming devastation that shall fall upon Jerusalem and later upon antitypical Jerusalem, to wit, “Christendom,” and which will completely denude the land: “That which the palmerworm hath left, hath the locust eaten; and that which the locust hath left, hath the cankerworm eaten; and that which the cankerworm hath left, hath the caterpillar eaten.” —Joel 1:4-.
” The language employed indicates a series of pests that come, but in the fulfillment of the prophecy the reference is not to literal pests that have been eating the farmers’ crops since 1918, any more than the fulfillment of the prophecy now applies to
the literal city of Jerusalem. The pests referred to in this fourth verse Jehovah calls “my great army” (Joel 2:25), and which great army devastates the land.
30 According to Rotherham and a footnote of the text the record is: ‘The creeping locusts (devourers not yet winged); swarming locusts (the kind appearing in large swarms).’ The plague mentioned in the text is fourfold and is the same as pictured in Revelation 9:1-12, in which Jehovah foretells that he will send his witnesses, who are likened unto locusts sent as a plague, upon “Christendom”. The plague’s being fourfold shows that it brings about a complete destruction of the food, or fodder rather, which “Christendom” and her leaders provide for the feeding of the people. Today the truth is a plague which exposes the fodder provided by “Christendom” as food for the people, as being all lies and without any life-giving or life-sustaining value. God’s message, delivered by his messengers, exposes all religion as being of the Devil and therefore that which leads the people into the Devil’s snare and ultimately into destruction. The plague comes as one pest following another and leaves nothing of “Christendom’s” fodder or pastures untouched. The message of truth exposes religion as fraudulent and death-dealing and appears to be the fourth and last plague of pests, and after which there is nothing that remains to be devoured. The Year Book of Jehovah’s witnesses for the year 1937 sets forth some important information concerning the expose of religion. That this message is not a message of man and is not given because of hate or ill will, but is given strictly in obedience to the commandment of Almighty God, is shown from what follows, to wit:
31 The text discloses the ones aroused as being sleepers and drinkers, who have become maudlin drunk: “Awake, ye drunkards, and weep; and howl, all ye drinkers of wine, because of the new wine; for it is cut off from your mouth.” (Joel 1:5) God calls upon them to awake; but to awake to what? To the fact that disaster is about to overwhelm them and that such disaster is the expression of God’s wrath against those who have disregarded and violated their implied covenant to obey him. “Christendom,” meaning the religious practitioners in particular, has been warned by Jehovah God and has given no heed to such warning. What Jehovah here says through his prophet applies to “Christendom” with stronger emphasis than to the people of Jerusalem in the type, because the people of “Christendom” have professed to be the children of God and servants of the Most High and yet, with all the advantages and opportunities they have had in the past, they have become the past masters in hypocrisy. What God said to the Israelites through Moses now applies with stronger force to the professed
186
THE WATCHTOWER
practitioners who are religionists, to wit: “But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day; that all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee.” “And thy heaven that is over thy head shall be brass [scorching hot, with no rain], and the earth that is under thee shall be iron [burned to a crisp and hard and dry]. The Lord shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust [the condition that results in 'Christendom’ after God’s army, the antitypical locusts, have eaten up everything]; from heaven shall it come down upon thee, until thou be destroyed.” “The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart.”—Deut. 28:15,23,24, 28.
82 The drunkards, hearing the command of the Lord, wake up in a measure, but do they awake with joy? No; on the contrary, the Lord tells them: “Awake, ye drunkards, and weep; and howl.” “Christendom’s” leaders have for long been under the influence of Satan’s wine made from “the vine of the earth” and are in a drunken stupor. Instead of repenting and weeping when first warned and thus forestalling what is about to come upon them, they first wake up when the calamity is just upon them. They heard the message during the “Elijah period” of the church’s work, but scorned it, and now, when Armageddon is very near, they get a stronger jolt. The political spellbinders, who have made a studied effort to deceive the people, and have done so; the religion mongers, who have hypocritically claimed to represent God and his King, but who have represented the Devil and have led the people into the Devil’s snare; and the money-changers, who have used both politics and religion to accomplish their ultraselfish deeds, have all drunk deep the wine of Babylon, fermented for them by Satan, and have all become drunk, and they have fallen into a stupor, forgetting God, and have utterly ignored their obligation to their fellow creatures. Being ultraselfish, and their drinking having intensified their selfishness, they look only to self-interest, and never seek to do good to their fellow creatures, and always dishonor the name of Almighty God. The three elements named constitute the official elements of the inhabitants of the earth, and are used by Satan to control the people of the earth. They imbibe Satan’s false and wicked policies and carry them out. They drink much from Satan’s wine and receive the effervescent effect from it and become reckless and wanton, and live in selfish pleasure and self-gratification. Satan leads them into his trap by means of religion, and they have been easily led after having imbibed the cup which Satan has prepared for them. Concerning this Jehovah by another of his prophets says: “But they also have erred through wine, and
Brooklyn, N. Y.
through strong drink are out of the way; the priest and the prophet have erred through strong drink, they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way through strong drink; they err in vision, they stumble in judgment. For all tables are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is no place clean.” (Isa. 28:7,8) And thus God depicts the miserable condition of “Christendom”, which claims to represent the Almighty on earth. The day of reckoning comes, and the Lord, by his inspired servant, says to that crowd: “Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are moth-eaten. Your gold and silver is cankered; and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days. Behold, the hire of the labourers who have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth; and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter.”—Jas. 5:1-5.
33 In all of the drunken revelry and debauchery amongst the nations of earth today religion takes the lead. Because the leaders of religion have hypocritically claimed to be the servants of God and have, contrary to God’s Word, mixed with and become a part of Satan’s world, the religious element of the state organization is likened unto an adulterous woman. Outwardly they may be entirely chaste, so far as the flesh is concerned, and uttering soft and kind words, while inwardly they are having illicit relationship with the admitted elements of Satan’s organization, which is called the “present evil world”. Therefore, says the Word of God concerning them: “Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is the enemy of God.” (Jas. 4:4) The Lord uses strong and emphatic language to make known the despicable condition of the religious systems, likening the same unto a blear-eyed harlot. God does not mince words, but he makes them so emphatic that no one has an excuse for not understanding them, and when these words are repeated in the presence or hearing of religionists they go stark mad and desire to destroy the ones who bring the message to their attention. Then the Lord addresses himself to those who hear and obey his voice, and says: "Come hither; I will shew unto thee the judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon many waters [peoples]: with whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication.” “And upon her
June 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
187
forehead was a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.” —Rev. 17:1, 2,5.
3<Note this according to the Scriptures: that the three elements above mentioned (Joel 1:2,5) that dominate the earth are drunken “because of the new wine”. New wine intoxicates quickly, and the Devil saw to it that plenty of new wine from his vineyard made from the vine of the earth was fermented and brought forth for “Christendom” since 1918, when he was cast out of heaven and down to the earth. (Rev. 12:1-12) New wine is seductive and causes the creature to glorify himself and to reproach Jehovah God. Satan’s “new wine” first appeared under the guise of the “League of Nations”, which is a substitute for God’s kingdom and is hailed by the religionists as such. It is announced as the means for ruling and establishing the earth. The ruling element once made drunken on this “wine” were easily led further into the snare of the Devil by giving the greatest importance to the state and magnifying the state or worldly government above Jehovah God. The drinkers, well tanked up on the Devil’s wine, then have united on what is known as the “totalitarian government”, or rule by arbitrary dictators. Furthering his deceptive schemes to overreach the people where democracies are supposed to exist, the Devil brings forth other idolatrous schemes setting the state above God, and brings into operation compulsory flag-saluting, oaths of allegiance to be taken by those who are native citizens of the state, bestowing honor upon men, and particularly magnifying politics and religion and religious leaders. With all of the disturbance and turmoil in the earth the political leaders loudly proclaim: “We must have more religion as a cure for the ills of the nations of the earth.” Not that we must have a return to God and his kingdom, but religion is what they insist upon, which is wholly an invention of the Devil. Cruelly and subtly the totalitarian or dictator schemes move forward, and now the dictators have become bold and arrogant and have formed a block of nations, including Germany, Italy, Japan and other states, and on top of which block or combine the so-called “spiritual” Roman Catholic Hierarchy sits in great state and struts her stuff, administering supposed doses of soothing remedy in a studied effort to make Satan’s rule or wine of this world appear a sweet wine. This is only a meager description of the presentday condition, and it is well known, by all who think, that the conditions are far worse than here described. The world today is in such a condition that human words cannot properly describe the same. In the land called “Christendom” God’s holy name is defamed and his kingdom opposed, and the
three ruling elements above mentioned have brought themselves into their present condition by an overindulgence of Satan’s new wine.
55 Following the World War, and after the religious leaders walked straightway into the political camp, the three elements aforementioned began to function together more completely and at that time there was much hilarity amongst them. The religionists then regarded that as the time ripe for them to join up with their allies, the political and commercial giants, and rule the earth in the place and stead of God’s kingdom under Christ Jesus. They became noisy and loud, and their merriment was due to the exhilaration of the new wine of Babylon produced by Satan for them. For centuries religionists have endeavored, as they have frequently stated, to bring the world into the church, but in modern times the religious organization called “the Christian religion” and “church” have walked right into the political, worldly camp, and have all gotten beastly drunk on the new wine of the “vine of the earth”. Their boisterous hilarity was of short duration. And why? The Lord, by his prophet, answers the question: “For it is cut off from [their] mouth.” Instead of hilarity they begin to howl, as God has stated in this prophecy. What interrupted the felicitations of the would-be rulers of the earth ? The answer is, Jehovah’s “strange work”. But how? Jehovah has sent forth his people, whom he has taken out of the nations as a people for his name, and these at Jehovah’s command proclaim the name of Jehovah and his King and kingdom. That message of truth makes known the name and Word of Jehovah God, exposes the aforementioned combine of religionists and their religion as a delusion and a scheme of the Devil formed to deceive and destroy the peoples of the earth. The heavenly kingdom message shows that the religious combine, instead of having God’s approval, constitutes an abomination in his sight, and therefore Jehovah God sounds the doom of religion and religious rulers and discloses that such shall be completely wiped out at Armageddon. Following the World War Jehovah God provided and caused his servants to use the radio, sound machines, the printing press, and other means, to carry his message amongst the people and herald his name and that of his King and kingdom to the people, and this has greatly annoyed the drinkers and interrupts their felicitations. Therefore their joy is cut off, as the Lord says, from their mouths, by the plagues which Jehovah sends upon them, and it is Jehovah’s antitypical locusts that carry the plague message. Having rejected Christ, the King of the world, the religionists and allies have no access to the joy of the Lord, and therefore they do not ‘drink the fruit of the vine new with Christ Jesus in the kingdom’. Only his faith
188
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ful servants do that. (Matt. 26: 29) Thus those who love the Lord, his appearing and his kingdom can partake of the Lord’s wine new with real joy with Christ Jesus, who has gathered them into the temple.
88 Satan’s visible ruling element in the earth, that is, the state organization, is referred to in the Scriptures under the symbol of a “beast”, the earth being a symbol of the visible part of Satan’s world, including the people who support it. (2 Cor. 4: 4) When Christ Jesus the King appeared at the temple of God Satan brought forth his substitute for the kingdom, and the time had then arrived for God to begin the expression of his wrath against the abominable thing of Satan. “And I heard a great -voice out of the temple [of God, there present representatively by Christ Jesus] saying to the seven angels, Go your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth. And the first went, and poured out his vial upon the earth; and there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the beast [Satan’s state organization], and upon them which worshipped his image [of tie beast, the combination of state powers to rule].”—Rev. 16:1,2.
87 The message of God proclaimed according to his commandment by his faithful witnesses on the earth then greatly disturbed the politicians or religionists and allies who had agreed to rule the earth, but then it was that the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses began in earnest: “And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast; and his kingdom was full of darkness; and they gnawed their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of their deeds.” (Rev. 16:10,11) The physical facts that came to pass from and after 1926 show the fulfillment of this prophecy uttered in Revelation.
88 Let those who love Jehovah and his kingdom take note of the beginning of the progress of Jehovah’s “strange work” and, appreciating the same, let them rejoice and give praise to Jehovah for permitting his servants to have a part in that work. To these faithful ones the Lord now speaks through his prophet, to wit: “For a nation is come up upon my land, strong, and without number, whose teeth are the teeth of a lion, and he hath the cheek teeth of a great lion.” (Joel 1:6) The nation described in this text as a “nation . . . come up” is God’s holy nation, or people for his1 name taken out of the world for his name’s sake (1 Pet. 2:9,10; Acts 15:14), and such nation is represented on earth by the remnant of God’s anointed people. Associated with the remnant is a company without number, made up of those who are of good will toward God and who constitute the Lord’s “other sheep” and whose hearts are right, and they join with God’s
holy nation, and they all work together in harmony. The rendering of this part of the text (Joel 1:6) according to Strong’s Concordance is: “Figuratively, in the sense of a massing; a flight (as of locusts).” Note that in Joel 1:4 God sends against “Christendom” the locusts to devour and devastate the products of the land. The locusts work together, just as God’s holy nation moves forward in a harmonious action. They have no earthly king, but are led by the Lord, the invisible King: “The locusts have no [earthly] king, yet go they forth all of them by bands [(margin) gathered together].”—Prov. 30: 27.
30 iphe “nation” here symbolized by locusts “come up upon my land”, saith the Lord, that is, upon unfaithful Judah in the miniature fulfillment, and now, in the complete fulfillment, upon “Christendom”, which nations claim to be the antitypical Judah, or those who praise and serve God, but do not and hence are hypocrites. The religionists claim that “Christendom” is the land of God. They practice what they call “the Christian religion”, but which is in fact a defamation of God’s name. It is that “land” which Jehovah causes his witnesses, pictured by locusts, to invade with the message of wrath against hypocrisy, and by proclaiming God’s message of truth the hypocrites are stung and their pastures are devoured.
40 It is important to here note that the “nation” that comes upon the land to devour does not engage in human slaughter or physical violence to any creatures or animals. That nation, likened unto locusts, does not resort to the use of the sword or any other instrument of violence. The damage is done, as stated in the prophecy, to the vegetation that grows upon the land and upon which the people feed. The prophecy in its miniature fulfillment in Joel’s day inflicted great harm upon the Israelites, and this was by a mass of living, moving creatures that came from outside of Palestine and therefore foreign to that land. Even so in like manner in the real fulfillment today upon “Christendom”, a swarm of moving, living creatures conies upon “Christendom”, does not engage in physical violence, but this army does devour the food or fodder which “Christendom” has prepared and invited the people to eat and upon which the people have tried to feed and have starved. This is proof conclusive that it is the message of God’s Word, proclaimed in the hearing of the people, including the ruling element, that devours that which “Christendom” produces in the way of so-called “spiritual” food. Jehovah’s witnesses and companions, who carry the message, are not engaged in a work of hate, any more than it can be said that the locusts ate up the vegetation of the fields because of hate. Jehovah’s witnesses proclaim the message of truth because God has commanded that they must do so. Therefore the same
Junk 15, 1939	WATCHTOWER,	189
is an expression of God’s wrath against hypocrisy by which the people are deceived and God’s name defamed.
41 Further describing the Lord’s invading army, the record (Joel 1:6) is, the nation is “strong [bold (Rotherham)], and without number”. They are strong and bold because they are sent forth in the strength and power of the Lord and are backed up by everlasting and unlimited power. (2 Chron. 16:9; Deut. 33:27) They are “without number”, it being true of them as it was said of the seed of Abraham. (Gen. 15:5) The number, as compared to the mass of humanity, is small; yet by their zeal and their organized, harmonious action Jehovah’s witnesses and companions are likened today by “Christendom” to a host “without number”. “Whose teeth are the teeth of a lion”; because they are like their Head and Lord, Christ Jesus, who is “the Lion of the tribe of Juda” and whom the remnant follow in obedience to his command. “And he [that is, Christ Jesus, the great Lion] hath the cheek [(R.F.) jaw] teeth of a great lion.” Christ Jesus knows no defeat, and he tears to pieces all hypocrisy that brings reproach upon the name of Jehovah, and his true followers have a part in this work. The religious combine now in the saddle as a totalitarian, arbitrary rule moves forward. Even in the land called “democracy” hypocrisy is practiced among many of the ruling elements who speak loud against dictators, while at the same time forging forward with dictatorial methods to regiment and control the people and take away all their liberties. The clergy and other religious
leaders advocate and aid in the enactment of laws compelling the saluting of flags and laws which place the state above Almighty God and his King. Never in the history of man has there been so much hypocrisy practiced as now, and in the practice of hypocrisy religion takes the lead and the political spellbinders howl, “We must have more religion.” Religious bodies make great pretense of advocating the liberties of the people, particularly freedom of speech, freedom of press, and freedom of worship, but at the same time they are active in making laws that take away from the people all such liberties. Exactly as God foretold by his prophet, they 'frame mischief by law’ and condemn those who love and serve righteousness. (Ps. 94:20,21) The clergy today appear before legislative bodies and advocate the enactment of such laws depriving the people of the liberty of speech and worship. The religious leaders and their allies attempt the destruction of those who serve God, even as Jehovah foretold that such hypocrites with their mouth destroy their neighbors; and the hypocrites do so because God’s message exposes them to the view of all honest people. For the comfort and hope of his people now on the earth Jehovah long ago foretold his present-day means of carrying on his “strange work” and what part his faithful people now on earth might have in that work. As progress is made in the study and understanding of this prophecy of Joel those of good will toward God will rejoice, and hence we commend to all of such the careful study of what follows.
(To be continued)
IS DEATH AN
SCIENTISTS and religionists who claim to be wise tell the people that “great men” living on the earth for a season accomplish much and then at death pass on to the next world, there to accomplish much more. Some have referred to the experience of death as the beginning of “the great adventure” into the unknown beyond. There is but one class of persons that can even by faith look with hope for a better place beyond this world, and that class of people is made up of those who are fully devoted to God as followers of Christ Jesus. No man can have the hope of passing at death into a better condition who has not believed upon God and upon Christ and his kingdom and has not devoted himself entirely to the Lord, and even that passing into a better condition can only take place beginning at a certain definite point of time, which time is marked by a prominent event in the onward march of God’s affairs.—See Revelation 14:13.
To support the popular religious teaching that the dead are conscious in heaven, or in purgatory, or in hell, the clergy must find that man has an immortal soul. “Immortality” means the quality or state of being deathless, unable
ADVENTURE?
to die or perish. It is easy to see that no creature could be for ever in conscious hell torment or in heaven or in purgatory if that creature could be killed, destroyed. Therefore the master mind behind such false doctrines said: ‘We must teach that man has an immortal soul.’ If, however, the Scripture proof is that man is a mortal soul, a soul subject to death, then the purgatory and torment theories must be completely false.
When God made the first man and placed him in the garden of Eden God said to man: 'In the day that you sin you shall surely die.’ (See Genesis 2:16,17.) That was the plain statement of God’s law. Did God mean that only the body should die? Ezekiel 18:4, 20 answers: “The soul that sinneth, it shall die.” Psalm 89:48: “What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul [not merely his body] from the hand of the grave ?"
In its “Ask and Learn” column, the Catholic TelegraphRegister, of Cincinnati, Ohio, as of March 31, 1939, quote, one of its inquirers and then answers, as follows: “Tht Bible says that, if a soul sins, it shall die. Please explain. [Answer] The soul’s death through sin is a figure of speech
190
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
which is used to indicate that the soul is turned away from its true end, God, by mortal sin. Grace, which is often spoken of as the life of the soul, is driven out of the soul by serious sin. But, strictly speaking, the soul cannot die since it is a spiritual substance which cannot corrupt.” Not only is this Catholic answer senseless, meaningless, but not a single scripture is cited or quoted in support of the answer. If the soul’s death means it is “turned away from its true end, God”, then what of Jesus, concerning whom the inspired prophecy (Isa. 53:12) says: “He hath delivered his soul unto death, and was reputed with the wicked: and he hath borne the sins of many, and hath prayed for the transgressors”? (Catholic Bible) Also Jesus’ own words in the garden of Gethsemane: “Then he saith to them: My soul is sorrowful even unto death.” (Matt. 26:38, Catholic Bible) Did Jesus’ soul die because “grace • . . is driven out of the soul by serious sin” of Jesus? Jesus did not say his “soul cannot die since it is a spiritual substance which cannot corrupt”.
In Eden Jehovah told Adam the eating of a certain fruit would result in his death. Satan the Devil desired to alienate man from God and have the worship of man for himself. Fraudulently and using the serpent as his medium, the Devil approached Eve and said to her: *¥00 can eat of that food; and if you do eat it, you will be as wise as God himself. You surely shall not die.’ Thus he induced Eve to disobey God.
The only support for the theory of immortality of all souls is what the Devil here said. God stated: “Thou shalt surely die.” The Devil stated: “Ye shall not surely die.” Whom will you believe, God or the Devil? The religionists have accepted the Devil’s statement and rejected God’s; therefore their teaching is false. The Devil was the father of lies, and this lie was his first. To the religious clergy of his time Jesus said: “Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it.”—John 8: 44.
The Devil himself is not immortal, because the Scriptures show that Jehovah God by Christ Jesus will destroy the Devil in due time. (Read Hebrews 2:14; Ezekiel 28:13-19.) Properly, then, we might put up to the clergy this question: If hell is a place of eternal torment, and if the Devil is the chief fireman there, who is going to keep up the fire when the Devil is destroyed?
Rather than already possessing immortality inherently, a Christian is admonished to “seek” immortality, incorruptibility. (Sec Romans 2:7.) A man does not seek that which he already possesses. God alone possesses the quality of immortality, as written at 1 Timothy 6:16: “Who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see: to whom be honour and power everlasting.”
When Jesus was on the earth he was not immortal, otherwise he could not have died on the tree; but God gave him immortality at his resurrection from the dead. (John 5:26; Rev. 1:18) The faithful overcoming Christians, of the <fbody of Christ”, are promised immortality as a glorious reward at the resurrection; as it is written: “This mortal must put on immortality.” (1 Cor. 15: 53, 54)
It would be inconsistent for the Lord to have put that into his Word if man were already immortal. Now, these scriptures show that man is a soul; that he is subject to death; that he is therefore not immortal; and these things being true, it must follow that a man, when he dies, could not go to heaven immediately, or go to a purgatory or to eternal torment.
People in sorrow like to believe that their loved ones have gone to a place of rest and peace, and so the clergy religionists have told the people that all the good members of their church go to heaven when they die. They have found no support for this in the Scriptures. Heaven is the habitation of Jehovah. No man ever has seen Jehovah or ever can see him. “For there shall no man see me [Jehovah], and live.” (Exodus 33:20; also 1 Timothy 6:16) Anyone who goes to heaven must be changed from human to spirit at his resurrection, thus to be like the glorified Christ Jesus.—1 John 3:2.
At the time Jesus was on earth more than four thousand years had elapsed since death entered the human race. Great numbers had died, and among them men whom God approved. A long list of these approved ones is given in the eleventh chapter of the epistle to the Hebrews. Not one there mentioned went to heaven. Concerning all the approved ones that had died up to the time Jesus was on earth he said: “No man hath ascended up to heaven.”— John 3:13.
Among such ones who were faithful to God was David, who was anointed to be king in Jerusalem. It is written concerning David that he was a man after God’s own heart. (1 Sam. 13:14; Acts 13: 22) David was used to foreshadow The Christ. The name David means “beloved”. At the dictation of Jehovah he was the writer of many of the Psalms. Surely if any men were to be taken to heaven at death David would be among them. But it is plainly written concerning him: “David is not ascended into the heavens.” That is what the apostle Peter stated under inspiration of the holy spirit, on the day of Pentecost, ten days after Jesus had ascended from earth to heaven. (Acts 2:34) John the Baptist was a good man, and received the approval of God, and was the one selected to announce the coming of the Savior of the world. He was beheaded shortly after Jesus began his ministry. He died because of his faithfulness to God. Yet Jesus declared that John the Baptist would never be of the heavenly kingdom class, for though none of earth might be greater than John the Baptist, yet the least in the kingdom of heaven would be greater than John. (Matt. 11:11) Psalm 45:16 shows that John is to be one of those whom Christ Jesus, “the Everlasting Father”, will “make princes in all the earth” under the heavenly kingdom.
Heaven is promised as a special reward to those who devote themselves to Jehovah God and are accepted in sacrifice with Christ Jesus and arc begotten as spiritual children of God and who then prove faithful unto God even unto death. Concerning such it is written: “God . . . hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible, and undcfiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time.” (1 Pet. 1:3-5) It is wholly unreasonable,
June 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
191
and inconsistent with Jehovah’s revealed purpose, that he would provide heaven for so-called "good people” in general, whereas Jehovah specifically states that it is only for those who, after the giving of Christ’s ransom sacrifice, are faithful unto death with him.—Rev. 2:10.
No creature could be enjoying bliss in heaven, or be undergoing suffering in purgatory or torture in a hell of fire and brimstone, or any other “adventure” after death, unless that creature were conscious at the time. Some clergymen try to qualify the statement as to bodily torment in hell by saying that the wicked are merely undergoing ‘mental torment’ because of the memory of their wickedness. Neither could this be true, unless the creature were conscious at the time and able to remember what had taken place. If now the Scripture proof establishes the fact that when one dies he has no knowledge nor wisdom; that he has no memory; that he cannot work and cannot think; and that he is in a condition of silence, such absolutely disproves the clergyman’s theory that the dead are undergoing any kind of suffering or any kind of joy.
God is true, and his written Word is true. Men are not true, nor is their word true, except when in harmony with God’s Word. (Note Romans 3:4.) Upon the question at issue the following quotations from the Word of God are submitted, with absolute confidence of establishing what is stated above:
Ecclesiastes 9:5, 6,10: “For the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not any thing, neither have they any more a reward, for the memory of them is forgotten. Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is done under the sun. Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest.”
Psalm 6:4, 5: “Return, 0 Lord, deliver my soul: oh save me for thy mercies’ sake. For in death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall give thee thanks ?”
Psalm 49:14: “Like sheep they are laid in the grave [(Hebrew) sheol; (Catholic Bible) in hell]; death shall feed on them.”
Psalm 115:17: “The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down into silence”; that is, down into the grave, hence not merely “spiritually dead”, so called.
Genesis 2:7 shows man was made of the elements of the earth, and when he dies he returns to the dust.—Gen. 3:19; Ps. 104: 29.
Ecclesiastes 3:19, 20: “For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth them: as the one dieth, so dicth the other; yea, they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preeminence above a beast: for all is vanity. All go unto one place; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again.”
According to Genesis 2:7, the breath of life animated man and made his organs function. No longer do they function when he ceases to breathe. “His breath goeth forth, he rcturneth to his earth; in that very day his thoughts perish.”—Ps. 146:4.
The clergy have attempted to apply these texts to the body only, and not to the soul. In this they are wrong; for it is the soul, animal or creature that ceases to exist at death, for the creature, animal or man is a soul. (Ezck. 18:4) The human soul is not a “spiritual substance which cannot corrupt”, as says the Catholic Telegraph-Register ; no, the human soul is the fleshly creature man himself, breathing and exercising his senses and intelligence. (1 Cor. 15:45) Therefore, the dead being actually dead and not immortal and alive, the inspired apostle points to the resurrection as the sole hope for the dead, and writes: “Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead ? But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen. And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain. Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God • because we have testified of God that he raised up Christ; whom he raised not up, if so be that the dead rise not. For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised; and if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye [Christians] are yet in your sins. Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished.” If they were immortal those dying could not perish. On the other hand, being mortal, those that die would perish for ever were there no resurrection of the dead in due time, to wit, under God’s kingdom. Christ’s resurrection is a guarantee that the dead shall be awakened to a resurrection. (1 Cor. 15:12-18) There shall be a resurrection of the dead, of both the just and the unjust. (Aets 24:15) Of this Jehovah God has offered faith to men by reason of the fact that Jesus was raised from the dead.—Acts 17: 31, Rotherham’s translation.
(Continued from page 178)
Saturday the 24th, from 3:00 to 4:00 p.m., and on Sunday, June 25, will address the public, 4:00 to 5:00 p.m., New York Eastern Daylight Saving Time. Consult the Informant for fuller details.
VACATION
Notice! The Brooklyn factory and office will be closed for the two weeks beginning Saturday, July 22, and concluding Sunday, August 6. This will enable the Bethel family, after a year of consistent strenuous activity here, to get away for a temporary change and to enjoy opportunities of field service in common with the other Kingdom publishers. All publishers will therefore order in advance enough supplies of literature to
last them over the Bethel vacation period, and to the end of August. Do this in good time to allow for shipment from here before the factory closes Friday evening, July 21. No orders will be filled and shipped, nor mail be opened and answered, during this vacation period.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of July 16: “Doom of Religion” (Part 1), fl 1-14 inclusive, The Watchtower June 15, 1939.
Week of July 23: “Doom of Religion” (Part 1), fl 15-31 inclusive, The Watchtower June 15, 1939.
Week of July 30: “Doom of Religion” (Part 1), fl 32-41 inclusive, The Watchtower June 15, 1939.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
A HOT PUBLIC MEETING IN SOUTH DAKOTA
"Sunday a publisher called on a Catholic woman, who had an ‘ax to grind’ from the very time approached. Immediately her husband dashed out of the house like a maniac, with an American flag in his hands, which he dropped before, the publisher, and in a commanding voice shouted: ‘Will you salute this flag?’ The publisher refused. The super-patrioteer became enraged: ‘I am a Catholic and a Legionnaire. Get the------off my property!’
The publisher removed himself quietly. While he was being escorted off, the wife laughed and boasted: ‘We are going to give you plenty of trouble before the day is over.’ She let the cat out of the bag. We anticipated trouble, so we arranged for the town marshal to be present at the assembly. He consented. Next day (Monday) an ex-judge of Lyman County favorable to our work told me: ‘In the 32 years I have lived in Presho I have never heard Catholic church bells ring 2:30 in the afternoon. I knew something was cooking or up.’ Shortly after 3 p.m. the people began to assemble. The majority present were Catholics. Upon seeing the town marshal present, the Catholic Action group could do nothing, nor even dared. They sat through two-thirds of the lecture; one took the speech down in shorthand. The ‘heat’ got too intense: up got two Catholics, then six, and six more, and left. About fifteen minutes before end of lecture some husky lads came into an adjacent room of the auditorium, to disturb our meeting by having band practice, but upon seeing town marshal they retreated. Catholic Action group had in mind to interfere with personal speaker, but, finding out the portable transcription machine was to speak, they sought to destroy records. They failed in the whole setup. While witnessing in Presho business territory Monday I learned the following from the justice of the peace, an ex-county judge, and other sources: A Catholic committee, went to the State attorney and made an appeal that Jehovah’s witnesses be prevented from having their meeting Sunday. They suggested methods to him to interfere with the meeting. Himself a staunch Catholic, he made reply: ‘If the Catholic organization cannot give reply to Judge Rutherford’s expos6 of the Roman Catholic organization, then they should go down. I’ll have nothing to do with interfering with the assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses. If you interfere you’ll just give them more publicity.’ Not getting any satisfaction from him, they approached the mayor of Presho and began to high-pressure him to interfere with our meeting. To this the mayor replied : ‘This is a free country. Nothing doing, men!’ Hence they tried to take the law into their own hands.”
WHEN ALL ELSE FAILS, TRY THE PHONOGRAPH
“Invited to the Watchtower study, they came — just once. As they never came again, one day after field service I stopped in to see them. They (Mr. and Mrs.) were both out in the barn milking, so I went out and talked to them there. Well, they were going back to ‘church’, the preacher had called, etc., and I talked all I could, at least half an hour, but to no avail. I tried to get permission to put on a model study, but they would not consent. By then they were through milking, so I asked them if they would go to the house and listen to a record. They finally consented. I played ‘Miracles’ and then ‘Instruction’, and laid The
192
Watchtower, Enemies and Face the Facts on the table and folded up the phonograph, preparing to go. Said he: ‘Well, I guess we’ll take The Watchtower.' Then they agreed to a model study, which we put on the next week, and then left one of the old, large phonographs and records with them. Now they are coming to the study.”
HOW ONE FAMILY SUPPORTER MAKES HER TIME
“I work every day from 7:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. to support the family. After work, at 6 p.m. a group of ten to twelve young witnesses go every night but Friday with the company servant in a beach wagon, out into the field for two or three hours. During the campaign with the Vindication books, all on one short country road, four houses in succession, I placed 14 books, 3 booklets, with 3 back-calls. During this period with The Watchtower I called on these persons. I got two new subscriptions, and the other one is getting it as soon as I go. I follow them up with the series and the model study. I call on them as soon as I get a chance (for I’m pretty well tied up with back-calls every night). They show a very good spirit. I put in as much time as I can. The Lord’s work comes first in every occasion. With the Lord’s grace I’m shooting for the sixty-hour goal, even though I work 44 hours a week, almost every week. I think the Lord has really blessed us with the phonograph and back-calls.”
SUPREME COURT DECISION AND TOURIST CAMP
“The man would not allow our work in there, claiming no one was allowed in. He took such stand ever since the flag-salute issue came up and was published. Saturday I took my little girls, 9 and 11; explained to him the purpose of calling. He objected and walked away. I approached him with the booklet Liberty to Preach and asked him if he would like to go contrary to the Supreme Court’s decision. He replied this was his property; and that was that' I told the little girls to go right ahead, and I followed in also. He threatened to call the police; to which I consented. He left for a few minutes, to come back with another man, warning me of results if I did not leave. By that time the girls finished the camp, leaving several booklets with the people; the Lord’s doing again. At Volusia County [Fla.], knowing of the man’s attitude toward our work I had an elderly publisher go from the back end of the camp. At the same time I succeeded in getting permission from the owner of the home and lot (an elevated place) right across from this man’s camp to put on by electrical transcription the lecture ‘The Kingdom the Hope of the World’. This kind of upset the tourist-camp man, who came to ask if I had permission to broadcast; to which I answered ‘Yes’. He then left, only to send another, with sleeves rolled up. I ignored him. He stated he was calling the sheriff. Later comes the old lady mother of the man ‘raising sand’ and calling names. At that time the lady of the house took part: ‘This man has permission from me to put on this lecture. This is my land and home. I am enjoying the lecture. Now you get to------and stay there.
The lecture ended. The volume was too loud to be interfered with by objectors. Many across heard it and enjoyed it, while at the same time the elderly brother called upon all cabins, placing much literature in there; the Lord’s doings I”
*fz. C? - •'
h>."

A;
r,‘ n
:
.1
W-
iwfiWi* j*
'■Ss3^






fe



V

. •
>
th




^7
SI
8

£
l'
iX^FCHTou^ml


;■?

Kg
S&
KS3
in?!
Z<
'£
/
i<
oiMrAk
/
f<
i

...■■X-C" rtif* L^- .
j




;• 'J

'<}> i#
t.

Zi,*’
z.
/»


An’
.<r:

*/W
■ n

They shall know that I am Jehovah^’
-Ezekiel 3545.
Vol. LX
Semimonthly
JULY 1, 1939
CONTENTS
No. 13
£ w it-
?-i!

£
m'U
s ft44il
i#-<
/




'fl
i.
i'-
i
Doom of Religion (Part 2) .....
Howl ........................
Fourth Trumpet.................
Things Required ...............
Field Experiences .............
Vacation ......................
Correspondence.................
Use Renewal Subscription Blank “Watchtower” Studies ..........
... 195 ... 199 ... 204 ..2oa ... 208 ... 194 .. 194
... 194 ... 194
A


E
V

Em





J??.'
R
?g
h
<«


'i
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	* Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President Vf. E. Van Amburgii, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 34:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that mau willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death In order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind ; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed In the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It Is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British .................... 34	Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian................. 40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian...........7	Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African .................Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
I’lease address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The 'Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. 7., under the Act of March S, 1S19.
VACATION
Notice! The Brooklyn factory and office will be closed for the two weeks beginning Saturday, July 22, and concluding Sunday, August 6. This will enable the Bethel family, after a year of consistent strenuous activity here, to get away for a temporary change and to enjoy opportunities of field service in common with the other Kingdom publishers. All publishers will therefore order in advance enough supplies of literature to last them over the Bethel vacation period, and to the end of August. Do this in good time to allow for shipment from here before the factory closes Friday evening, July 21. No orders will be filled and shipped, nor mail be opened and answered, during this vacation period.
CORRESPONDENCE
All brethren should write to the Society in English whenever possible. Letters written in foreign languages, such as Italian, Greek, Polish, etc., require extra time and work to handle. The suggestion is offered that foreign-speaking companies select as secretary some young brother or sister who speaks and writes English as well as the foreign language. This person can then write all letters to the Society in English at the dictation of the company servant, and when written the company servant can
sign the letters. This will result in more prompt handling of your orders and letters.
Brethren who live in countries outside of the United States and in which countries there arc branch offices of the Society should write to such branch offices rather than to Brooklyn.
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The blank sent you one month before expiration of your Watch tower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office in the country where you reside. Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals for The Watchtower, should always use these blanks. By filling in these renewal blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the time of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a great help if you sign your name uniformly, and note any recent change of address, on the renewal slip
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of August 6: “Doom of Religion” (Part 2), fl 1-21 inclusive, The Watchtower July 1, 1939.
Week of August 13: “Doom of Religion” (Part 2), fl 22-41 inclusive, The Watchtower July 1,1939.
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX	July 1, 1939	No. 13
DOOM OF RELIGION
PART 2
"Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land; not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for ivater, but of hearing the words of the1 Lord"—Amos 8:11.
TEHOVAH pronounced the doom of religion in I general, and specifically the doom of what is called J “the Christian religion”. The latter specifically reproaches Jehovah’s name. That religious system, by the use of the name Christ, is a mockery and a defamation of God’s holy name and is marked with hypocrisy from beginning to end. This is corroborative proof that religion is the creature and instrument of the Devil, brought into action for the very purpose of deceiving men and reproaching the name of Jehovah. The Devil has pursued his own crooked and wicked way, and that without let or hindrance until God’s due time to take action, and then, as the Scriptures clearly show, Jehovah maneuvers the forces of the Devil and brings them right into the place required for destruction according to his will. Jehovah now reveals to his faithful people these truths that their faith and hope may be strong and fail not. Feeding upon the Word of God, the faithful witnesses rejoice, knowing what will be the end.
1	That among the religionists there is today a great famine in the land called “Christendom”, for the hearing of the Word of God, there can not be the slightest doubt. The provender which the religious leaders have dished up and handed out to the people is without any food value whatsoever, and, instead of ministering life, peace and happiness to the people, that provender ministers unto them grief, spiritual sickness and death. There is an abundance of truth in God’s organization, and this declared by Jehovah’s witnesses is a marked contrast to the famine conditions that exist amongst the religionists. Seeing the result upon their pastures by reason of the proclamation of the truth, and that that result is the burning up of their pastures, the religionists howl and attempt to destroy the faithful men and women who, as God’s servants and under God’s command, bring to the attention of the people the truth and point them to the real, life-giving and life-sustaining food which the Lord has provided for those that love him.
8	God’s chosen and holy nation, selected and
equipped by the Lord to make known his name, and now used for that purpose, appears upon the scene at his command. They come without any desire or reason to use carnal weapons against anyone. They do not use carnal weapons, but that nation does work depredation and destruction upon the hypocritical religion and religious systems, and concerning this God’s prophet says: “He hath laid my vine waste, and barked my fig tree; he hath made it clean bare, and cast it away; the branches thereof are made white.”—Joel 1: 7.
4	The land of “Christendom", speaking by its religious leaders, claims to be God’s “vine”, that is, the visible expression of his kingdom on earth, and even the head of the religious system claims to be “the vicegerent of Christ”. The claim is entirely false and hypocritical to the last degree, but God permits them to make such claim and to go the full limit and then foretells the doom of religion and of religious practices. God sends forth his servants, the anointed remnant and their companions, his “other sheep”, to deliver his message against religion, and such message shows what “Christendom” really is. That message discloses that religion is a fraud and a snare and a racket, held forth in contrast to Christianity, and is a fraudulent representation of Christ. The truth declared shows that Christianity is true and that Christians are the ones who faithfully serve Jehovah God and Christ Jesus his King. Religion is shown as a waste and fruitless toward God, because it is against his King and kingdom. The truth discloses that “Christendom” has no cause for joy but is empty and void, having none of the “joy of the Lord” and no part in the kingdom of God, which shall vindicate his holy name. “Christendom,” which practices the so-called “Christian religion”, brings no joy or good cheer to God or man. (Judg. 9:13) That is a great calamity to those “drinkers of wine” of Babylon and who become “drunkards” upon such wine and who are commanded by the Lord to wake up and to view their deplorable condition. (Joel 1:5) Hearing that
195
W6	THE WATCHTOWER	Brooklyn, N. Y.
alarm at the mouth of the Lord repeated by his faithful witnesses on earth makes the religionists exceedingly mad, and they froth at the mouth and threaten all manner of violence against Jehovah’s witnesses and do what they can to carry out their violent desires.
‘As Jerusalem was the original planting of the Lord and became unfaithful, so “Christendom” for centuries has claimed to be the “vine” of God, and, it being in an implied covenant to perform accordingly, God speaks of the same now as “my vine”, “my fig tree.”
• Christ Jesus and the members of his body are “trees of righteousness, the planting of Jehovah”, that bring glory to Jehovah’s name. (Isa. 61:3, A.R.V.) “Christendom” loudly claims to be that tree of God’s planting, but the claim is false and, instead of bringing joy to the Lord, they bring great reproach to his name. “Christendom” has long claimed to be God’s “fig tree”, but she has brought forth no fruit whatsoever to the glory of the Lord. Therefore says the Lord: “He hath . . . barked my fig tree [(according to Rotherham) hath turned . . . my figtree to splinters].” The Lord’s message now sent forth by him through his faithful witnesses discloses that “Christendom” is totally barren of fruit and worthless because she has abandoned God and his kingdom and has sought promotion from Satan and hence is now a tree stripped even of its bark, dried up and dead. “Christendom,” being one of the trees of Satan, has sought to have the name of Christ attached to her, and hence, as stated in the parable, has said to God’s true fig tree: “Come . . . and reign over us,” but let us pursue our own selfish course. The scripture of the parable gives the answer: “But the fig tree [the true one] said unto them [Satan’s trees], Should I forsake my sweetness, and my good fruit, and go to be promoted over the trees [of the Devil’s organization]?” (Judg. 9:11) God’s true fig tree avoids the Devil’s organization, knowing that it is a deadly thing.
’ The “fig tree” is a symbol of God’s “holy nation” or kingdom. Jehovah selected Israel as his typical people, picturing his kingdom, and before that people were set the prospects of the kingdom; and when Christ Jesus came to that nation he pronounced his Father’s curse upon it because that nation had been unfaithful and had brought forth no fruit. (Matt. 21:19,20) Christ Jesus, with his apostles, set up the Christian organization, which organization is God’s and must be wholly obedient to God’s commandments. Soon thereafter ambitious men associated themselves with God’s organization, and those selfish and ambitious men soon substituted religion and religious practices for the true service of God. This they did, of course, because they were overreached by Satan the Devil. To be sure, God knew
this from the beginning and for that reason foretold it by his holy prophets. He foretold that “Christendom” would fail and that the kingdom prospects would be entirely removed from her. Now God sends forth his faithful remnant who have been gathered by Christ Jesus to the temple and these faithful witnesses are commanded to deliver and do deliver God’s message, and the truth declared by them exposes “Christendom” as a false fig tree; and concerning it the prophet Joel says: “He hath made it clean bare.” This shows, together with the undisputed facts, that the kingdom has been taken away from unfaithful “Christendom” and given to the nation (God’s holy nation) bringing forth the fruits thereof, even as the Lord foretold. (Matt. 21:43) This strips “Christendom” clean bare of the kingdom fruit in the eyes of all his people of good will. In the parable the Lord foretold this result: “He spake also this parable: A certain [one, Jehovah] had a fig tree planted in his vineyard; and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none. Then said he unto the dresser [Christ Jesus] of his vineyard, Behold, these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree [the Jewish nation], and find none: cut it down; why cumbereth it the ground? And he answering said unto him, Lord, let it alone this year also, till I shall dig about it, and dung it: and if it bear fruit, well; and if not, then after that thou shalt cut it down.”—Luke 13: 6-9.
8	As Jehovah permitted Israel to go on for eighteen centuries, so he has suffered “Christendom” to continue falsely claiming to represent Jehovah until the coming of Christ Jesus to his kingdom, particularly since his coming to the temple in 1918, at which time every hope and prospect has been taken away from “Christendom”, pictured by the barking and cutting down of that fig tree. The result is that “Christendom” is now a castaway and, according to Rotherham, God has “cast it down”. Jehovah sends his witnesses declaring his truth, thus casting down the religion which is called “the Christian religion”, and shows that the same is an abomination to him and that he has completely disowned “Christendom” and that it is entirely cast away from him. The branches of that unfaithful tree are bleached and made like ashes, and “Christendom” is a disreputable and forlorn sight. The publication of the book Enemies, in 1937, brought these facts prominently to the attention of honest people.
9	The message of God’s truth, which exposes “Christendom” and her so-called “Christian religion", shows that religion to be a fraud and a snare completely separate and distinct from Christianity and in opposition to Christianity, and hence separates “Christendom” from Christ Jesus, the Bridegroom: and so the Lord says to “Christendom”: "Lament
July 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
197
like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband [{Rotherham) the owner] of her youth.” (Joel 1: 8) The prospect of becoming the bride of Christ was once set before “Christendom”, and because of unfaithfulness that prospect has been entirely removed and now she is bereft of that prospect entirely and, like a cast-off and disowned virgin, “Christendom” is shown as being in deep grief and anguish. Jehovah tells her to weep and howl, and she does. Jehovah’s witnesses come with God’s message of truth informing “Christendom” that she has lost the one, Christ Jesus, to whom she supposed that she was espoused. “Christendom,” and particularly the leaders of her religious system, howl and declare that this “strange work” now carried on in the earth is Communistic and seditious, and that Jehovah’s witnesses are Communists and seditionists. They call upon their political allies to enforce the laws of the land against Jehovah’s witnesses on the theory that such witnesses are Communists and seditionists. The papa of the Vatican City is exposed by the truth and is shown not to be the vicegerent of Christ, the Bridegroom, and hence the claim made for that high dignitary is false and fraudulent. Hearing the sound of the message delivered by Jehovah’s witnesses from God’s Word the clergy or religious leaders become hysterical and rush about seeking the restraint and destruction of Jehovah’s witnesses. God’s “strange work” hurts them and fills them with great rage, but this is nothing as to how they will feel when Jehovah performs “his act, his strange act”, at Armageddon. Let it be understood that what is here said is not directed against individuals nor prompted by hate, but against a system, the offices of which are filled by men, and it is the religion and religious system that have brought great reproach upon Jehovah’s name, and such fraud he now exposes by his Word of truth.
10	A calamity has come upon “Christendom”, of which the Lord long ago foretold through his prophet: "The meat offering [(7?.F.) The meal offering] and the drink offering is cut off from the house of the Lord; the priests, the Lord’s ministers, mourn.” (Joel 1:9) “Christendom’s” grain fields and vineyards are smitten so that there is no corn produced to offer to the Lord as the first-fruits or to make a meal offering, nor are there any grapes to make wine to pour it as a drink offering unto the Lord. Jehovah’s locust plague has consumed the crops of "Christendom” so that there is no fruit or drink, and hence their religion cannot be carried on as in the past. There is no real wine of the Lord amongst them to make glad the heart, and no bread from heaven to strengthen them. (Ps. 104:15) Because of this calamity the priests of "Christendom” mourn and howl.
11	As the prophecy was fulfilled in miniature upon Jerusalem, so now it is fulfilled in completeness upon "Christendom”. God, foreknowing what would come upon “Christendom”, used his typical people to foretell the calamity that is now upon the religious practices. The Lord’s message today makes known that he has cut off all such religious offerings through his true sanctuary, and that includes the “elective elder” crowd. The sanctuary has been cleansed, and now the true worshipers of God must "offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness”. (Mal. 3:1-3) The Lord does not ask for nor will he receive religious offerings, because the same are a reproach to his name. It means that such offerings God regards as an abomination, and the one who offers them is described in these words: “He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man; he that sacrificeth a lamb, as if he cut off a dog’s neck; he that offereth an oblation, as if he offered swine’s blood; he that burneth incense, as if he blessed an idol. Yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul delighteth in their abominations.”—Isa. 66: 3.
12	The sleepers who have had too much of Babylon’s wine from “the vine of the earth” wake up and find themselves out of jobs and their pastures well stripped and burned. They have been hoodwinking the people for a long season, but now the message of Jehovah exposes their religious racket and the people of good will toward God forsake the religious systems and flee to Christ for refuge. The clergy have thought more of a job than of the Lord, and now they mourn because they are in a dreadful dilemma. The Lord by his prophet (Joel 2:17) advised the preachers and the clergy and other religionists what to do, but they refuse to give heed to such advice. Jehovah’s witnesses make known by proclaiming the truth of God’s Word that the Hierarchy clergy are not the servants of Jehovah; and that message of truth makes the clergy very mad, and they make a loud howl, because they know their racket is found out and that they have come far short of God’s requirements, and have failed. Likewise the “evil servant” class resents the publication of the Lord’s judgment against them. That class is ‘cut asunder’ from God’s organization, and their portion is appointed with the other hypocrites and they howl and gnash their teeth. (Matt. 24:48-51) The two classes together make up “the man of sin”, "the son of perdition,” and they are both now arrayed against God and his kingdom.
13	Jehovah’s “strange work”, which has now progressed for several years, has uncovered “the refuge of lies” (Isa. 28:15-17) and the practice of hypocrisy; and the wide devastation that has come upon “Christendom” is further described by the prophet in these words: “The field is wasted, the land mourn-
198
THE WATCHTOWER,
eth; for the corn is wasted; the new wine is dried up, the oil languisheth.”—Joel 1:10.
“Jehovah’s "strange work” makes the religious fields a miserable sight like a field the vegetation of which has been destroyed by pests. The land shows no sign of fertility, and the beauty of growing crops and fruits has entirely disappeared. Such is the present state of "Christendom”, in which there is a famine for the hearing of the Word of God. “Christendom” now becomes a by-word and a stench, and the Lord describes it in this language: “The land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled: for the Lord hath spoken this word. The earth mourneth, and fadeth away; the world languisheth, and fadeth away; the haughty people of the earth do languish. The eaTth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.”— Isa. 24:3-5.
18	The clergy and religious leaders of “Christendom”, instead of giving heed to the counsel of the Lord, grow indignant, and they cry out to the people: “What we need is more religion.” The Lord laughs at them in derision, and the honest people know, that religion is a snare and fake and a racket. Hence the true ones are earnestly seeking Jehovah God and his King, Christ Jesus, and rendering service unto the Most High. In “Christendom” three elements control, namely, religion, politics and commercial traffickers, and these have been fully linked up together and been trying to hold each other up, and the politicians, with the clergy, shout: “Give us more religion.” Jehovah describes the situation in these words: “For the land is full of adulterers; for because of swearing [cursing] the land mourneth; the pleasant places of the wilderness are dried up, and their course [violence] is evil, and their force is not right. For both prophet and priest are profane; yea, in my house have I found their wickedness, saith the Lord. Wherefore their way shall be unto them as slippery ways in the darkness; they shall be driven on, and fall therein; foi* I will bring evil upon them, even the year of their visitation, saith the Lord.”—Jer. 23:10-12, margin.
18	In “Christendom” there is no substantial, basic food available: “For the corn is wasted: the new wine is dried up [ashamed (7?.V.); is abashed (Roth.)], and the [olive] oil languisheth.” Such is the present-day condition of “Christendom”. She is without spiritual nourishment, and hence the religionists look to the politicians and the money-changers to hold “Christendom’s” organization together. There is no more “joy of the Lord” amongst the religionists, because now they are against Jehovah God and against his King and kingdom and have gone entirely away to Satan and his world and have become a part of it.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
The Lord is revealing these truths today for the special aid and benefit of the people of good will, the Jonadabs, and, this information coming to them, they discern the miserable situation of religion and religionists, and they are fleeing to God’s kingdom that they might there find protection and refuge before and during Armageddon. Many sincere people have been under the influence and control of religious systems of “Christendom”, and now those of good will are quickly separating themselves from the unrighteous and unholy thing.
1T	The message of Jehovah’s kingdom proclaimed within the hearing of the religionists is a torment to them, but they do not give heed thereto and seek the way of reformation and forgiveness; and so the Lord says to “Christendom”, and particularly to the religious leaders, who have planted the religious seed: “Be ye ashamed, O ye husbandmen; howl, O ye vinedressers, for the wheat and for the barley; because the harvest of the field is perished.”—Joel 1:11.
18	The clergy, instead of sowing the seed of God’s kingdom and pointing to it as the only hope of the world, have planted the seed of the wicked one Satan, and their present day of calamity is now upon them and is due to their unfaithfulness to God. Not willing to be honest with themselves and openly confess their wrongful course, they go on hypocritically scattering religious seed, indulging in politics, and all other worldly schemes, and that without shame. God’s published message has brought to the attention of “Christendom” the miserable condition in which she finds herself, but it does not cause them to repent. The clergy angrily denounce Jehovah’s witnesses, who at God’s command bring this message within their reach, and thus they fight against God and against his kingdom. The clergy claim, and for a long time have claimed, to be the “vinedressers” and “husbandmen” of the Lord on the earth, but such is only a pretense. They serve God with their mouths, but, as Jesus said of them, their hearts are removed far from him. (Matt. 15: 6-9) They drink deep of the wine of “the vine of the earth” and openly commit fornication with the Devil’s organization. (Rev. 14:18-20; Rev. 17:1,2; Jas. 4:4) “Christendom” and her religious leaders, in particular, spurn God’s kingdom, continue to indulge in religious practices, and hence have no “feast of weeks” or of harvest. The Lord does not show any more favor to such practitioners of hypocrisy. The time is here to feed the “great multitude”, the Lord’s “other sheep”, and, instead of having some part in doing that work to the glory of the Lord, the religionists put forth their strongest endeavors to deprive the “great multitude” of the opportunity of learning of God and of his King and kingdom. Thus, as did the Pharisees, they
July 1, 1939
SEe WATCHTOWER-
199
refuse to enter into or support the kingdom, and do all they can to keep others from receiving the blessings thereof.—Matt. 23:13.
18	Religion has been the chief means of bringing reproach to the name of Jehovah; and since “Christendom” has become entirely religious and antiChristian and hence against the kingdom of God under Christ, Jehovah has taken away from her all favors; and concerning which he foretold through his prophet the following: “The vine is dried up, and the fig tree languisheth; the pomegranate tree, the palm tree also, and the apple tree, even all the trees of the field, are withered; because joy is withered away from the sons of men.” (Joel 1:12) God has made it hot for religionists by “turning on the heat” since the coming of Christ Jesus. This is the effect of the expression of his indignation against hypocrisy. The scorching, dry season is upon “Christendom”, and her days of grief are here. God foretold the present-day conditions also through his prophet in the following words: “And now, go to; I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard: I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down; and' I will lay it waste; it shall not be pruned nor digged; but there shall come up briers and thorns; I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant; and he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry.”— Isa. 5:5-7.
20	By the words of his prophet aforesaid the Lord specifically described the devastation of “Christendom” and of all the religious systems. Thus it is seen, as Jesus foretold, the kingdom interests are completely removed from “Christendom” and God has turned on the heat and dried her up. (Matt. 21:19,20) The pomegranate tree furnished the design for the temple and for the temple service (Ex. 28: 33, 34); and Palestine, the land of promise, was called “a land of . . . pomegranates”. (Deut. 8:8; Num. 13:23) The “palm tree” here mentioned evidently means the fruit-bearing date-palm (2 Chron. 31:5, margin); and the “apple tree”, the fruit of which is a source of comfort, is like that described in Proverbs 25:11. Furthermore, says the prophet, “even all the trees of the field are withered.” All are barren and have no sign of the kingdom of God. Why? Because “joy is withered away from the sons of men”. There is in “Christendom” no joy of the Lord, because none of the religionists and religious leaders of “Christendom” rejoice in the coming of the kingdom of God under Christ. They have no interest in the vindication of Jehovah’s name, but, on the contrary, they cast in their lot with Satan, the
god of this world of wickedness. (2 Cor. 4:4; Jas. 4:4) Since the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple, in 1918, the joy of the true lovers of God and his King and kingdom continues to increase, but the hatred and bitter opposition to that kingdom and its supporters increase with the religionists. Both the ultrareligionists and the “evil servant” class are totally without joy of the Lord. Therefore with them, as with all who hold to Satan’s organization, it is a time of great woe. (Rev. 12:12) By another of his prophets Jehovah describes “Christendom’s” miserable state in these words: “There is a crying for wine in the streets; all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone.”—Isa. 24:11.
21	While the woes upon the world increase and the religionists, particularly the clergy, continue their ever-increasing bitter persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses, the faithful remnant and companions rejoice, and so these words are put in the mouth of such by the Lord and they sing: “Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labour of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.” —Hab. 3:17,18.
HOWL
22	As is well known by all, and admitted by themselves, the leaders in the practice of religion are those who compose the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and the clergy; and these, together with the “evil servant” class, forming 'the man of sin, the son of perdition’ crowd, although professing no alliance with each other,.work together. Jehovah having entered final judgment against them and made known that judgment, he tells that crowd to listen to what he has to say to them and then howl: “Gird yourselves [with sackcloth (7?.T7.)], and lament, ye priests; howl, ye ministers of the altar; come, lie all night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God: for the meat offering and the drink offering is withholden from the house of your God.”—Joel 1:13.
23	In the miniature fulfillment of this prophecy the priestly company served at the altar, but the nonpriestly Levites were not permitted in the inner court where the altar was situated. Now in the complete fulfillment of the prophecy upon “Christendom” the priestly class, the clergy and the “evil servant” class, have assumed to serve at God’s altar, all of such claiming to be the priests and representatives of God on earth. Such priests see and hear the spread of the proclamation of Jehovah’s judgment against religion, and particularly against the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, which is the highest expression of religion. These priests grow frantic and tear their hair and pound their breast with vexation and rage
200
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
at the devastating effect of the message. They see their many parishioners slipping away from them and their pastures denuded. Foreknowing this, God in derision says to them: ‘Howl, ye ministers of the altar, ye have assumed to be the ministers of God and still claim to be such; therefore come lie all night in sackcloth and ashes, ye ministers of my God, which ye claim to be.’ It is truly the nighttime, because now darkness covers the earth, particularly concerning religion. The facts now well known show that the very thing the prophecy of Joel foretold is now taking place amongst those “ministers” who have been feeding upon the things offered at the altar, and so these privileges are now taken away from them. And why should they not howl? Their income is being cut down and their pastures dried up or burned up, and they are out of a job and their days are about finished. So God tells them to mourn all night because Armageddon is near. Jehovah continues to send forth his servants to proclaim the message of truth, and this they do “day and night”, meaning all the time, and that fact intensifies the anger of the clergy and they continue to howl. Being wrapped in sackcloth does not permit them to have a very peaceful sleep. Their official garments serve no good purpose to alleviate their miseries. Their newspapers now being published throughout the earth rant and fume, and indulge in all manner of lies against Jehovah’s witnesses because of the proclamation of God’s truth, and thus they by spite and ill will advertise God’s messengers and his message of the kingdom. The Catholic publications have much to say against Jehovah’s witnesses, and in doing so their publications arouse the interest among honest subjects, the “Catholic population”, and these honest ones are induced to investigate. Thus they find the truth and flee from the religious organizations, that they may find refuge under Christ. Of course, this brings about further devastating effect upon the Hierarchy, causing the honest seekers who have been amongst the religionists to withhold their patronage and financial support. The people are getting no spiritual food from the religious leaders, and the honest ones see that there is no further occasion for them to bring any financial support to the religionists to keep them going. The famine is on in “Christendom” for the hearing of the spiritual truth. The religionists have no spiritual food but, they being constantly angered, their howl constantly increases. Frantically the religious leaders demand of their political allies that something be done to stop those “pestiferous” Jehovah’s witnesses. As a result, in the legislative assemblies laws are proposed which, if enacted and enforced, would deprive the sincere Christians of hearing the truth of God’s Word. The effort to enact such laws advertises the miseries of the religionists,
and also advertises the truth of God’s Word, so that the truth concerning the kingdom is preached under all circumstances; and this makes the religionists howl more and more with ever-increasing anger.
24	Who is responsible for this state of famine in the land of “Christendom”? The religious clergy declare that Jehovah’s witnesses, whom they call “Communists”, are the responsible ones. In this they are very wrong again. The faithful Christians who are proclaiming the message of God’s kingdom are not Communists. They are entirely separate from all political parties or companies, and their devotion and service is to Jehovah God and his kingdom under Christ, and to none other. Who, then, has brought about the famine in “Christendom”? The correct answer is given by God’s prophet in these words, to wit: “Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land; not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord; and they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east; they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it.”—Amos 8:11,12.
25	Mark this, that Jehovah says: “I will send a famine in the land.” He makes it clear that he is the one that has brought about this condition of devastation upon “Christendom”, and this because of the unfaithfulness of those who have assumed to represent him but who have shown themselves to be out-and-out hypocrites, and he declares that “the hypocrite’s hope shall perish”. (Job 8:13) The clergy have claimed to be the chief ones on the earth of God’s organization. Having turned entirely unto religion, they are sinners, and to them Jehovah says: “The sinners in Zion are afraid; fearfulness hath surprised the hypocrites; Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?” (Isa. 33:14) Those religionists now hear the sounding of the doom of religion, and they are frightened and continue to howl.
26	There is a possible remedy that might be applied by the individuals of “Christendom”, but the religious leaders make no effort to avail themselves of such remedy. God knows that they will not avail themselves of the remedy, but he tells them about it, that they may have no excuse to say that they did not know. Therefore the Lord says to the religionists, who claim to represent him: “Sanctify ye a fast, call a solemn assembly; gather the elders, and all the inhabitants of the land, into the house of the Lord your God, and cry unto the Lord.”—Joel 1:14.
2T	If the clergy should obey God’s command and indulge in the fasts commanded, of necessity they must cease their religious practices and observances in which they have been indulging in order to appear respectable to the world. The real fasting which
July 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
201
God has commanded would bring upon the clergy the reproach of Satan and his agents. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy never indulge in the fasts commanded by the Lord, because they make up the chief ones of Satan’s representatives on the earth. They do indulge in an outward show of fasts, and they do lament and howl for the effect they hope the same will have upon the public, but such is not the fast which God calls upon them to sanctify. The fast in which the religionists indulge is hypocritical, because they make an outward show hoping to influence the people; and concerning such the Lord says: “Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness; ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to be heard on high. Is it such a fast that I have chosen! a day for a man to afflict his soul ? is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? wilt thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord ?” —Isa. 58:4,5.
’’The religious leaders in the days when Jesus was first on earth indulged in such hypocritical fasts, and, addressing his disciples, Jesus said: “Moreover, when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance; for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face; that thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly.”—Matt. 6:16-18.
19	In the prophecy of Joel the Lord is telling the religionists to fast or refrain from the food they have been using to hoodwink the people, namely, religious doctrines and practices. They have had nothing to feed upon but religious food, and such food they have served to the supporters of religion, which is of no value; and God’s command is that their ministers and the people refrain from such religious food. Their fast should be similar to that in which the people of good will at Nineveh indulged upon hearing of God’s judgment. (Jonah 3:5) No one is commanded to fast from the truth. It is the truth of God’s Word that he brings to the people and invites them to feed upon it and live. Religionists do not have the truth, but they have substituted for truth the doctrines of men. Now the Lord tells them to cease from such and turn to the truth and feed upon what God has provided. Those who are amongst the religionists who would find relief must obey this command and fast from what the religious leaders have been serving them. To obey that command of Jehovah would put such in the class with Christ Jesus, and upon them would fall reproach like that which fell upon the Lord. (Rom. 15:3) The clergy steer clear of all things of that kind. The honest ones
amongst the religionists are anxious to obey the Lord, and they do so, and they find relief, protection and blessings under the Lord’s organization.
80	Further instructing them, Jehovah says: “Call a solemn assembly [a day of restraint (margin)]” On the day following the end of the “feast of tabernacles” the faithful Israelites did call a solemn assembly. (Num. 29:35) It was then a time of restraint from doing servile work, serving creatures, or indulging in activities for self-gain. Instead of seeking and serving selfish things, they must assemble and seek God at his temple. Today the kingdom interests must be uppermost in the mind and heart of those who attend such solemn assemblies, otherwise called the “day of restraint”. “Christendom,” that is, those who practice what is called the “Christian religion”, would not call such assembly the “day of restraint”, because to do so they would have to abandon all their religious ceremonies and political affiliations and activities, all of which things are selfish and used for self-gain. It would mean that all “Catholic Action” would have to cease and be completely abandoned; and the Hierarchy would never agree to that.
81	Further admonishing the religionists, Jehovah says to them: “Gather the elders [the old men (R.V.); that is to say, the dreamers mentioned in Joel 2: 28].” They too need to engage in such a fast or day of restraint. They must cease their religious dreams and speculations and guesses and turn wholly to the truth of God’s kingdom. They have much responsibility as examples to the younger ones. This applies to the “elective elder” class of the present day. Let all who continue to hold to religious practices, which were indulged in during the “Elijah period”, cease from the same, turn away therefrom and give full attention to the service and the interest of the kingdom of God. This admonition includes “all the inhabitants of the land”, that is, all who have made a covenant to do the will of God. Religionists, if they would heed the admonition, must cease from making the professed house of God a “den” of commercial grafters (Jer. 7:11), and must face about and “serve God and his King”.
82	There is a two-fold purpose in God’s placing upon the religionists and those under the religious leaders the responsibility to call a day of fasting or restraint, to wit: (1) To give warning to all who indulge in religion, and (2) to disclose the only means of escape from Satan’s organization, which God provides for those who are of good will toward him. There are those amongst the religious leaders and under their influence who sigh and cry because of the abominations done in “Christendom”, and such persons must have an opportunity to hear and learn what is the way of escape and where they may find
202
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
safety. Therefore God commands that “all the inhabitants” assemble at the house of the Lord and “cry unto the Lord”. (Joel 1:14) By so doing they acknowledge their guilt in having followed and practiced religion and its traditions rather than hearing and obeying the Word of God and worshiping him in spirit and in truth. They must recognize that the judgment now proclaimed is not the judgment of Joel the prophet nor of any man nor of the witnesses of the Lord, but that it is God’s judgment and his expression of condemnation of religious practices. They must call upon the name of the Lord for mercy and express their determination to serve him and keep his commandments to promote the interests of the kingdom. They must seek righteousness and meekness and become obedient. (Zeph. 2:3) When must this be done? Now, at the present time, before Armageddon begins. It will be too late to cry unto the Lord when Armageddon begins. When the battle of Armageddon is on, “then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me; for that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord: they would none of my counsel; they despised all my reproof; therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices.”—Prov. 1: 28-31.
88 For several centuries Satan has carried on his religious and other operations without interruption; but the end of such time must come, and did come when Jehovah enthroned Christ Jesus and sent him forth to rule while the enemy Satan is still active. (Ps. 110: 2) Therefore the Lord by his prophet says: "Alas for the day! for the day of the Lord is at hand, and as a destruction from the Almighty shall it come.” (Joel 1:15) The day of Jehovah began in A.D. 1914. Satan has had his day, and he must now get out. The war in heaven was fought, and Satan was cast down to the earth. (Rev. 12:1-9) Then in 1918 judgment began at the house of God. (1 Pet. 4:17) The day of tribulation God then stopped for a season in order that the witness work might be done. This he did for the benefit of those who loved God and his kingdom and that the Lord’s “other sheep” might be gathered. (Matt. 24: 22) Since that day is the time in which God is doing his “strange work”. This is the time when God causes his adverse judgment against Satan’s organization to be made known, serving warning upon all and disclosing to those of good will the only means of escape from destruction which soon shall follow. In this day of his “strange work” Jehovah sends his army of ‘locusts”, which constitutes a plague upon “Christendom”, and the heat is turned on against religion. (Joel 1:4,10,12) This is a warning that the battle of the great day of God Almighty is close by. The wrath of God does not stop with the locust plague and the rain
less season of famine in “Christendom”, but reaches a climax at Armageddon. Now is the time of the ‘destroying pests’ upon “Christendom” or religion. Hence the plague is not from men. It is not another religious campaign of men or a propaganda movement such as the atheists, Bolsheviks and Communists, and other godless radicals, carry on. It is from Almighty God, who now sends forth his servants and messengers to declare his name and his purpose, and which he commands must be done immediately preceding the battle of Armageddon.—Ex. 9:16, Leeser.
84 There is no scarcity of spiritual food in God’s storehouse, but the famine is all on “Christendom”, and that famine is for the hearing of the Word of God and is due to the fact that God has closed the door to “Christendom”. “Is not the meat cut off before our eyes, yea, joy and gladness from the house of our God?” (Joel 1:16) The religious leaders know that God has forsaken them. This text, according to Rotherham, makes it clear and shows the religious leaders as saying: “Is it not before our eyes that food hath been cut off?” Jehovah’s wrath is toward “Christendom”, exactly as God declared both to typical and to antitypical Jerusalem by the mouth of Moses. “But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day; that all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee.” (Deut. 28:15) There is an abundance of spiritual food being scattered throughout the earth by Jehovah’s witnesses, and it comes from God’s storehouse, but “Christendom” has no access to and no part in the distribution thereof. Neither the Roman Catholic clergy nor other religious leaders or “evil servant” class have anything to do with dispensing the spiritual food of the Lord. None of them are for the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and hence they are against the kingdom. All food from the Lord’s storehouse that is carried to the people is being carried by Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions, the Jonadabs, and all of these together are acting through the Watchtower organization. The religionists of “Christendom” see this fact and desperately attempt to prevent Jehovah’s servants from carrying the spiritual food to the common and hungry people.
35 In recent months God has clearly revealed to his faithful servants the distinction between the so-called “Christian religion” and Christianity, the truth of and concerning which exposes to plain view the emptiness of the religious systems, showing the people that they can get from religion nothing that is helpful, but only that which is detrimental, and that their only help comes from following and obeying Christ Jesus, hence being real Christians. The book Enemies contains the truth concerning religion
THE WATCHTOWER.
203
July 1, 1939
and Christianity, and within a short time after it was released the circulation thereof reached more than two million volumes, and the booklet Cure, which contains a succinct statement of the falsity of religion and what is Christianity, within a few months actually had a circulation of more than twelve million amongst the people. This work the Lord fitly illustrates by the plague of the locusts eating up what little had been left in “Christendom”. The “purgatory” racket, which has for a long time been a source of much revenue to the Hierarchy, is now completely exposed as the greatest money-inak-ing racket that has ever operated; and this greatly frightens and makes mad the clergy. Their own publications give forth more evidence of this fact.
88 The “strange work” of Jehovah, which he has done and is doing by his faithful servants, by his army of “locusts”, has taken the joy and gladness from the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, whose god is Satan. Hence they say: “Yea, joy and gladness [are cut off] from the house of our God.” That house which once loudly claimed to be distributing spiritual provender has now become the house of commercial and political robbers. Such well describes Catholic Action, and therefore says a one-time Jesuit clergyman in his book Rome Stoops to Conquer: “Catholicism is now something that partakes of clannishness and that is constituted in a large part by social and political club affiliation. Catholic action in practice is the Catholic group fighting their way to control America”; politically and financially, of course. No religious leader believes, and hence none teaches, that Christ Jesus has come to the temple of God, and they therefore have no understanding or appreciation that the kingdom of Christ is here. As it was with the religious Jews, so it is now with "Christendom”, to whom the Lord says: “Your house [of religion] is left unto you desolate.”—Matt. 23: 38.
8T The spiritual crops of “Christendom” have completely failed: “The seed is rotten [the seeds rot (R.F.)] under their clods, the garners are laid desolate, the barns are broken down; for the corn is withered.” (Joel 1:17) There is a complete absence of and prospect for a new crop. God has now made it clearly to appear that nothing good can spring from religion. The seeds of religion now rot because sown at the instance of the Devil, and his day is done. The people can gain nothing from religion. All the people of good will toward God now realize this fact and flee from the religious systems and seek protection in Christ. The great heat from the truth turned on by the Lord, and the complete absence of the rain of truth upon “Christendom”, have turned her barns into useless things, and there is no food supply to put in them, and none to take from them, for the people. The religionists do not appreciate the true
state of affairs. Those who are honest among them do appreciate the true situation, and they sigh and cry because of the abominations which are done in “Christendom”, and the Lord hears their cry and sends them spiritual food through his faithful servants.—Ezek. 9:1-10.
S8 The credulous common people have been the beasts of burden for the clergy and other religious leaders, political and commercial, and these now seeing the desolate condition are much perplexed and in distress. “How do the beasts groan! the herds of cattle are perplexed, because they have no pasture; yea, the flocks of sheep are made desolate.” (Joel 1:18) The entire system of religion is doomed and headed for early destruction. The very opposite state or condition exists amongst the people of God, who are described by the Lord in these words: “Jerusalem [those who are of God’s organization and who follow peace and serve G od and his King] shall be inhabited as towns without walls [needing no protection] for the multitude of men and cattle therein.”—Zech. 2:4.
89 By his prophet Jehovah tells the people what they should do, but the religious leaders refuse to hear. Those who are of good will, and who are getting their eyes opened to the truth, are shown by the prophet as using these words: “0 Lord, to thee will I cry; for the fire hath devoured the pastures of the wilderness, and the flame hath burned all the trees of the field.” (Joel 1:19) Instead of the religious clergy leaders’ joining with the common people of good will in this crying unto the Lord, they continue to call down God’s blessing upon the political and commercial schemes of the world and at the same time try to destroy those who do bring God’s message of good cheer to the hungry ones. The man recently elevated to the post of pope of the Hierarchy calls for his blessing upon the United States, and, of course, this is done for political effect. The pope’s blessing has already been bestowed upon the murderer who has destroyed Spain and Abyssinia and wrecked many other people’s homes in different parts of the land.
40 Continuing to disclose the miserable condition that has been brought about amongst the people of the religious agents of Satan, God, through his prophet, says: “The beasts of the field cry also unto thee; for the rivers of waters are dried up, and the fire hath devoured the pastures of the wilderness.” —Joel 1:20.
41 The religious leaders have made life miserable for the common people, who are really the ‘beasts of burden’, and whom the Hierarchy calls “the children of the church”. Jehovah now makes it clearly to appear that religion, which is of the Devil, is responsible for the famine conditions in “Christendom” for the hearing of the Word of God. Organized religion
204
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
is the enemy of God, and the destructive foe of the people. Upon the religious systems and religious practice God sends no more rain, that is, no more blessings. Religious systems are marked and branded for destruction, which only waits until the witness work, God’s “strange work”, is finished. The alarm of warning must be sounded now, to the end that none of the religious practitioners may say that they did not hear about the kingdom, and, furthermore, that those amongst the religious systems that are of good will may find a way to flee. This is the work which God long ago foretold, and which is a "strange
work” to all who do not have the spirit of the Lord. It is the work of Jehovah, in which he uses the remnant of his people and their companions, and both of these must now give close attention to God’s commandments and strictly obey. The faithful, anointed remnant and the “other sheep” of the Lord greatly rejoice, because they see that the kingdom of God under Christ is at hand and that complete deliverance is near. Let all such continue to diligently hear and obey the Lord’s commandments and learn of his purpose and what is their daily duty.
(To be continued)
FOURTH
IN THE visions of the revelation given to the apostle John on the prison isle of Patmos in the Aegean sea, he saw “seven angels which stood before God” and to whom were given “seven trumpets”. Manifestly these seven angels picture spirit creatures clothed with authority to perform certain duties in Jehovah’s organization. These are designated as seven in number because seven is the number symbolic of perfection or completeness in things spiritual. Even so these angels were used to deliver all of the seven distinct proclamations, which proclamations were made world-wide, one each year from A.D. 1922 on.
In the year 1918 Christ Jesus, the King greater than Solomon, began to build the temple of Jehovah God. Of this temple each member of the body of Christ forms a “living stone”. Seven years have now passed. It is A.D. 1925. Jehovah continuing to direct the movement of his organization, the fourth angel of the Lord sounds his trumpet, and, as Revelation 8:12 records, “the third part of the sun was smitten, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of the stars; so as the third part of them was darkened, and the day shone not for a third part of it, and the night likewise.” Even so, the “third part” of the following group composed of (1) Big Business, symbolized by the golden "sun” of prosperity; (2) the so-called “statesmen” or lawmaking element, symbolized by the moon; and (3) the fraudulent clergy, symbolized by the stars, claimed to be the light of the world, and they have falsely used the slogan: “Make the world safe for democracy,” and they say concerning the League of Nations: “In a world as dark as this why blow out the only light there is ?” They hold forth themselves and their schemes as the saviors of men. Their glory must be broken.
God directed his angel, the fourth, to sound, and directed his people on earth, as his witnesses and members of his capital organization, to take up the message sounded and herald it on. In August, 1925, at a general convention of God’s people assembled in the city of Indianapolis, Indiana, a resolution “Message of Hope” was unanimously adopted by Jehovah’s witnesses, which, together with the discourse in support thereof, to wit, “A Standard for the People,” was heralded by word of mouth and by radio and by the printed copies to millions of people throughout the earth.
The year 1925 is a parallel of the year 1028 B.C., when King Solomon, after seven years of work on the temple,
TRUMPET
dedicated it and then in his public prayer to God included a petition in behalf of the “stranger that is not of thy people Israel, but cometh out of a far country for thy name’s sake; for they shall hear of thy great name”. (1 Ki. 8:41,42) In parallel action, the world-wide proclamation of A.D. 1925 was a message of hope addressed to the people of good will, the “great multitude” out of all nations and people, the Lord’s “other sheep”, and who were foreshadowed by the “stranger that is within thy gates”.—Ex. 20:10.
“MESSAGE OF HOPE
“To All People of Good Will:
“The International Bible Students [Jehovah’s witnesses] in general convention assembled send greetings:
“When in the course of human affairs the nations have reached a condition of extremity it is due time that the peoples give consideration to the inducing causes, to the proffered remedies and to the true remedy. We humbly invite consideration of this message to the end that the peoples might find consolation therein and hope for their future welfare.
“For centuries man has been the victim of oppression, war, famine, sickness, sorrow and death. At all times he has desired peace, prosperity, health, life, liberty and happiness.
“World powers, science and philosophy, commerce and religion, have each in turn offered their respective remedies for man’s relief. In the name and under the guise of democracy, these combine in offering their joint and several powers to meet the requirements of man. Together they claim to be the sunlight of the world, holding forth all the light that shines to enlighten and guide the human race.
“Intrigue, duplicity and trickery are freely resorted to by the political and commercial powers; science and philosophy are marked by vanity and self-sufficiency; while the religionists, both Catholic and Protestant, are conspicuous by their arrogance, self-conceit, impiety and ungodliness. Therefore it is apparent that the remedies offered by any and all of these afore-mentioned elements are vain, impotent and powerless to satisfy man’s desire.
“Catholicism claims and assumes that which justly belongs exclusively to God. Modernists deny God, deny his Word and his purpose of redemption and offer blind force as a remedy for man’s undone condition. Fundamentalists,
July 1,1939
THE WATCHTOWER.
205
while professing to believe the Bible, by their course of action deny the same. They teach false and God-dishonoring doctrines and together with Catholics and Modernists are allied with the political and commercial powers of the world in blasphemously claiming the ability to establish God’s kingdom on earth. All of these have combined, under Satan their superlord, to push God into a corner and to dishonor his name.
“The results are that the peoples are smarting under the oppressive weight of commercial profiteers and their allies, have lost faith in their political leaders and no longer have respect for the religionists who have misled them. Being guided by the false light of such an ungodly and unholy alliance, the peoples have fallen into darkness. They are like lost sheep scattered upon the mountain tops without a shepherd and are without food and shelter and are made the prey of wild beasts.
“The causes for this deplorable condition are that man by reason of original sin fell from perfection; and that Satan the enemy of God and all righteousness is the invisible ruler or god of this evil world and by his various agencies has turned the minds of many peoples away from God and from his truth.
“The greatest crisis of the ages is impending and about to fall, because the old world has ended and Satan’s lease of power is done. Knowing this, and that his time is short, the Devil is trying to overwhelm the peoples with a great flood of false and deceptive doctrines and to turn their minds completely away from Jehovah. The time has come for God to make for himself a name in the earth and for the peoples to know the truth concerning the divine purpose, which is the only means of salvation for the world.
“Therefore, in the name and in the spirit of the Lord, the standard of God’s truth and righteousness is here lifted up against the enemy and for the benefit of the peoples, which standard is, to wit:
“That Jehovah is the only true God, the Most High, the Almighty, the author and finisher of his great purpose for the salvation of man, and is the rewarder of all that diligently seek and obey him; that the Bible is his revealed "Word of truth; that his beloved Son Christ Jesus is the Redeemer and Deliverer of mankind and, true to his promise, has come to rule and bless the peoples; that the present turmoil, distress and perplexity of the nations is in fulfillment of prophecy, proving that Satan’s empire must fall soon and that the Lord of righteousness is taking possession ; that the Lord Jesus is now establishing his righteous government and will sweep away Satan’s stronghold of lies, lead the peoples into the true light and judge the world in righteousness and the peoples with his truth; and that his kingdom of righteousness is the only remedy for the ills of humankind.
“We confidently appeal to the peoples to rally to the divine standard of truth thus lifted up and thereby learn the way that leads to life and happiness. We call upon all the people of good will of every nation, kindred and tongue, to discard the errors invented by the enemy Satan and for many years taught by man, and to receive and believe the divine purpose for salvation as set forth in the Scriptures.
“God’s kingdom for which the peoples have long prayed is at hand. It alone can and will establish and stabilize the world so that it cannot be moved. Its ensign of righteousness is the standard now lifted up for the people. Christ
Jesus as glorified King and great executive officer of Jehovah God, has become the rightful Ruler of the world. Let the peoples receive, believe and obey him and his laws of righteousness. All who so do are certain to receive the blessings of peace, prosperity, health, life, liberty and eternal happiness.
"Dated Indianapolis, Aug. 29, 1925."
That message exposed the intrigue, duplicity and trickery of the ruling group. When it fell upon their ears it cast a gloom on the brightness of their light. Their father and leader Satan, and his schemes, and their own schemes, were exposed to the gaze of the people, which dimmed the brilliancy of the enemy’s organization. The message pointed out that the cause of the distress and suffering among the peoples of earth is due to Satan and his selfish agencies. In striking contrast it held forth God’s standard for the people, pointing them to the divine standard as the only hope of salvation and telling them that God’s kingdom and his anointed King has come and is marching majestically on to the complete destruction of Satan’s organization. It was a message of gloom to the enemy’s organization. It was a message of hope and joy to those who have faith in God. It was a part of God’s ever-increasing light to those who love him. As foretold in Isaiah 30:26 concerning God’s faithful witnesses on earth: “Moreover, the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that the Lord bindeth up the breach of his people, and healeth the stroke of their wound [received during the World War period].”
On the 31st of October, 1925, or in the same Jewish month of the year that King Solomon completed the building of the temple for Jehovah’s name at Jerusalem, there began a world-wide distribution of the above Resolution “Message of Hope” and its supporting argument, and millions of copies in many languages were put in the hands of the people; and this had the effect of darkening the schemes of the worldly organizations, to the people of good will.
In the vision the apostle John (picturing Jehovah’s faithful servant class on earth) next beheld, and heard an “angel” flying in the midst of heaven. A number of Bible versions render this word of the Greek manuscript as “eagle” instead of “angel”. (See the versions of Rotherham, Emphatic Diaglott, American Revised Version.) The eagle is far-visioned. (Job 39:29) It symbolizes the servants of the Lord who are privileged to have some far vision of what the Lord is about to do. It was believed that Jehovah had provided the radio to proclaim his message of truth. Amidst much tribulation, which was to be expected, the radio station WBBR was built and put in operation in 1924, and at least five other radio stations were then broadcasting the truth. The 1925 resolution known as the “Message of Hope”, and the accompanying discourse, “A Standard for the People,” was broadcast throughout America and Canada on radio stations, “through the midst of heaven,” as well as in other forms mentioned.—Rev. 8:13.
The apocalyptic vision says that the eagle “flying through the midst of heaven” is heard to say: “Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of the earth, by reason of the other voices of the trumpet of the three angels, which arc yet to sound.” (Rev. 8:13) It was in that same year, 1925, that God’s people
206
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
saw clearly that the battle of Armageddon would be the battle of God against Satan, and not a melee between contending forces of mankind. (See The Watchtower January 1, 1925.) It was seen that there remained much work to be done to give the witness before the great and terrible day when Jehovah’s forces shall completely triumph. This farsightedness of God’s people is illustrated by the eagle. God’s devoted people, therefore, with eagle-vision, have gone for
ward with the work in proclaiming the vengeance of God against Satan’s organization, which is a “woe” to those composing the organization. The clear implication from this statement must be that the “voices of the trumpet of the three angels” yet to sound would announce God’s vengeance upon Satan’s organization and assign the reason therefor. And the three “trumpet” proclamations that followed in the next three years did that very thing.
THINGS REQUIRED
JEHOVAH delivered a remnant of the Jews from their captivity in Babylon and restored them to the land of Judah and Jerusalem, which had lain desolate without man or beast for seventy years. Through fear of the enemy and the religiousness on the part of some that remnant permitted themselves to be held up for sixteen years with respect to rebuilding the temple of Jehovah God at Jerusalem. Then Jehovah raised up his faithful prophet Zechariah to encourage the remnant in the completing of the temple building. Now, since A.D. 1919, Jehovah God has restored the faithful remnant of his witnesses on earth from a like captivity in the Devil’s organization foreshadowed by Babylon. Christ Jesus, the chief corner stone of the building, proceeds to the building of the great spiritual temple wherein Jehovah dwells by his spirit, and the great Builder gathers unto himself at the temple the faithful remnant, cleanses them and sets them to offering a praise offering in righteousness unto Jehovah God.—Hal. 3:1-4.
If the remnant would remain in the temple and partake of the good things which Jehovah prepares at this time, they must do what he commands them. Zechariah 8:16 reads: “These are the things that ye shall do: Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbour; execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates.” This commandment of the Lord cannot be fulfilled by making speeches before the people of God concerning “character development”, so called, or any other kind of speeches that merely sound nice. The speakers on any occasion in God’s service must speak the truth, and it is not true that man by his own efforts can prepare himself and make himself fit for the kingdom of heaven; nor by amusing or entertaining his hearers by his speech can he accomplish God’s purposes. He must obey the Lord God and the Lord Jesus Christ. Having been brought to the point of unity in God’s organization each one must speak the kingdom message of truth which the Lord has provided. Ephesians 4:24, 25 bears this out, saying: “Put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness [(marginal reading says:) holiness of truth; that is, the truth alone]. Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his neighbour; for we are members one of another.” The remnant, now engaged in the work foreshadowed by the work of the prophet Elisha, must speak up-to-date truth, and not what was learned during the Elijah period of the church, before 1918. They must be frank to point out the true qualifications of a follower of Christ, his commission to service, and his responsibility, speaking the truth of and concerning the kingdom and plainly telling the truth concerning the enemy as God commanded.
Those who refuse to obey Jehovah’s great Prophet Christ Jesus in this and in other matters of importance shall be destroyed, as Acts 3: 22, 23 plainly declares. Hypocrisy will no longer be tolerated. The truth concerning Jehovah’s judgment of his people and against “Christendom” and all the enemy’s organization must be told. Avoid all controversy, but be diligent in telling the truth; as it is written: “Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee. Because of the house of the Lord our God I will seek thy good.” (Ps. 122: 6, 9) “But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another.” (Gal. 5:15) The faithful remnant will keep the unity in Christ and go forward joyfully in the army of the Lord God. (Eph. 4:13; Phil. 1:27) Unfaithfulness to the Lord’s organization is hateful to Jehovah. (Isa. 58:1) Each member thereof is responsible to the Lord and must put self in the background and give strict heed and attention to the interests of the kingdom. Zechariah 8:17 adds: “And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbour; and love no false oath: for all these things are things that I hate, saith the Lord.”
Jehovah was there stating the divine requirements to a delegation of men from the city of Bethel, of the weeping kind, “old-timers,” sticklers for religious formalities, unprogressive, and who made a show of fasting in commemoration of the months of the year when national calamity and destruction came upon the land of Judah and Jerusalem. (Zech. 7:1-3) Jehovah now gives answer to their question about the suitableness of fasts since their deliverance from captivity in Babylon and beginning the rebuilding of God’s temple at Jerusalem. The fast they celebrated in the fourth month commemorated the fall of Jerusalem and the capture of the king, Zedekiah. (2 Ki. 25:3-5) The fast of the fifth month commemorated the destruction of the temple built by Solomon; the fast of the seventh month commemorated the time of the complete desolation of the land without man or beast (2 Ki. 25: 8, 9, 25, 26) ; and the fast of the tenth month commemorated the time when the prophet Ezekiel, captive in Babylon, received the news that the city of Jerusalem had been smitten. (Ezck. 33:21) Concerning this practice, which was unfitting now, Jehovah said: ‘This shall not be a time of weeping now, but shall be to the house of Judah joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts,’ (Rotherham) “pleasant appointed meetings.” Therefore Zechariah (8:19) says:
“Thus saith the Lord of hosts, The fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, shall be to the house of
July 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER,
207
Judah joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts: therefore love the truth and peace.” When the trouble, such as persecution, imprisonment, public misrepresentation, etc., came upon God’s covenant people in 1917 and 1918, they should have received it with joy, accepting it as being permitted by Jehovah that his purposes might be accomplished. Certainly after 1919 those who love the Lord and his truth should no longer mourn about what had come to pass. Those who do are, as Hebrews 6:1 says, “laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works” and do not “go on unto perfection”. Instead of obeying the Lord and walking on joyfully in the light he has given to his people, many “weepers” have continued to observe days and months and times and years, and to hold solemn and weepy meetings to commemorate the death of one who in the past led them, and on such occasions to pray: “God bless his memory.” They also have tried to perpetuate a now dead form of work, the “Elijah work”, also the symbolic meanings formerly attached to the dead stones of the great pyramid at Gizeh, Egypt, and such things, all of which is displeasing to the Lord.
The time having arrived, the temple work must be done, and it is time to be “forgetting those things which are behind” and with joy reach out and do the work which Jehovah has commanded must be done looking to the vindication of his name. The Lord says: “Therefore love the truth and peace.” That means unity and peace in doing God’s will, and not peace that comes by compromise with the enemy of God and his people. (Heb. 12:14) The true and faithful ones have responded to the Lord’s commandment. The large and small “service conventions” which they have been holding, the world-wide “united testimony periods”, the campaigns carried forward to the honor of Jehovah and to his praise, and this in the face of stubborn resistance by the enemy of the truth in various parts of the earth, all these are proof of their faithful devotion to Jehovah. This obedience they have rendered with joy and in great peace. These have been no “weep fest” occasions. The remnant are rejoicing in the truth that Jehovah continues to provide for them and which he has given them, particularly since the year 1922.
Jehovah’s promise given through Zechariah is that many who have been under Satan’s organization will come and seek the truth at the hands of the Lord’s representatives: “Thus saith the Lord of hosts; It shall yet come to pass that there shall come people, and the inhabitants of many cities.” (Zech. 8:20) God’s capital organization Zion, the new Jerusalem, shall become a house of prayer for all nations or people who ever get life. (Isa. 56:7) The truth must reach the ears of many people, that they may identify themselves as on the Lord’s side, and this must be done before the battle of Armageddon; and this was foreshadowed by Solomon’s prayer at the dedication of the temple concerning the coming thereto of strangers from afar. (1 Ki. 8:41-43) The text'of Zechariah 8:21,22 shows that many people shall come to a knowledge of the truth and will tell others about it. The “great multitude” class foreshadowed by King Jehu’s chariot companion, Jonadab, is now hearing and saying, in the language of the prophet,
“I will go also” and tell others about the kingdom, not out of envy or strife, but of good will to help others. (Phil. 1:15-17) This part of the prophecy of Zechariah shows that many people of different nationalities, such as the Japanese, Chinese, East Indians and others, will hear this gospel of the kingdom. The facts show that this part of the prophecy is now in course of fulfillment. The kingdom message is now printed in more than 80 languages, and there are witnesses to Jehovah and his kingdom in 78 countries of the earth. Those who hear and accept the truth will no longer pray unto priests, preachers and rabbis, but will seek the truth at the temple of Jehovah. This is now in process of fulfillment, as foretold also at Isaiah 2:3 and Micah 4:2.
The number “ten” symbolically represents completeness of things pertaining to the earth, or, all things, and in this manner it is used in the following prophecy of Zechariah 8:23: “Thus saith the Lord of hosts, In those days it shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold, out of all languages of the nations, even shall take hold on the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you; for we have heard that God is with you.” The time, “those days,” has now begun; and “all languages” means all of those people who constitute the Jonadab class, regardless of nationality, and these are beginning to seek the kingdom truth. (2 Ki. 10:15-23 ; Ps. 68: 31; Isa. 55: 5, 6) The skirt of the garment hangs down at the feet, and hence the language of the prophecy, “ten men . . . shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew,” necessarily means taking hold on those who constitute “the feet” of the body of Christ, the One who gives “praise” and vindication to Jehovah’s name, because “praise” is the meaning of the name “Jew” or “Judah”. Christ Jesus is “The Lion of the tribe of Juda” and the King to all that praise Jehovah’s name. (Rev. 5:5) Uis faithful followers on earth are his feet members, the remnant, who now bring good news of the kingdom and sing the praises of Jehovah. —Isa. 52:7,8.
The unfaithful whom Christ Jesus classified as the “evil servant” class say, “We are Jews”; but the Lord says they are members of Satan’s organization; and He knows. (Rev. 3:9; 2:9) Jehovah has put his name upon his anointed ones, and therefore the “ten men” who take hold on them means all persons of earth who honestly seek the truth and who will not be misled in determining who is “The Jew”. They will know it is Christ, that is, Christ Jesus and his anointed body members. (Isa. 62:2; 65:15; Rev. 2:17) These persons of good will are now saying to the feet members of Christ, the “Jew”, in the language of the prophecy: ‘We are with you’; meaning we are supporting Jehovah’s witnesses and we arc for the kingdom. Today Jehovah’s witnesses, in obedience to his commandments, are taking the lead, and the Jonadab class follow and are thus getting into the Lord’s “chariot” or organization, as Jonadab got into Jehu’s chariot. (Isa. 62:10; 57:13,14; see Vindication, Book Three, page 29) The faithful remnant render themselves in full obedience to Jehovah’s commandment and his organization instructions, and he is pleased to use them in the temple service and to continue to prepare them for Armageddon, which is just ahead.
O Jehovah, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth, who hast set thy glory upon the heavens!—Psalm 8:1, A.R.V.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
AT THE LONDON (ENG.) ZONE ASSEMBLY
"The lengthy article in the March 17 issue of the London Catholic Herald entitled ‘Judge Rutherford Starts Big Drive against Religion in England’ was read. It brought many laughs from the Kingdom publishers in the course of the reading and increased their determination to continue forward in the campaign against the Catholic-Fascist crowd in spite of their threats and assaults, having Jehovah’s assurance: ‘But they shall not prevail against thee.’ For their tea the publishers crowded out the many restaurants and cafes near Kingdom Hall. A lively discussion of this Catholic Herald article at one table was overheard by a stranger near by. After a few minutes she came over and interrupted, saying she also had read that article and even though she was a Catholic she wished more information. Not much time lost giving it, also an invitation to return with the publishers to the Watchtower study, which she gladly accepted. She was keenly interested and thrilled with the Watchtower study and is making plans to further step along in the way of the Kingdom rather than that of Catholicism.
"This exposure of the Catholic Herald has sharpened the interest of the people, making them come out into the open and take their stand for the Kingdom and against the Hierarchy. The Herald has now published more than ten articles about Jehovah’s witnesses since its first ‘slip’ in printing its lying report of October 14, and each time it has put its foot into it and caused more people to inquire concerning the Kingdom. The Society’s London office has received hundreds of letters and requests for further information as a result.”
FROM PIONEER HOME NO. 1 IN NORTH LONDON
"We received from the London office a request from an interested lady to pay her a visit and play ‘Faee the Facts’. This as a result of her reading a Catholic Herald leaflet exposing the crookedness of these religionists. We played her all the lecture, and the lady took the special offer for 6/- (Watchtower year’s subscription, book Enemies and booklet Face the Facts), and additionally some Face the Facts booklets to distribute herself. She was glad there was someone to so fearlessly expose the Hierarchy. Tears came to her eyes at the part of the lecture where Judge Rutherford says: ‘We meet you on the battlefield with songs of praise to Jehovah’s name on our lips.’ Her husband was Spanish, so she, now a widow, has lived in Spain and said no one need tell her of the doings of the priests and how they got hold of the children before seven years of age. At her home there is a Spanish boy who is trying to learn to read the Bible so that he will know what to believe. We arc making arrangements to leave with him some Spanish literature. Next week we are to pay a further visit to play the ‘Fascism or Freedom’ recordings.”
A ZONE SERVANT IN OREGON REPORTS:
"I have been using the ‘doorstep set-up’ method during March and had as many phonograph setups as the four previous months. By using this method I got in two or three times as many homes as before. I am urging all the publishers to use it. Those who have been report good results, finding it easier to interest the people.”
AMONG CATHOLIC POPULATION IN GLASGOW, SCOTLAND
“A man who said he was on parish relief showed good interest, and accordingly I arranged a back-call. The recorded lecture I took was ‘Safety’. I ran the series right through, his wife, daughter and he listening very attentively. When it was over he exclaimed: ‘I could go on listening to that man all night; I always go and hear him in Glasgow, whenever he’s here. When is he coming again?’ After some conversation I reintroduced The Watchtower, a sample of which he had previously taken on my first call. Enemies attracted him very much, and, while quite willing to take each issue of The Watchtower as it came out, in order to get Enemies free he is going to put a sixpence away every week till April and take out a subscription. His concluding remarks were: ‘Ye knows there’s as many Catholics go to hear Judge Rutherford as Protestants. I’m a Catholic masel!’ I don’t think he’s going to be a Catholic much longer.”
PROGRESS IN THE IRISH FREE STATE
"In Dublin we called at a house and asked the man who opened the door if there were any Protestant families in the street, as we had a phonograph we wanted to take to them. He showing himself to be a person of good will, I mentioned that the records dealt with divine prophecy. He at once asked us in, saying that the ‘Holy Marys’ were at mass and we had come just at the right time. He was Catholic, the ‘Holy Marys’ being his wife and daughters. He heard the recordings ‘Relief’ and ‘Resolution’, took Enemies and Warning, and thanked us for calling. A Catholic lady told me she had no objection to my coming to give lectures in her home, her husband being a Protestant, but she would go to the Cinema on my back-ealls, as she was forbidden to listen. While playing the record ‘Relief’ in a home, a young man entered and listened attentively, afterwards manifesting his enthusiasm in no uncertain terms. He was delighted to take Enemies to learn more, as he had never heard anything like it. When he had gone the householder was astonished at his enthusiasm, because the visitor was a Catholic. An interested person here is feeding the butcher boy, baker boy, and various others with the literature, all Roman Catholics whom we could not reach. Another interesting experience: A pioneer has placed 120 books in 16 days, mostly on her back-calls. A Roman Catholic, blind man, in one of the poor tenement houses hears the records with a lit-up countenance. He is married to a Protestant whose friends warned me he was a very wicked man.”
THE WAY HE GOT IN
‘“Come back in a half-hour or so!’ Next: ‘Come some other time!’ The publisher replied he had a wonderful lecture he would like her to hear. She said: ‘No, no, you better come around some other day.’ He: ‘What seems to be the trouble?’ She: ‘Oh, we have a busted water spigot, and wc can’t seem to fix it.’ He: ‘I’ll fix it for you.’ She: ‘Well, if you think you can fix it, come right in.’ So the Kingdom publisher went in, threw off his coat and asked for tools, and the spigot was fixed in ten minutes. The job complete, the publisher looked at the lady and said: ‘How about listening to that lecture I was telling you about?’ She said: ‘All right, we’ll listen.’ ‘Fascism or Freedom’ was played, and everyone enjoyed it. Result: "Watchtower subscription, bound book and Face the Facts placed.”
208
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street -	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President____W. E. Van Amburoh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” * Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wllL It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
united States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British______________________ 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian...................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian...........7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African ................  Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y-, under the Act of March 3, 1870.
“SALVATION”
We take special pleasure in announcing this new book, written by the president of the Society. It was the feature release at the recent world-wide convention of Jehovah’s witnesses with its hub at New York City. The author of this book for the times describes it as “A text-book for the Jonadabs”. But a study of its 384 pages of contents will prove to you it is meat in due season and a joy to all anointed Christians as well. The author’s edition only is now available, containing a facsimile of a letter to the reader in the author’s own hand and which you will much appreciate. This edition being limited, and the initial costs of manufacture being heavy, a contribution of 50c is asked per copy. Early translation of Salvation in more than twenty other languages is assured, and due announcement will be made on publication.
“DIVINE MANDATE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The entire month of August has been designated “Divine Mandate” Testimony Period. This midsummer witnessing Period will be specially favored by the release then, for distribution to the general public at the popular contribution of 25c a copy, of the new book Salvation. Circulation of no other book could be more appropriate for this Period than that of Salvation, with its beautiful treatment of the recently revealed truth on the
“Divine Mandate”. What anointed witness, or what person of good will in line for this divine mandate, could hold back from a prompt and large part in this Testimony Period? All will begin their preparations now. The Informant will give details to guide you. The regular report should follow up your activities at the close of the month.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of August 20: “Doom of Religion” (Part 3), fl 1-21 inclusive, The Watchtower July 15, 1939.
Week of August 27: “Doom of Religion” (Part 3), fl 22-42 inclusive, The Watchtower July 15,1939.
VACATION
Notice! The Brooklyn factory and office will be closed for the two weeks beginning Saturday, July 22, and concluding Sunday, August 6. This will enable the Bethel family, after a year of consistent strenuous activity here, to get away for a temporary change and to enjoy opportunities of field service in common with the other Kingdom publishers. All publishers will therefore order in advance enough supplies of literature to last them over the Bethel vacation period, and to the end of (Continued on page 223)
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LX	July 15, 1939	No. 14
DOOM OF RELIGION
PART 3
"So thou, 0 son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and rvarn them from me.”—Ezek. 33:7.
JEHOVAH'S prophets speak in exact harmony. They could not speak otherwise. It is Jehovah’s message which they are announcing. The name of Jehovah must be declared throughout the earth before he shows the enemy His great power. (Ex. 9:16) The warning must be given of the approaching disaster. It was so in the time of the miniature fulfillment of the prophecy concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, and it must be so at the time of the complete fulfillment upon the land of “Christendom”. The prophet Ezekiel was also sent by Jehovah to give warning to Jerusalem, and Ezekiel there pictures those whom the Lord uses to give warning to “Christendom” at the present time. In the fulfillment of the prophecy the “feet” members of Christ Jesus are called the “watchman" because they watch for their brethren and for all who love God and they watch for the kingdom interests, and then, above all, they are watching the hand of the Almighty God that they may ascertain and do his will. (Ps. 123: 2) The watchman is diligent to look for the events which God brings to pass, furnishing a lead for his people, and they are quick when receiving orders from the Lord to obey the same. All the members of the body of Christ now on the earth, and which are collectively called “the remnant”, are also collectively the watchman of the Lord. To them the Lord makes known the meaning of his prophecies, and, when ascertaining what they must do, those of the remnant do it with joy. Thus they keep in step with God’s organization, which moves majestically forward to accomplish his purpose.
2 Chapter two of the prophecy of Joel opens with an emphatic command given to Joel, who represents the faithful witnesses of Jehovah now on earth: “Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in my holy mountain; let all the inhabitants of the land tremble; for the day of the Lord cometh, for it is nigh at hand.”—Joel 2:1.
8 As Joel the prophet sounded the alarm to Jerusalem, so now the remnant in fulfillment of the proph
211
ecy must in obedience to God’s command sound the alarm among all persons of God’s organization, and within the borders of “Christendom”. The remnant has received the commission from Jehovah’s hands to make proclamation of the vengeance of the day of the Most High and thus to sound the warning. That commission is given alone to the anointed, as it is written: “The spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to . . . proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and [to declare] the day of vengeance of our God.” (Isa. 61:1, 2) The sounding of the trumpet of warning is for the benefit of those in God’s organization, as well as for those who claim to be the servants of Jehovah: “Hearken to me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the Lord; look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged.”—Isa. 51:1.
8 To those who love Jehovah and who love the appearing of Christ Jesus, his King, the trumpet gives forth a sound that fills their hearts with joy, announcing the day of jubilee. But the effect is exactly the contrary to the religionists. To those who practice religion the trumpet of God gives a sound of distress. The religious leaders have long reveled in their ability to carry on according to their own ideas, and they would not now sound the alarm if the opportunity to do so were given to them. On the contrary, those religionists are designated by the Lord as “dumb dogs", “lying down,” and ‘loving slumber’ and ease and to lie in the beds of tradition made by their fathers. (Isa. 56:10) The religious leaders refuse to recognize that Jehovah’s day is here. They do not want that day of Jehovah, and they refuse to hear of the battle of Armageddon. On the contrary, they cry out to the people under them and who support the religious organizations: “Peace, peace,” “when there is no peace.” Those religious leaders have an avaricious desire to acquire the things that the “present evil world” can furnish them to make them comfortable and easy, and to give them a
212
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
standing with the other members of the worldly organization. Not one of the religious leaders in all the earth today supports the interest of the kingdom. Concerning such the prophet of the Lord says: “For from the least of them even unto the greatest of them every one is given to covetousness; and from the prophet even unto the priest every one dealeth falsely.”—Jer. 6:13-15.
* The trumpet must be sounded in Zion, that is to say, in Jehovah’s capital organization, or particularly that part which is on the earth. Christ Jesus having appeared and builded up Zion (Ps. 102:16), he has gathered unto himself the faithful ones remaining on the earth and made them a part of Zion. Christ Jesus is the “Faithful and True Witness” of Jehovah, and those with him at the temple must be witnesses to Jehovah, and it is to such that the command is given to ‘blow the trumpet’. They are under the immediate command of the Lord Jesus Christ and form a part of His capital organization: “And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father’s name written in their foreheads.” (Rev. 14:1) With God’s typical people the priests were to sound the alarm of danger; and so in the antitypical or final fulfillment of the prophecy, it is those who are of “the royal priesthood” that must sound the alarm of the near approach of Armageddon, and in doing this they are participating in Jehovah’s “strange work”. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and those with them in their so-called “united Christian religious front”, try to prevent the people from hearing the trumpet of God, and to offset the same those clergymen blow their own tin horns announcing their own greatness and at the same time denounce the witnesses of Jehovah, calling them “Communists”, for want of something else to name them. God’s trumpet is sounded from his “holy mountain”, where Jehovah has placed his King: “Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.” (Ps. 2: 6) From God’s organization the sound of his trumpet goes throughout the earth, particularly throughout “Christendom”, and it is the privilege of his witnesses to carry this message to the various lands. This is further corroborated by another of God’s prophets, to wit: “And he said, The Lord will roar from Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the habitations of the shepherds shall mourn, and the top of Carmel shall wither.”—Amos 1: 2.
•All who love God fear him with a godly fear; hence the prophecy states: “Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble.” The anointed remnant and their companions, the Lord’s “other sheep”, are the only ones who really fear God and who therefore take the wise course. Knowing that the sound of the trumpet is a message of Jehovah, which means really a com
plete deliverance for his faithful servants and at the same time the destruction of the wicked and the complete vindication of Jehovah’s name, has the effect of filling the faithful with a godly fear and with rejoicing in their hearts. They have the joy of the Lord. The Lord Jesus Christ, the King, has appeared to their joy, and they know he shall vindicate Jehovah’s name: “Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word; Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name’s sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified; but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed. A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of the Lord that ren-dereth recompense to his enemies.”—Isa. 66:5,6.
7 To the faithful servants of Jehovah there is a clear and marked distinction between the noise that comes from the religionists who pretend to represent the Lord, and the “voice from the temple”, which is the voice of the Lord’s devoted ones uttered and led by Jesus Christ. The effect upon the religionists is exactly opposite to that upon those who love God. Like Belshazzar, who saw the handwriting on the wall, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their allied religious elements, shaking with fear and dread because of the message of truth announcing the doom of religion to them, are made mad, and their first thought is to stop the message by destroying the messengers and their work. Regardless of the opposition, Jehovah’s witnesses go straight forward in the performance of their part, sounding the trumpet, and their zeal and devotion to God are a token to the Hierarchy of the near downfall of that institution. They do not wish to hear such warning, and hence they vent their spleen against the ones whom the Lord uses to give the warning.
•Why should an alarm be sounded now? Because “the day of the Lord cometh, for it is nigh at hand”. Jehovah always gives notice and warning in advance of his positive action, in order that those who properly fear him take the right course and find the way of escape and the place of safety: “A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself; but the simple pass on, and are punished.”—Prov. 22: 3.
• “The day of Jehovah” began in 1914, when he enthroned his King, and therefore it is at hand now, and will reach a climax in the battle of the great day of God Almighty. His “strange work” is now being done to serve notice upon all of his purpose, that they may have no doubt that Jehovah is acting. The “strange work” will be quickly followed by God’s “strange act".
DARKNESS
10	This is a day of darkness for “Christendom”. Jehovah by his prophet has emphasized the coming of this day of great darkness, but the religionists
July 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
213
have ignored God’s Word and have relied upon their own opinions and that of other men who preceded them, whom they call their “fathers”; and all their allies today love to have it so. Speaking of this day by his prophet, Jehovah says: “A day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick darkness, as the morning spread upon the mountains; a great people and a strong; there hath not been ever the like, neither shall be any more after it, even to the years of many generations.”—Joel 2: 2.
11	This description agrees exactly with the facts as now observed by all those who give heed to the Word of God. Spealdng by the mouth of his prophet, Jehovah says of this day: “The day of the Lord is darkness, and not light,” to religionists and all of Satan’s organization. Then the Lord illustrates how men act in this day who are surrounded by the darkness and have no light: “As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear met him; or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him. Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness, and not light? even very dark, and no brightness in it?” —Amos 5:18-20.
13	The religion-mongers and practitioners will find no way of escape. Regardless of what they do the Lord will search them out and see that the proper recompense is ministered unto them. (Jer. 25:35) “The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord: the mighty man shall cry there bitterly. That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness, a day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced cities, and against the high towers.”—Zeph. 1:14-16.
18	Such is the condition in which the enemies of God find themselves now. They will not be able to escape darkness: “But with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end of the place thereof, and darkness shall pursue his enemies.” (Nah. 1:8) Added to their mental and spiritual darkness that has come upon the religionists, God sends his army of “locusts”, which have plagued and which continue to plague those of Satan’s world, even as the army of locusts down in Egypt plagued those who were against Jehovah and against his people: “And the locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in all the coasts of Egypt: very grievous were they; before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such. For they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land was darkened; and they did eat every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there remained not any green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all the land of Egypt.” —Ex. 10:14,15.
14	These prophecies are today being fulfilled upon “Christendom”. It is the time of which Jehovah speaks, a time of darkness to the enemy and of light to those who love him and serve him faithfully and truly; and concerning this he says through his prophet : “Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people; but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee.”—Isa. 60:1,2.
15	The ’ '•lit from the temple daily increases and makes gl s those who are devoted to Jehovah and his kingdom; and, therefore, while the enemy is in darkness those who love and faithfully serve Jehovah God have an ever-increasing light, and with that light their joy increases. “But the path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day. The way of the wicked is as darkness; they know not at what they stumble.” (Prov. 4:18,19) The religionists are in the dark because they reject the Word of God. Religionists do not believe the Word of God, and hence go contrary to his law and to his prophets: “To the law and to the testimony : if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light [(Rotherham') no dawning day] in them.” (Isa. 8: 20) It is the time when wicked spirits control the rulers of this world. (Eph. 6:12) It is the day when Satan is putting forth his last desperate effort to destroy the human race.
19	This is the “day of clouds”, which betoken (1) the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ (Ex. 13:21; Ex. 19:9,16; Matt. 26: 64; 1 Thess. 4:17; Rev. 1:7), and (2) a time of distress and trouble, announcing the approaching storm of Jehovah upon his enemies. Mark the difference between those who love God and those who are his enemies: the joy that fills the heart of God’s people, and the effect upon the enemy: “I will praise thee, 0 Lord, with my whole heart; I will shew forth all thy marvellous works. I will be glad and rejoice in thee; I will sing praise to thy name, 0 thou Most High. When mine enemies are turned back, they shall fall and perish at thy presence.”— Ps. 9:1-3.
17	In this time of darkness upon his enemies the Lord causes his light to shine on his “other sheep”, while he gathers them to himself and comforts them: “As a shepherd secketh out his flock in the day that he is among his sheep that are scattered; so will I seek out my sheep, and will deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day.” (Ezek. 34:12) At the early morn, when the dawn is upon the mountains, the sunlight is hid; and so it is with the enemy today. As the kingdom glory appears even now to religionists there is an uneven and unsteady light which is daily growing darker. In this condition of darkness upon the enemy
214
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
a “great people” appears, great because used by Jehovah to have part in his “strange work”, “a great people and a strong [and bold {Rotherham}](Joel 2: 2) At Joel 1: 6 these are called “a nation”. In the complete fulfillment of this part of the prophecy the word “people” is used evidently for the reason that it is now God’s people whom he has taken out for his name’s sake which come as a swarm of locusts to proclaim the name of Jehovah. They are not great in themselves, either in name or fame or power, nor great in the sight of men, but are regarded by such as very insignificant. They are made to appear as great, however, by reason of the work done and their methods employed to reach the hundreds of millions of people and place in their hands hundreds of millions of copies of the message of warning. These people who are taken out by Jehovah for his name are bold, because this is the day of the Lord’s judgment and his witnesses must be bold and thereby show their love for Jehovah. (1 John 4:17,18) This does not mean that they are rude, but that they are fearless of creatures, fearing only God.
18	That which Jehovah’s witnesses have accomplished in recent years is phenomenal in the eyes of many. As stated by the prophet: “There hath not been ever [before] the like.” The same thing was said of the swarms of locusts down in Egypt. (Ex. 10:14) Never had there been such a widespread publication of the truth of God’s Word as during the past few years; and this is true because it is God’s time and it is his work. From the year 1921 to 1931 Jehovah’s witnesses placed in the hands of the people books and booklets to the number of 110,565,401. Since 1931 the work accomplished by Jehovah’s witnesses has been even greater. The message has been broadcast by hundreds of radio stations each week and at certain times by international broadcast. Thousands of phonographs and sound machines have been employed to proclaim the message, free tracts numbering many millions have been put in the hands of the people, and at the end of the year 1938 the publications of the Society (the books and booklets) in the hands of the people exceeded 275,000,000, and this in more than 70 different languages. Nothing like that ever before in the history of man. It has been accomplished by the power of the Almighty God and Christ Jesus. This distribution of literature and witness work is not a religious movement, but the publication of God’s Word, and done at his commandment. When the strange work of proclaiming the truth is done such will never be repeated, because there will be no occasion to do so; hence says the prophet: “Neither shall there be any more after it [after them (R.V.)], even to the years of many generations.” The “strange work” is for the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and following Armageddon all
creatures that breathe shall be praising Jehovah’s name, the vindication of which will have been fully accomplished, and no need for a repetition thereof.
18	Since the beginning of Jehovah’s “strange work” that work has progressed with intensified zeal or heat. God’s army of servants, likened unto locusts, has appeared with the sound that is the sound of the fifth trumpet described in Revelation 9:1-12. That fifth trumpet began to sound in 1926, at the time of a convention of God’s people in London, England. At that time “Christendom” had become guilty of the “transgression of desolation” by setting forth a Devilish organization claiming the right to rule the earth instead of God’s kingdom. (Dan. 8:13) Prior to 1926 there was sounded a series of trumpets or alarms, which are described at Revelation, chapters eight, nine and eleven. It was during that time, that is, from 1922 to 1926, that some work foretelling the coming of the locusts had to be done. That work is described in Revelation 16:1-9 as “plagues”. Those plagues heated up the religionists, and were therefore like a flame of fire. In this connection mark the description by Joel (2:3): “A fire devoureth before them; and behind them a flame burneth; the land is as the garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate wilderness; yea, and nothing shall escape them.” This means that before the coming of the army of locusts there came a devouring flame unto the religionists. That proclamation of the truth well heated up the religionists, who then began to witness the burning up of their pastures as a result of the heat. Then when the “strange work” has been completed the destructive flame at Armageddon comes upon them and finishes the job. The organized and progressive witnessing by God’s faithful servants began in 1922, after Christ Jesus had assembled the approved ones at the temple and anointed them, and this work must progress until the conclusion of God’s “strange work”, which is quickly to be followed by his “strange act”. Hence before the coming of the army of “locusts” as such, the heat was turned on; and behind the locusts a flame of fire shall burn. "As the fire burneth a wood, and as the flame setteth the mountains on fire, so persecute them [God’s enemies] with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm.”—Ps. 83:14,15.
20	Jehovah put that prayer in the Scriptures to be uttered by his faithful witnesses, and that in harmony with his will; and that prayer God answers according to his will. In symbolic phrase another prophet of Jehovah describes the scorching of “Christendom” and the wasting of her pastures: “And say to the forest of the south, Hear the word of the Lord, Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee, and every dry tree; the flaming flame
THE WATCHTOWER
215
July 15, 1939
shall not be quenched, and all faces from the south to the north shall be burned therein. And all flesh shall see that I the Lord have kindled it; it shall not be quenched.”—Ezek. 20:47,48.
21	The effect of this scorching heat and the work of the locusts upon “Christendom” is described as “the land is as the garden of Eden before them”, which was the condition prior to 1922. The Protestant clergy and allies vigorously advocated the League of Nations as “the political expression of God’s kingdom on earth”. The League was then set up, and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy climbed upon the back of the old “beast”. A great religious revival had been predicted by the clergy following the World War, and hence those religionists tried to start the old chariot to moving. In 1919 the Interchurch World Movement of the Protestant Churches of America was launched. At least they tried to make her go. Much money was collected and spent to boost the thing, and hence the field at that time before the religionists looked good, like unto a garden. In the spring of 1919 the National Catholic Welfare Conference was organized. Fascism raised its head in Italy, the same year, and at that time the Vatican, looking for an instrument to be used apparently against Bolshevism but to be used in reality against the message of God’s kingdom, seized upon Fascism as such a desired instrument. Shortly thereafter Fascism put the Papacy back into temporal power and the Hierarchy became a large political machine. For some time prior thereto the Roman Catholic organization was, as the prophet describes, ‘the forgotten harlot of modern Tyre’. In those days of refreshing the old lady redecked herself and began to sing her songs in an effort to entice others and to regain her former political and commercial paramours. (Isa. 23:15-17) February 6, 1922, Cardinal Ratti was selected pope, and about the same time Mussolini assumed control of Italy. So at that time the field, that is, the nations of the earth, looked to the religionists very promising, like unto a garden of pleasure; and so they looked upon it and called it “The garden of the Lord”, and the religionists felt and acted as though they were riding upon the top of the waves of the universe. In the eyes of religionists there seemed to be no particular reason to be worried about anything that Jehovah’s witnesses might do. True, those witnesses were considered by religionists as a pestiferous crowd, but they expected them to do little or nothing. The religionists figured that they had killed the work and influence of Jehovah’s witnesses during the World War, and hence the religious leaders were riding high and strutting their stuff. At the same time, by the grace of Jehovah and under the immediate command of Christ Jesus at the temple, Jehovah’s witnesses were
reviving and getting their work in order. In the Lord’s due time Jehovah’s army was ready and he sent them forth, likened unto a cloud of locusts. That was the beginning of real activity and real organized forward movement of Jehovah’s witnesses, and now, after the Lord’s locusts have been at work for a few years, the religious field looks like a place of desolation. Hence the Lord, by his prophet, says: “Behind them a desolate wilderness; yea, and nothing shall escape them.”
22	The effect of the invasion of the “locusts” of the Lord and the declaration of God’s judgment against all religion, and particularly the so-called “Christian religion”, discloses that the same is a fraud and a snare of the Devil. Honest people of the world, learning the truth, now look upon religion as a desolate thing, as a snare and a racket, and they see that it is under the blight of God’s adverse judgment. The faithful witnesses of Jehovah have not been partial to any religion, but have, at the command of the Lord, boldly announced that the purpose of all religion is the defamation of the name of Almighty God, the scheme of the Devil to turn the people away from God. The declaration of the truth has been against all such enemy organizations: “And none hath escaped them.” (R.F.) Not even the mighty and the high of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy have been able to go on without taking notice. In 1933, with great gusto and much noise made by that Catholic organization and their political allies the so-called “holy year” was announced, the purpose of which was to restore in the minds of the people “the garden of Eden” appearance for religion. Then the Lord by his army of “locusts” pulled the camouflage off religion, and since then the people have become well informed and know that all religion is of the Devil and is the chief opponent and bitter enemy of Christianity. Likewise Fascism and Nazism and Communism have been shown up as devilish instruments, upon which the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization rides, and for which it acts as spiritual adviser. The people are learning that the purpose of that unholy combine is to rule the world in the place and stead of God’s kingdom under Christ. They see that religionists have put the “corporate state” above Jehovah God and his kingdom.
28	Whom has the Lord used to bring about this condition of devastation upon the fields of religion! He has used his faithful servants, who act strictly under the command of the Lord Jesus Christ. In all the efforts put forth by the Lord’s army of locusts no physical force or carnal weapons have been used; and such is exactly in harmony with the prophecy. There has been no physical destruction of any houses, property or person. Locusts do not work that way. Jehovah’s witnesses, under the command of
THE WATCHTOWER,
216
their Head, Christ Jesus, turn on the light and the heat and devour the false teachings of men, which have been invented by the Devil and used by his agents to defame the name of God and turn the people away into darkness. At the present time Jehovah’s witnesses see how they have been favored by the Lord and how he long ago caused this prophecy to be written foretelling present-day conditions and its fulfillment in this present time. They are very much encouraged and comforted, and their hope is brightened, and on they march with joy! The Lord continues to furnish his people with evidence that he is at the helm and that as long as his witnesses remain faithful to God and his King they may be certain of having everlasting blcisings bestowed upon them by the hand of the Lord.
14 For the further encouragement of the faithful remnant and their companions, the Jonadabs or “other sheep”, the Lord by this prophecy gives a minute description of those that make up his army likened unto locusts: “The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses; and as horsemen, so shall they run.” (Joel 2:4) Horses symbolically picture war equipment; as it is written: “Horses prepared unto battle.” Thus are pictured the faithful witnesses of Jehovah who go right on in his work as he commands, not hesitating for anything. The locusts have an oblong-shaped head, somewhat like that of a horse, and he uses his head: “And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto battle; and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men.”—Rev. 9:7.
28 Locusts are not afraid, nor is the horse afraid, and it is to such that the faithful witnesses of Jehovah are likened: “Hast thou given the horse strength? hast thou clothed his neck with thunder? Canst thou make him afraid as a grasshopper? the glory of his nostrils is terrible.” (Job 39:19, 20) The big religious leaders and allies try to frighten Jehovah’s witnesses into submission and to cause them to cease their witness work, but the faithful hear and obey the Lord Jesus Christ, who says to them: “Fear them not.” (Matt. 10:26,28) The locusts resemble the horse going into battle, and so Jehovah’s witnesses push on in the fight regardless of opposition: “He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted; neither turneth he back from the sword.” (Job 39: 22) Jehovah’s witnesses love God and Christ, and “perfect love casteth out fear”. (1 John 4:18) They know they are going in the fight against bitter opposition, but God gives to them the assuring command that he gave to Jeremiah: “Be not afraid of [them].” “Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee; be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them. For, behold, I have made thee this day a defenced city,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and an iron pillar and brazen walls against the whole land, against the kings of Judah, against the princes thereof, against the priests thereof, and against the people of the land. And they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee.”—Jer. 1:17-19.
26 A better translation of the latter part of this verse of the prophecy of Joel reads: “And as warhorses so shall they run.” (Joel 2:4, Rotherham) They run to and fro in the service. They do not run away from the battle, but at the Lord's command they increase their speed. “The horse rusheth into the battle.” (Jer. 8:6) “His horses are swifter than eagles.” (Jer. 4:13) Since the beginning of the year 1939 Jehovah’s witnesses have shown an increased speed and fearlessness in the “strange work”.
2T Jehovah’s witnesses are always anxious to do with all their might that which is possible for them to do. In January, 1939, the Society suggested that more time might be occupied in the field of witnessing, and suggested that sixty hours per month is not unreasonable. Some who claim to be the Lord’s servants have objected and complained of that increased activity. All are reminded that the Society has no authority to give commands and that the sixty hours in the field work is merely a suggestion; and it is believed that the Lord caused that suggestion to be made, and it is for each one of the Lord’s servants to do what he thinks to be the Lord’s will. The Lord in his Word has foretold diligence in his service. He likens his faithful workers to war horses, and that of itself is a strong indication that the servant should put forth his very best endeavors in this day of heated battle. Almost all who claim to be on the Lord’s side have gladly accepted and adopted the suggestion, and during the first half of the year the hours of field service have been greatly increased by the workers. Some of these witnesses who have passed the age of threescore and ten have speeded up even more than some of the others and have made as much as seventy hours per month in the field service. Some at first thought themselves unable to carry the phonograph, but now have learned that the burden is easy when in the service of the King. Like a war horse they are going daily in the battle with greater joy. If any desire to look back and take it easy, let them do so. All who really love God will do what they believe is God’s will concerning them, and if they can put in more time they will delight to do so.
DESCRIPTIVE
28 In symbolic language the Lord caused such a clear description of the faithful witnesses that no doubt is left as to their identity. He also describes the harmonious action on the part of those who form
THE WATCHTOWER
217
July 15, 1939
his visible organization, and this is further proof that all of the faithful dwell together and work together in peace, having in mind the one thing, the vindication of God’s name. Jehovah’s witnesses are shown as fearless of man’s power or of the Devil’s power and are pushing forward actively in Jehovah’s service in obedience to his commandment: “Like the noise of chariots on the tops of mountains shall they leap, like the noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble, as a strong people set in battle array.”—Joel 2:5.
*• A similar description is given in The Revelation of Jesus Christ concerning the earthly part of God’s army: “And they had breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron; and the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses running to battle.” (Rev. 9:9) The movement of a gigantic swarm of locusts is very noisy, but it is a harmonious noise. Like the illustration, so with the reality. Forward and active movement of Jehovah’s witnesses is now and for some time has been carried on with much publicity, harmonious sound, and what they have done has been done openly and aboveboard. If the clergy in one community oppresses a pioneer a whole swarm goes in immediately and cleans up the community. They call the people’s attention to Jehovah’s name and that his kingdom is here and it is the only possible means of bringing to them peace, prosperity, life and happiness; and their movement is a harmonious song. They warn the people of the near approach of the battle of Armageddon. They do their work systematically and in a well-organized manner, and their movements and sound of warning are much like the oncoming of war chariots hurrying to the battle. It is Jehovah’s war organization, the invisible part of which is rapidly approaching to destroy the hypocritical and unfaithful “Christendom” and will do the real destructive work; but the remnant go before and announce the fact. God’s great organization, like a huge and irresistible chariot with four tremendous wheels, is described by Jehovah’s prophet Ezekiel as moving forward and crushing all opposition. (Ezekiel first chapter; Ezek. 43:1-3) The forward movement of the Lord’s army of locusts strikes terror into the hearts of the religionists, because to them it is a token of impending destruction.—Phil. 1:28.
80	The word “mountains”, as used in the prophecy, verse five, symbolically pictures the government organizations of “Christendom”. Such governments attempt to hinder the work of Jehovah’s “locust” army, and resort to various means to accomplish that wrongful purpose. Such government opposition, however, does not deter the witnesses of the Most High nor frighten them into submission. Jehovah’s “strange work” must be done, and God will see to it
that it is done according to his will. During the past few years those devoted to God and his King have fully recognized and acknowledged God and Christ Jesus as the only higher powers and that all Christians must obey God and Christ, regardless of opposition from man or man-made governments. (Rom. 13:1) The faithful apostles blazed the way, and the faithful followers of Christ now go the same way. (Acts 5: 29) Only a short time ago the Lord’s “little flock” of witnesses were scattered because of the assaults of the religious leaders of the earthly governments. No one of the religionists showed them any favor whatsoever. God took notice of this, foreknew it would come, and foretold it: “And they were scattered because there is no shepherd; and they became meat to all the beasts of the field when they were scattered. My sheep wandered through all the mountains, and upon every high hill; yea, my flock was scattered upon all the face of the earth, and none did search or seek after them.” (Ezek. 34: 5,6) The Lord notified these false shepherds that he would take action. Now Jehovah’s witnesses have received from the Lord a clear vision of his purpose. They trust in God implicitly and go forward without fear of human or Devil institutions.
81	Fires frequently break out and destroy the stubble field following an exceedingly hot and dry period, and such fire is attended with much noise. Even so the united action of Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions appears to the religionists “like the noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble”. The “strange work” of Jehovah is a warning to give the alarm of the fire of Armageddon. God by his spirit moved the apostle Peter to write of such time: “But the heavens and the earth which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men.” “But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burned up.” “Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens, being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat?” (2 Pet. 3:7,10,12) This is further corroborated by the prophet Malachi: “For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.”—Mal. 4:1.
82	In describing the activities of the locusts, mark the language of Joel’s prophecy: “As a strong people set in battle array.” There the preposition “as” shows that the words did not apply in Joel’s day, when the
218
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
locusts destroyed the fields, but actually refers to intelligent creatures and human organization, Jehovah’s witnesses. These are not armed with carnal weapons, but they are thoroughly organized and under the command of the great Field Marshal, Christ Jesus. It is the time when Satan and his host, that old Dragon, ‘go forth to make war against God’s organization, and the remnant thereof’ now on the earth. (Rev. 12:17) The army of the Lord set in battle array is not a democratic form of organization, but is under the control and command of the Lord Jesus Christ, Jehovah’s King and Field Marshal, and therefore is a theocratic government. This conclusion is proved by the words of The Revelation, which apply to that army under the Lord’s command: "And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto battle; and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men. And they had a king [the Lord Jesus Christ] over them, which is the angel of the bottomless pit [into which Christ Jesus flings the Devil], whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon [destruction for Satan’s crowd], but in the Greek tongue hath his name Apollyon [destroyer of Satan and his organization].” (Rev. 9:7,11) Jehovah’s witnesses, that is, his army of “locusts”, are without fear of creatures because they know that they are backed up by the almighty power of God. The faces of the “faithful servant” class are as “adamant, harder than flint”, made so by Jehovah, who says to his witnesses : “Fear them [the rebellious religionists] not, neither be dismayed at their looks.” (Ezek. 3: 9) Regardless of opposition the faithful witnesses go straight on doing their assigned work: “Before their face the people shall be much pained [at their presence the peoples are in anguish (R.P.)]; all faces shall gather blackness.”—Joel 2: 6.
33	This applies particularly to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and the allied Protestant doctors of divinity and Jewish rabbis. This proof is supported by the fact that they all howl and work together to induce the political, legislative, judicial and other parts of the government organization to take drastic action against Jehovah’s witnesses. The same locusts (Jehovah’s witnesses) are described in The Revelation in these words: “And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth; and unto them [Jehovah’s witnesses] was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power. And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree; but only those men [the religionists] which have not the seal of God in their foreheads. And to them it was given that they should not kill them, but that they [the religionists] should be tormented five months; and their torment was as the torment of a scorpion, when
he striketh a man. And in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and shall desire to die [to escape torment], and death shall flee from them.” —Rev. 9: 3-6.
34	God permits the religionists to exist and to continue in their practice for a short time while his “strange work” is in progress, to the end that they might receive torment, and this they do by having their “religious susceptibilities shocked” when someone speaks in their hearing the message of truth. Concerning the faces of the religionists, the Hebrew text means that their faces have a “gleam” or “flush” of anxiety upon observing the activities of Jehovah’s witnesses and the message which they bring. According to the Authorized Version, their faces “gather blackness”. God’s prophet speaks of the Ninevites in this language: “She is empty, and void, and waste; and the heart melteth, and the knees smite together, and much pain is in all loins, and the faces of them all gather blackness [(Hebrew) a gleam or flush].” —Nahum 2:10.
35	The faces of the clergy show a flush of anxiety when called upon by Jehovah’s witnesses, and those clergymen usually resort to harsh words against Jehovah’s witnesses, and, seeing that their harsh words do not deter the witnesses but that they fearlessly go on in their work, the religionists conclude that it is a token of impending destruction of them and their racket. Belshazzar was in the same condition when he saw the handwriting on the wall. The religionists know that it is true that they have been weighed in the balance by the Lord and found worthless.
38	Jehovah by his prophet foretold the united and harmonious action of the faithful witnesses who bear the message of his kingdom. They are not weaklings, but “strong in the Lord and in the power of his might”: “They shall run like mighty men; they shall climb the wall like men of war; and they shall march every one on his ways, and they shall not break their ranks.”—Joel 2:7.
37	The zealous ones are not content with spending a few hours in the service, but they are “up and at it” on every possible occasion. They attack in the strength of the Lord, and Jehovah, through Christ Jesus, continues to provide them with all the needed strength. “But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary, and they shall walk, and not faint.”—Isa. 40: 31.
38	The faithful and zealous ones hear the command of the Lord and hasten to obey: “I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shalt enlarge my heart.” (Ps. 119:32) David was a type of Christ Jesus and his body members, and indited this Psalm which is now appropriate for Jehovah’s witnesses: “For thou art my lamp, 0 Lord; and the Lord will
July 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
219
lighten my darkness. For by thee I have run through a troop; by my God have I leaped over a wall.”— 2 Sam. 22:29,30.
’* The enemies of God’s kingdom that shield, hide and protect themselves behind their political and judicial walls find that these walls are inadequate to shield them. Jehovah’s witnesses do not stop, but, in the language of the prophecy, they ‘climb the walls like men of war’, that is to say, they go on regardless of the walls. Since the Lord’s people have seen and appreciated the theocratic government, which directs them, they have been and are being rapidly disciplined and trained, and they act orderly and fearlessly. Like locusts, they do not stop at tall obstacles, but climb right over them and keep going forward. The religionists have builded up their walls, fortified by politics and commerce, and behind which they attempt to hold the common people who have supported their organization. Now Jehovah sends his army of locusts, who go right over and through those walls with a message of deliverance; and thus God by his witnesses ‘opens the prisons to them that are bound’.—Isa. 61:1.
40	Every one of the “faithful and wise servant” class knows that the Lord’s command, as applied to him, assigns to him a specific work, and therefore he goes forward attending to his own business, doing with his might what has been assigned to him, and does not interfere with the other fellow’s business. He knows that individually he has no strength, and therefore he does not become heady. He realizes that he is small in himself but strong in the Lord and, like the description of the locusts, he is “little . . . but . . . wise”, and like a band of locusts all such go forward as one united band of warriors: “There be four things which are little upon the earth, but they are exceeding wise; . . . The locusts have no king, yet go they forth all of them by bands.”—Prov. 30:24,27.
41	The Hierarchy and allies, all of whom are enemies of God’s kingdom, try to break up the unity and harmonious action of Jehovah’s witnesses, but they cannot do so. Therefore says God’s prophet concerning those faithful and zealous locusts: “They . . .
shall not change their paths.” (Roth.) Those of the “faithful and wise servant” class have this one thing to do. (Phil. 3:13) That one thing is to carry out God’s commandment concerning them. They are trustworthy, constant, dependable, and reliable. They know that Jehovah and Christ Jesus are their teachers and commanders and that it is their business as servants of the Lord to joyfully obey: “Thine eyes shall see thy teachers; and thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when [lest] ye turn to the right hand, and when [lest] ye turn to the left.”—Isa. 30: 20, 21.
42	The Lord has brought to pass facts which show that the present is the time of the fulfillment of this part of Joel’s prophecy. Only recently the Lord revealed to his people that the organization of Jehovah on earth, as well as in heaven, is theocratic and that Christ Jesus, as Jehovah’s great Executive Officer, is in charge and that now is the time when individual things or selfish desires should be and must be put entirely away and when everyone must bend his efforts to know and to do the will of God. Since the beginning of 1939 the “strange work” of Jehovah has progressed in the earth far more than at previous times, and greater is the joy of the workers. The Lord’s “other sheep” are coming in flocks to the corral, and these quickly see their privileges of joining in the work of proclaiming the King and kingdom. The reports that are regularly received from the field workers show a tremendous increase in the work during the time beginning and following January, 1939. True, the opposition everywhere increases, and the Lord gives his servants greater strength to surmount those difficulties. The faithful servants of the Lord now in the field have ever increasing and corroborative evidence that they are marching rapidly to Armageddon and that the day of final decision is at hand, and as they go forward their joy increases. Are the “other sheep” or “great multitude” being gathered? The “evil servant” class see it not. Behold the coming of the “great multitude”, marching shoulder to shoulder with the remnant of the anointed.
(To be continued)
FIFTH TRUMPET
JEHOVAH’S greatest “Star” is Jesus the beloved. Numbers 24:17,19 foretold: “There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Sceptre shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Sheth. Out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, and shall destroy him that rcmaincth of the city.” This prophecy must have a complete fulfillment in God’s due time. The “fifth angel” which the apostle John saw in the visions of The Revelation was now due to sound his trumpet, and we mark fulfillment of the prophecy now.-Rev. 8:6; 9:1.
We want to believe, we must believe, and we do believe that the Lord directs the course of his people who are wholly devoted to him. (Pss. 32:8; 48:14; 73:24; Isa. 58:11) A convention of God’s devoted people assembled in London, England, in May, 1926. For years prior thereto Bible students had thought that “that servant” mentioned in Bible prophecy was an individual man. But now, there at London a discourse entitled “The Servant and Service”, based upon Isaiah’s prophecy, chapter forty-nine, disclosed for the first time to God’s assembled people the true mean
220
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ing of “The Servant”. A resolution entitled “A Testimony to the Rulers of the World” was then introduced. It was supported by a public address delivered at Royal Albert Hall and entitled “Why World Powers Are Tottering”. The morning following the adoption of that resolution, “A Testimony,” and the delivery of the supporting argument, a daily paper of London published a full report of both, and more than a million copies were put in the hands of the people that day, and later upward of fifty million copies were published in many languages and distributed throughout the world. At the same convention the new book Deliverance, which exposes the Devil’s organization, was released internationally. The Lord’s people began to see and appreciate, as they had not previously, the two opposing organizations, God’s and the Devil’s, and the privilege that God’s anointed ones have in being his witnesses and servants.
“A TESTIMONY
“To the Rulers of the World .-
“The International Bible Students in general convention assembled declare their unqualified allegiance and devotion to the Almighty God, and believing it to be their privilege and duty so to do, in obedience to the commandments of God, send this testimony to the governing powers of the world, to wit:
“First. That it is of paramount importance that all recognize that Jehovah, the Creator of heaven and earth, is the true and almighty God besides whom there is none other; that his purpose for man is set forth in the Bible, which is his Word of truth, and that Christ Jesus is the Executor of Jehovah’s purpose; that it is now apparent to all that the nations of the world are in dire distress and perplexity, and great trouble more terrible than any heretofore experienced is now threatened; that the efforts of the rulers to establish a desirable government or world power have failed; and, now be it known unto you, that the outworking of God’s purpose concerning man, and that alone, can and will stabilize the world, and bring lasting peace, prosperity and happiness to the peoples, and that the time has come for those who are exercising governing power over the peoples to recognize these great truths.
“Second. That the reason for the prevailing condition of perplexity and distress is because man disobeyed the true God and yielded to the wicked influence of Satan, the false god; that Lucifer, originally the rightful overlord of man, because of his disloyalty to God became Satan the Devil, the instigator of all evil, and the adversary of God, and the arch enemy of man; that the evil one alienated man from the true God, and caused him to sin, by reason of which man lost his perfect home and his right to life and happiness ; that since then man has organized governments and world powers in an attempt to govern himself, but in so doing has ignored the Word of God and submitted to the control of Satan the Devil; that until now God has not interfered with Satan, to the end that man might be free to choose right or wrong. But now the time has come when God will interfere in behalf of the peoples.
“Third. That Christ Jesus, by his faithfulness unto death, became the Redeemer and Deliverer of mankind; that when on earth he taught that the time for the deliverance of the people would begin when the evil world under the rulcrship of Satan shall end, and that he, Christ Jesus,
would return and set up God’s kingdom of righteousness that the peoples might know and follow the right way; and for this reason he taught his followers to pray, ‘Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on earth as in heaven’; that in the meantime world powers have been organized and carried on for the purpose of ruling and controlling the peoples, and these world powers are designated in the Scriptures under the symbol ‘beast’ for the evident reason that they are the result of the combined efforts of the commercial, political and ecclesiastical leaders of men and are influenced and dominated by Satan, the god of this world, and have been, and are, military, harsh, cruel and oppressive, and manifest the spirit of Satan, their invisible ruler, or god; and now the repeated cries of oppressed humanity have reached unto the God of heaven, who will hear and deliver them.
“Fourth. That divine prophecy now fulfilled, and in the course of fulfillment, bears testimony to the fact that Satan’s lease of power is done, and that the old world has ended, and that the time is at hand when Christ Jesus, the executive officer of Jehovah and the rightful King of earth, will oust Satan the evil one and begin His righteous government, which shall establish God’s will on earth; that beginning with 1914 divine prophecy in the course of fulfillment gave testimony that the end of the evil world had begun in fhis, to wit, the World War, famine, pestilence, earthquakes, revolutions, . . . and later followed by general distress and perplexity of the nations of the world; that, this testimony of the fulfillment of the divine prophecy having been plainly given to the governing powers of the world, there is placed upon the shoulders of the rulers a responsibility that cannot be avoided.
“Fifth. That although Jehovah God furnished conclusive proof that the evil world had ended and that the time for the reign of his beloved Son had come, yet this testimony was ignored and pushed aside by those who should have known better; and contrary to the Word of God the commercial, political and ecclesiastical rulers attempted to stabilize the world and keep the peoples under control by adopting that makeshift which is called the League of Nations and which was wrongfully and blasphemously hailed as the political expression of God’s kingdom on earth; that the real author and father of the League of Nations compact is Satan the Devil, the god of this world, which was put forward by him as his last desperate effort to deceive the peoples, turn them away from the true God, and hold them under his own wicked control; that now after seven years of laborious effort on the part of the proponents of that compact to establish peace and prosperity, it is practically conceded that the League of Nations is a complete failure and that its utter collapse is a matter of only a brief space of time; that even now while its advocates are striving to re-assemble their forces to maintain that disintegrating and unholy alliance, the people are hearing the solemn warning of God’s prophet concerning the federation, saying ‘Associate yourselves, 0 ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces. Take counsel together, and it shall come to nought; speak the word, and it shall not stand.’—Isa. 8: 9,10.
“Sixth. That by reason of the blinding influence of
July 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
221
Satan the minds of the rulers and the ruled are turned away from the true God, and the evil forces are gathering the whole world unto the great battle of the Lord God Almighty; that there is now impending a time of trouble such as the world has never known, during which conflict Satan’s powerful organization shall fall never to rise again, and there shall be such a demonstration of divine power that all the nations will learn that Jehovah is God and that Christ Jesus is King of kings and Lord of lords.
"Seventh. That the great tribulation will reveal to the people the kingdom of God, which kingdom shall rest upon the shoulder of his beloved Son the Prince of Peace, and of the peace of that kingdom there shall be no end: it will bring the heart’s desire of all the people of good will, and in that kingdom the blind ignorance with which the people have long been afflicted will be for ever removed and with the knowledge of and obedience to God there shall come to the people everlasting peace, prosperity, health, life, liberty and happiness; and that the kingdom will be the complete fulfillment of the prophetic song of the angels, ‘Peace on earth, good will toward men.’
"Therefore we earnestly bear before you this testimony: That Jehovah is The God, and that he has installed Christ his Son, as The King of the earth, and bids you to give full obedience to earth’s rightful King. Do so and use your influence to turn the minds of the people to THE TRUE GOD, that disaster may not befall you.—Ps. 2: 2-12.”
Concerning the vision foreshadowing this John says: “And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth: and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit [abyss].” (Rev. 9:1) The proper identification of this star will be the key to the understanding of the prophecy. Undoubtedly that star is Christ Jesus, of whom 1 Thessalonians 4:16 says: “The Lord himself shall descend [come down] from heaven . . . with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God.” The Emphatic Diaglott version renders the words of Revelation 9:1, “A Star having fallen from the heaven to the earth”; Rotherham’s version renders them, “A star out of heaven fallen unto the earth.” The fall, as stated in this text, does not denote something bad. Rather the thought is that the star has come down from heaven to earth. Coming from his exalted position to earth is best represented by the word “fall” or “descend”, as concerns a star. The thought might well be expressed that this mighty Star here and now condescended, descended or came down to give attention to things pertaining to the earth.
The words of Revelation 9:1, “to him was given the key of the bottomless pit [or, abyss],” definitely identify the Star as Christ Jesus. (See Revelation 1:18; 20:1.) No one but Christ Jesus is given the key to the bottomless pit, or abyss; hence the Star mentioned must be the Lord Jesus Christ himself. At his death he went into the abyss, or "pit”, but God brought him up therefrom; and having gained this victory over death he would be the one properly entrusted with the key thereto. (Ps. 16:10; Aets 3:15) The “star” mentioned could not be Satan; because, if so, then he would have the key to let himself out of that pit. The divine record is that Jesus will open the bottomless pit at the end of the thousand years of His reign and let Satan out for a short season; and Jesus opens that pit or abyss for the sleeping saints to come out in due time. When Jesus
was on the earth he, and none other, had received authority over the abyss or pit. (Luke 8:30-33, Diaglott version, shows this.) These scriptures identify Jesus as the Star, beyond any question.
The record is that when this mighty Star came down from heaven “he opened the bottomless pit [or abyss], and there arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace; and the sun and the air were darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit”. (Rev. 9:2) The smoke ascending as from a great furnace is a precursor of destruction coming from that source which is controlled only by Jehovah and his Christ. It therefore symbolically pictures destruction. Likewise the Scriptures (James 3: 6) describe the unruly tongue, set on fire, as one of destruction. The “whirlwind”, which the prophet Ezekiel saw (1:4), was a symbol of the same thing. As further proof that the “smoke” is a symbol of coming destruction God’s prophet (Mal. 4:1) wrote: “For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.” Revelation 9:2: “And the sun and the air were darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit.” Symbolically this says: ‘The time has come to proclaim the vengeance of Jehovah God against the enemy’s organization.’
The resolution adopted at London, above mentioned as “A Testimony to the Rulers of the World”, and the supporting message, was the preaching of the Word of God concerning his vengeance, and giving the reason for the impending fall of the world powers. This was not the message of man or men, but the message of the Lord’s Word which God through his angels, without a doubt, directed should be spoken. We must therefore conclude that the angel of the Lord directs the movements of God’s organization in obedience to the command coming from “the higher powers”, Jehovah and Christ. (Rom. 13:1) The message contained in the book Deliverance, released at the same time, was a more detailed description of Satan’s organization and God’s organization preparing for battle. These messages especially make mention that the name of Jehovah is exalted and expose the wickedness of the enemy organization. These great truths of Jehovah therefore caused “the brightness of the firmament [of Satan]” to be “darkened”.
As to smoke, the prophet Isaiah, giving a description of the Lord in his temple, says: “And the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried [to the seraphim], and the house was filled with smoke.” (Isa. 6:4) Thus the glory of the Lord appeared, filling his temple. The proclamation of this message of truth began to put Satan and his cohorts in the shade. The army of the Lord is now mustered for service, and concerning that army and what accompanies it from the Lord his Word says (Joel 2:10,11, 30): “The earth shall quake before them; the heavens shall tremble: the sun and the moon shall be dark, and the stars shall withdraw their shining; and the Lord shall utter his voice before his army; for his camp is very great: for he is strong that executeth his word: for the day of the Lord is great and very terrible; and who can abide it? . . . And I will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke.” Even the Devil’s organization began to take notice that something undesirable was ap
222
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
proaching. The "smoke” and that which came out of it worried the Devil’s agents.
What came out? John describes "locusts” as coming out of the smoke upon the earth and that there was given to them power or authority “as the scorpions of the earth have power”. (Rev. 9:3) These locusts could not symbolize Satan’s servants, but they do symbolically represent the servants of Jehovah God. Verse eleven of this same chapter of Revelation says concerning the locusts: “And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue hath his name Apollyon.” This shows that the locusts symbolize an organized band or company going forth under their supreme commander; and other scriptures identify Jesus Christ as that King and Commander and the Head of the elect servant of God. The “locusts” therefore must represent God’s faithful remnant of witnesses on earth. The remnant do as 1 Peter 2:17 says, “honor the King.”
The word “Abaddon” is derived from the Hebrew word abad and means “Destroying One”, and is applied to Jehovah and his Executioner; for Jehovah is the One that is “able to save and to destroy”. Jehovah destroys them that hate him. (Deut. 7:10) Many Scripture texts apply this Hebrew word abad to Jehovah relative to destruct ion. For example, Ezekiel 28:16: “I [Jehovah] will destroy thee [Satan], 0 covering cherub.” Obadiah 8: “Shall I not in that day [the day of the Lord], saith the Lord, even destroy [abad] the wise men out of Edom, and understanding out of the mount of Esau [Satan’s organization] ?” To the same effect it is written, at Micah 5:10: “And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that I will cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy chariots.” Jehovah’s faithful remnant of witnesses on earth liow declare the coming execution of Jehovah’s judgments of destruction upon Satan’s organization at the battle of Armageddon.
LETTERS
UNITED IN GRAND PROCLAMATION
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Jehovah’s mercy endureth forever! We, his people gathered for organization instructions of the theocratic government at the zone assembly at Mattoon, Illinois, praise and bless him, for he has richly extended his mercy unto us.
Jehovah’s “strange work” now brings forcibly to the attention of the people his purpose to destroy all the wicked, visible and invisible, at Armageddon. We are joyful to be united with you in this grand proclamation. You have been an inspiration to us by means of the powerful denunciation of the tactics of the visible parts of Satan’s organization.
“Jehovah’s Battle,” the present testimony period, gives to us increased opportunities to praise our Almighty God and to “make mention that his name is exalted”, as the prophet states. Individually as members of this assembly, numbering 73, we declare ourselves for Jehovah and his beloved Son, Christ Jesus. We pray that our opportunities to serve may be increased through Jehovah’s favor and that we shall be on the alert to grasp and use such privileges.
With this letter we send our love to you. We love you greatly for your manifest devotion to our loving heavenly Father. We thank and praise him as the ‘giver of all good gifts’.
Your brethren in the theocracy,
Jehovah’s witnesses Illinois Zone No. 2.
ALL PRAISE TO JEHOVAH
Mv dear Brother Rutherford:
Just a few lines to let you know how much I enjoy reading The Watchtower, and all the Society’s publications. Also want to thank and praise Jehovah that it was through your publications I was brought to a knowledge of the truth. I haven’t been in the truth quite a year, but this has been the happiest time of my life. I wasted eighteen years in “Christendom”, but all praise to Jehovah for the privilege now of having a small part of spreading the good news of the kingdom message. When I received the truth I was not physically able to be up all day. I can now spend six or seven hours daily in house-to-house witnessing and feel ten years younger. I thank God for you, and may he bless all the workers at Brooklyn.
Sincerely, yours in his service,
(Mrs.) Ruby Mae Alcorn, Alabama.
OBEDIENT TO HIGHER POWERS
Dear Brother:
The second assembly of Pennsylvania Zone No. 1, held at Wilmington, Del., June 4, 1939, wishes to express thanks to Jehovah for the privilege of having part in His Theocratic Government, especially at this time.
We wish to thank you for the much-needed admonition contained in your letter of January 1, to all Kingdom publishers.
Activity in the field has much increased in this zone and promises to increase much more. Many have already exceeded their 60 hours and back-call quotas.
It is our determination to be obedient to instructions coming from the Higher Powers, Jehovah and Christ Jesus, through their visible channel, the Society, and work together in peace and unity and we will endeavor to our utmost to properly guard ami advance the Kingdom interests.
There are 495 present at this assembly, and many arc here for the first time; which is evidence that the Lord is gathering the “great multitude”. At the morning assembly for field service 392 were present, and 392 engaged in the field service.
We are with you in the greatest battle of all time.
JEHOVAH THE GREAT GIVER
Dear Brother Rutherford:
It was with joy that I received the January 1 issue of The Watchtower. The bright new cover harmonizes beautifully with the ever-increasing brightness of the truth revealed in its pages, and gives us strength to press on in the service of Jehovah.
I have never read a Watchtower article so plain, so convincing and strengthening, as “Deliverance Guaranteed”, which is evidence that the same message is particularly important for the great multitude; and this is an incentive now to carry The Watchtower to them as a kingdom publication. Anyone reading that article must truly acknowledge Jehovah as the great Giver. As 1 read it it made me glad and grateful beyond words that I mn on Jehovah’s side, and I pray that, by his grace, I remain there for ever.
With you wholeheartedly in Jehovah’s “strange work”, knowing full well “They shall not prevail against thee”.
Your brother and fellow servant,
C. Hutchings, England
July 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
223
TO JEHOVAH ALL GLORY
Dear Brother Rutherford:
As again one month has elapsed, we are sending you our Bethel study report for May, 1939.
We have now studied Parts 2 and 3 of “Drama of Vindication”. This is a very mighty drama which we have with admiration watched. The faith of Rahab and her eagerness to seek the Lord’s approval is quite touching, and the crossing of Jordan was followed with strained attention by us as we saw the miracle performed by the Lord. And when we come to the fulfillment, there are no words with which to express our delight. The mutual care of each other among the remnant and great multitude has especially been impressed upon us. And as we look on the ‘pile of stones in the midst of the river’, we do it overjoyed and glad for having some part in bearing and piling of them by the Lord’s grace, without which we could do nothing like that. To him we are giving all glory, for we know that it is a miracle, performed by him and for his holy name. It is a miracle that we are in Canaan, where the fight is going on, and we will, by the Lord’s help through his organization, continue to fight with you in his victorious army.
With warm greetings and asking God’s richest blessings upon you, we are,
Your brethren by His grace,
Bethel Family, Helsinki.
BLESSING OF JEHOVAH MAKETH RICH
Deab Brother Rutherford:
Loving greetings in the name of our victorious King 1 Because my heart is overflowing with gratitude to Jehovah for the great privilege of standing shoulder to shoulder with you in this the greatest battle of all time, and because I am fully aware of the fact that the enemy organization is aiming all its darts at you, I feel it is not only a privilege, but a Christian duty, to express to you my fervent love and perhaps say something that will bring joy and comfort to your heart.
By appointing you as the visible leader in his mighty theocratic arrangement Jehovah has conferred upon you an honor the like of which has never before been accorded to any man. I rejoice with you in the great honor thus conferred. Moreover, I am firmly convinced that Jehovah has thus honored you because of the fullness of your unselfish devotion to him in the performance of your commission. Your great faith in Jehovah God is manifest in everything you do, and your undaunted courage in the face of danger is a source of constant inspiration to every one of God’s true people. Your enemies, and they are legion, hate you with a perfect hatred, but your true and loyal friends, and they are in the small minority, love you in a manner “passing the love.of women”.
The joy of being associated with you and sharing in the vindication of Jehovah’s name increases every hour of every day. This joy is enhanced by the ever-increasing evidence that the members of the great multitude are rapidly waking up and are beginning to join with us in the song of praise to Jehovah.
Words fail to express the deep sense of satisfaction that wells up in my heart as I daily engage in the pioneer work among the businessmen of Boston. For this I am deeply grateful to Jehovah. Every day is replete with from six to eight outstanding experiences that thrill my heart through and through. Because I am so “unwise” (1) as to associate myself with such a man as “that man Rutherford” the Devil sees to it that plenty of abuse is heaped upon me too; but, thank God, I have learned long since to take it fight on the chin and glory in tribulations.—Rom. 5: 3-5.
In closing I cannot fail to express to you my thankfulness to Jfchovah for the “strong meat” we are constantly getting in the Watchtower articles. The dazzling splendor of the beauty of the priceless gems of truth now being revealed to God’s faithful people surpasses the power of imagination.—Job 38: 22,23.
I am proud, and happy indeed, to be associated with “that man Rutherford”, who has proved by his works of righteousness that he is a true and faithful witness to the honor and praise of the Most High God, Jehovah. It is my daily prayer that our loving Father, Jehovah, will continue to guide you in your work and give you added strength and heavenly wisdom in the stirring days just ahead. Now that the theocratic government of the great God, Jehovah, is in operation in the earth, I firmly believe we may expect to see him crack down on the Devil’s organization in very short order by an outstanding expression of his righteous judgments about to be executed against that wicked outfit.
This letter carries to you my fervent love and renewed assurance of joyful co-operation in the promotion of the kingdom interests. May the blessing of Jehovah that maketh rich be your constant portion.
Your brother and fellow servant in the service of the King Eternal,
W. B. Fowler, Pioneer.
THANK JEHOVAH FOR GRANTING LIGHT
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Three months ago I too was a prisoner in the Church of England, and I shall never be able to thank Jehovah enough for granting me the light of his Word through your books.
Having the disadvantage of a college education, we were taught there was no Devil, and the book of Genesis was winked at. How I enjoyed reading Creation! which solved so many problems for me—what is more snobbish than a public-school girl! The Church of England was such good style! And, of course, the Church of Rome was really the thing.
When my husband read your books and the truth was revealed to him, he was on the church council, many church con1-mittees, an officer in the Hereford Regiment, a member of the Druids, British Legion, and many other things. Of course, when he gave up everything for the work, I, strongly supported by the entire town, thought he was qualifying for the local asylum. Yes, the Devil sent me strong delusions, and many of his followers to cheer me up.
It was not until many months of great misery and after praying to God that if Bill was right I should see the truth, that it was revealed to me in a blinding flash in the middle of a page of the Armageddon booklet (which I confess I had stolen from his car, where he left his books after I had burnt the first he brought home). It was as clear as the pebbles at the bottom of a clear stream, and I shall try and thank God for giving me this great understanding by in a small way repaying Him by doing all I can to help in his work; and happily we are spending every moment we can in joy at kingdom interests; children and house and friends (which are now only Jehovah’s witnesses) take a second place. Bill is company servant of the Ross and Hereford companies, and we hope to be granted time before Armageddon to prove our love for Jehovah and his great King.
My small son, aged 7, loves the work and, too, the banner marches. When accidentally the wireless had been switched on at a service the other day and the parson was saying, “Good Lord, deliver us,” he switched off the set with great deliberation and said, “Yes, and they’ll need it.” The baby of three is very good, too, and comes out with me on the work and enjoys it, too.
We love the “Face the Facts” records, and they fill us with a great desire to drop everything and find the great multitude.
Thanks to Jehovah that we have you to help us.
Very sincerely,
Freda Wisell, England.
(Continued from page 210)
August. Do this in good time to allow for shipment from here before the factory closes Friday evening, July 21. No orders will be filled and shipped, nor mail be opened and answered, during this vacation period.
FIE! D EXPERIENCES
CALIFORNIA PRIEST LISTENS UNDER DURESS AND DIES
“The phonograph was set up, but before it was played the housewife requested that the Kingdom publishers wait for a few minutes. She went out the front door and returned in a few minutes with a priest from the ehureh across the street. Latching the screen door, she turned to the priest and said: 'Now, let me see you do what you told us to do. Break up their phonograph and tear up their literature.’ Greatly embarrassed, of course, was the priest and began wringing his hands, and said: ‘You took me too seriously; I didn’t mean what I said.’ The woman replied: ‘Then you don’t mean anything you say in church. You just sit down and listen to this record.’ The priest sat, and as soon as the lecture was finished he made a hasty exit. The publishers remained and found that the woman was really fed up on the church and was looking for the truth. Result: Another back-call series is now being held at her home. An interesting sequel to all this happened within a week: The priest died of heart failure very suddenly.”
CATHOLIC BRITON MEETS UP WITH INFORMATION MARCH
“Looking after a little girl while the mother was in the information march, and walking alongside on the pavement, she was approached by a gentleman who inquired what it was about, said he was a Catholic and had been looking for this all his life, admitted that religion is a snare and a racket, and promised to attend the local meetings.”
“DOORSTEP METHOD” IN ENGLAND (ZONE 24)
“A young man at a fairly large modern house was rather surprised and greatly interested when a publisher called on him and started to set the phonograph up on the doorstep. He asked her to explain more fully what she was doing. On being told the purpose of the work he asked her inside. The recording ‘Enemies’ appealed to him very much, and he asked many questions about the message and also about the phonograph work. He remarked he had never seen such a fine method of presentation before, and he would certainly have some of the books. He contributed 10/- to the work and took Enemies and Riches, and gave a year’s subscription for Consolation.”
AT VERDUN IN QUEBEC PROVINCE
“Sunday morning the publisher called at a Catholic home. Asked in, he played the record ‘Prince of Peace’. The woman told her husband to put him out. Husband told wife the message was good. Then the publisher told them this work must be done, showing them Matthew 24:14, then Jeremiah 17:5, telling them not to trust in man, but to trust in the Lord, and ‘religion is of the Devil’. Then the wife phoned for the police. Five minutes later the police arrived. She told the police to arrest him. The police asked: ‘What has he done ?’ She told the police: ‘He said religion is of the Devil.’ Policeman: ‘The priests are preaching today, Sunday, and I have no more right to arrest him than the priest.’ The publisher then repeated to the police what he had already said to those in the house. The woman then invited the publisher and policeman to the parlor, where they discussed the Truth for 25 minutes more. The woman gave the publisher an address of her uncle and stated he is very interested in these books. So the publisher has a back-call and will call around to see the woman again after he has
gotten in touch with the uncle. The police of Verdun are with us, and so is the chief.”
RIGHT AROUND HOME
“I have been ill and felt very much discouraged, being out of the service for some time. This morning I worked the territory near my home. I just went around one block and in that one block I got four back-calls, two Watchtower subscriptions, and placed a book and eight booklets.”
THIS SOUND-CAR DRIVER WAS NOT BLUFFED
“The sound-car was giving the lectures ‘Relief’ and ‘Resolution’ in Cape May Court House (N. J.). A man came up with a big car and told me to stop, saying: ‘Stop this lecture, because you are under arrest and 90 days in jail and some money to pay.’ I asked: ‘Who are you ?’ He replied he was So-and-so. I asked to see his badge. He said he left it at home. So I told him to go and get it. Then he said he would break the record to pieces on the sound equipment. I said: ‘If you have $10,000 and if Jehovah permits you yet, well, go ahead. This is the United States, not Germany; not Hitler nor Hierarchy rules.’ He said: “Are you going to stay here ?’ I said: ‘Never mind. Keep going!’ He left.”
USING THE JAPANESE RECORD ON PACIFIC COAST
“At one place a man was standing by a fence. So I set the phonograph up and began to play the record. Two women in a house 300 feet away heard it and came out to listen. At another place I did not see anyone around and no one came in response to a knock at the door. So I set up the phonograph and started playing, and there were six of them who stuck their heads out and began listening.”
BACK-CALL SQUAD IN LONDON
“The London N.W. unit of Jehovah’s witnesses have organized a back-call squad whose duty it is each week to thoroughly witness in a specific area with the phonograph and obtain back-calls, so that the people of good will may be called upon. This method has just been put into operation, and it is found that the unit now averages more than one back-call per publisher per week. In February 193S they reported 63 publishers in the field. In February 1939. 114 publishers were reported in the field; an increase of 51 publishers in 12 months. This has been accomplished by establishing model studies, then transferring after a time to a study of the book Enemies. At Denham, Bucks, a pub lishcr established a model study in his own home for the benefit of two of his relatives and a neighbor. The numbers increased in the course of a few weeks, until 12 to 14 were regularly attending. Following the model study an Enemies study commenced. The numbers at the class are still in creasing, and the publisher is setting a good lead by going into the field with them. All the surrounding territory has been well worked with the sound-car, phonograph and Face the Facts booklets. The interested ones who attend this study are all engaging regularly in the field work. They find eve ning a most suitable time to engage in the work. From re ports handed in new publishers are reported almost every week. The above area has been worked consistently for a number of years. The books and booklets have always been placed freely, but, in the past, time was not given to the people’s needs.”
224
THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
PIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilt It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Forbion, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ...........-....... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian.................40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African ..............   Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year Is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879.
“DIVINE MANDATE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The entire month of August has been designated “Divine Mandate” Testimony Period. This midsummer witnessing Period is specially favored by the release, for distribution to the general public at the popular contribution of 25c a copy, of the new book Salvation. Circulation of no other book could be more appropriate for this Period than that of Salvation, with its beautiful treatment of the recently revealed truth on the' “Divine Mandate”. What anointed witness, or what person of good will in line for this divine mandate, can hold back from a prompt and large part in this Testimony Period? The Informant gives details to guide you. The regular report should follow up your activities at the close of the month.
available, containing a facsimile of a letter to the reader in the author’s own hand and which you will much appreciate. This edition being limited, and the initial costs of manufacture being heavy, a contribution of 50c is asked per copy. Early translation of Salvation in more than twenty other languages is assured, and due announcement will be made on publication.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of September 3: “Doom of Religion” (Part 4), fl 1-19 inclusive, The Watchtower August 1, 1939.
Week of September 10: “Doom of Religion” (Part 4), fl 20-40 inclusive, The Watchtower August 1, 1939.
“SALVATION”
We take special pleasure in announcing this new book, written by the president of the Society. It was the feature release at the recent world-wide convention of Jehovah’s witnesses with its hub at New York City. The author of this book for the times describes it as “A text-book for the Jonadabs”. But a study of its 384 pages of contents will prove to you it is meat in due season and a joy to all anointed Christians as well. The author’s edition is still
VACATION
Notice! The Brooklyn factory and office continues closed for the two weeks beginning on July 22, and concluding Sunday, August 6. This enables the Bethel family, after a year of consistent strenuous activity here, to get away for a temporary change and to enjoy opportunities of field service in common with the other Kingdom publishers. No orders are being filled and shipped, nor mail opened and answered, during this vacation period.
WCHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH'S KINGDOM
Vol, LX	August 1, 1939	No. 15
DOOM OF RELIGION
PART 4
"For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places."—Eph. 6:12.
JEHOVAH has made it clearly to appear to the anointed remnant and to their companions that his kingdom under Christ is the doctrine of paramount importance set forth in the Scriptures. This is true because it is the kingdom that will vindicate Jehovah’s name. The Devil has put forth religion as a subtle means of teaching and causing men to teach doctrines exactly contrary to the kingdom. Not one of the religious institutions in existence today attempts to instruct the people concerning the importance of God’s kingdom under Christ. The religious institutions magnify the importance of men, showing outward loyalty to earthly governments, and the necessity to make themselves appear as those who have developed a beautiful character. They make much ado with their mouths about individual development of character, while at the same time pursuing a course exactly the opposite to God and his King. During the “Elijah period” of the church’s work on earth many sincere persons committed exactly the same error. “Character development” was magnified as the important thing, and it was then said of one of the “elective elders”, who for some years had been serving: “Note how he has grown. He is now so ripe and mellow, surely he is about ready to go to heaven. Soon the Lord will gather him.” Those words sounded nice to ears that love to hear them, but were very deceptive and misleading. To be sure, it is important that one should be honest, chaste, reliable, dependable, and do what is right. That is to be expected, and even required of men who make no pretense of serving God. One may do all these things, claiming to be a Christian, and not be one at all. The important thing for a real Christian to learn is the purpose of God and what is his will concerning his creatures and then to be diligent to obey God’s commandments.
’ That which is magnified throughout the Scriptures is God’s government, which government is theocratic; that is, Christ Jesus is the Head of the royal organization carrying out and accomplishing
Jehovah God’s purpose. God gave his word that he would set up his government; and since a “theocracy” means a government by the Supreme Being, that promised government, of necessity, is a theocracy. After the rebellion in Eden God’s first expression to man of and concerning His purpose was that relative to his coining government. Every one of his holy prophets, without a single exception, prophesied concerning the kingdom of God and its establishment, with Messiah as the Head thereof. For eighteen centuries Jehovah used his typical people Israel foretelling the bringing in of his kingdom. With them he made many prophetic pictures or dramas foretelling the development and setting up of his kingdom. When Jesus came to earth he began the work by announcing the kingdom of heaven. Jesus stressed the kingdom with his disciples, and those faithful apostles, while they lived, magnified the importance of the second coming of Christ Jesus and the kingdom. At all times, from Eden till now, who has opposed God’s kingdom? The answer is, and must be, that Satan, the adversary of God, has fought everything concerning the kingdom. Satan is a subtle foe. He is the original deceiver and master of fraud. What means has Satan used with greatest effect to deceive men and cause them to oppose the kingdom of God under Christ? The answer is, and of necessity must be, religion. He has used men as teachers of religion and by subtle words and seemingly good doctrines has induced men to build up an organization into which many credulous ones have been unwittingly drawn. The entire religious system, including that of the so-called “Christian religious” system, has been and is anti-Christ and therefore anti-God’s kingdom under Christ. While the apostles were still on the earth, engaged in the proclamation of the truth concerning Jehovah and his kingdom, that anti-Christ was busy deceiving the people and inducing them to follow religious teachers. Who would be specially interested in denying that Jesus is the Messiah who Jehovah long ago promised
227
228
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
should be the King and ruler of the world? The Devil, of course; and he would be the one that would put it into the minds of men to deny this great truth: “Who is a liar, but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is antichrist, that denieth the Father and the Son.” (1 John 2:22) “And every spirit that con-fesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God; and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; and even now already is it in the world.”—1 John 4: 3.
• “Christ,” the “Messiah”, means Jehovah’s “Anointed One”, his King and rightful Ruler of the world and the One who shall destroy Satan’s wicked rule. Every thing and every institution that denies that great truth is a part of the antichrist. Every thing and every institution that is not for Jehovah God and Christ Jesus is against the Lord and against his kingdom. Jesus not only magnified the kingdom, but also said: “He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad.” (Matt. 12:30) Every religious institution today extols and magnifies creatures and keeps the people in ignorance of the kingdom of Christ which will vindicate the name of Jehovah God. Religion puts the state even above God and his kingdom. Religion is therefore the chief means employed to deceive the people and oppose Christ, and religion is wholly anti-Christ and anti-God. The influential politicians in these latter days publicly proclaim: “We need more religion”; at the same time exerting their power and influence against the kingdom of God under Christ. All the facts show that religion is anti-God and anti-Christ and hence anti-God’s kingdom.
* The “remnant” and the Lord’s “other sheep” now see that the kingdom is of paramount importance. We see that every Christian must be for Christ and for the kingdom under Christ and must obey the commandments of God, and therefore must be against religion. All faithful servants of God will now keep in mind the wicked challenge of Satan in which he declared that he could turn men away from and cause them to curse God; that God accepted that challenge and declared that he would permit Satan full time and opportunity to carry out his wicked challenge before God exhibits his supreme power against that enemy. (Job 2:1-6; Ex. 9:16) The issue therefore arrays Satan and all his forces against God and against his King, Christ Jesus. From the time of Eden until now Satan has fought against God and his kingdom. Because of this issue the kingdom is stressed by all the writers of the Bible. Those faithful men of old wrote prophecy under inspiration of the spirit of Jehovah God and have magnified the importance of the kingdom. Seeing, then, that it is Satan that leads the wicked forces against God and against Christ Jesus, who, then, are the enemies
against whom the followers of Christ Jesus fight? Who are the ones that seek to destroy those who serve Jehovah? Is it possibly true that Christians must fight against flesh and blood, as religionists would have them believe? Satan and his forces arc unseen to men, and it is these unseen forces that battle against Jehovah’s King and kingdom and all who represent the kingdom. Therefore the apostle under inspiration of the spirit of God instructed the followers of Christ Jesus concerning their enemies in these words: “For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.” (Eph. 6:12) Thus it is seen that the enemy against whom the anointed of the Lord fight is not those of flesh and blood, but the enemy is made up of the Devil and his host of wicked angels, who use human creatures as their tools.
8 In this day the issue is sharply drawn because it is the time when Jehovah is doing his “strange work”, which work consists of informing the people that religion is of the Devil; and because it is of the Devil, and the means used by him to deceive the people, religion is doomed to early and complete destruction. Those who sincerely desire to know and to serve God and who now see the truth and have an understanding thereof clearly appreciate the issue that they must be against religion and must be for the kingdom, and that there is no middle ground. Discerning that religion is against God and against his kingdom enables them to see that religion is man’s enemy and the Devil’s chief instrument to use against men. That is the reason why so many persons of good will now are appearing upon the scene and declaring themselves against religion and for the kingdom of God under Christ. They clearly see that Jehovah's wit nesses are not engaged in any fight against human creatures, but that they are carrying on and carry ing forward a good work by proclaiming the message of God according to his commandments; and for this reason those persons of good will hasten to join the anointed remnant in that “strange work”. All who are on the side of Jehovah and his King must of necessity stand firmly together and work faithfully and harmoniously together, because they have a com mon purpose and a common interest, and that is to serve God and his King and to receive God’s ap proval. Necessarily then, the Devil and all his agen cies, and particularly religion and religionists, oppose God and oppose Jehovah’s witnesses ami their companions. The time must come when God would manifest and express his wrath against religions and that time has come. He sends forth his witnesses to declare his truth, which exposes religion as the in strument of the Devil, fighting against God’s kingdom
August 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
229
8 Long ago Jehovah by his prophet Joel emphasized the harmonious and forward action of his faithful people on the earth. He shows that his anointed ones and their companions would stand shoulder to shoulder, working for the kingdom. He likens his faithful anointed ones unto locusts (Joel 1:4; 2: 25) and calls them “his army”, who have no earthly king but who are under the leadership of Christ, the heavenly King. God’s faithful and loyal ones now on the earth do not need an earthly or visible king, head or ruler. They are all at unity; meaning they are all at one, and that Christ is their Leader and Head. Christ Jesus denounced religion as of the Devil, and they must follow their Head and Leader. Note now the prophecy of Joel, which discloses the harmonious movement of Jehovah’s faithful servants, who follow their King whithersoever he leads: “Neither shall one thrust another [nor against each other shall they strike (Rotherham)], they shall walk every one in his path; and when they fall upon the sword, they shall not be wounded.”—Joel 2:8.
T They have no occasion to fight one another. If they are found fighting with one another, that would be proof conclusive that they are not serving God and his King. They inarch forward in unity. They do not get out of line with one another. They do not try to mind the other fellow’s business, nor to interfere with another in the discharge of his assigned duty. Each one knows his assigned position and duty and is diligent to faithfully serve where he is put. All keep themselves in the peace of God and maintain their full peace and harmony amongst themselves, just as God foretold his faithful ones must do. (Psalm 122) The Authorized Version does not give the clearest understanding here of Joel’s prophecy, which, according to the Revised Version, reads: “They burst through the weapons, and break not off their course.” According to Rotherham: “Though in among the weapons they fall, they shall not stop.” Note here the indisputable facts in harmony with and in fulfillment of the prophecy, as stated. The legislative bodies enact laws to stop the activity of God’s people. The courts construe those laws to try to stop the work of Jehovah’s witnesses. The strong-arm squad, acting at the behest of the religious leaders, inflict punishment upon Jehovah’s witnesses, assault them, beat them, throw them into filthy prisons, falsely accuse them of crime, and otherwise ill-treat them. The religious leaders incite mobs of violent persons to assault Jehovah’s witnesses, and, as Jesus foretold, Jehovah’s witnesses are fiiated of all nations of the world for his name’s sake’. (Matt. 24:9) None of these things stop the onward march of Jehovah’s faithful servants. They realize that their commission and authority is from Almighty God, and so they are determined to obey God regardless of what men may
say or do. Some of Jehovah’s witnesses are cruelly subjected to bodily punishment, and some have actually been murdered by the religious representatives of Satan. Such things, however, do not deter others from going forward in their work. The surviving ones do not cry and weep because one of their fellow witnesses is killed by the enemy, for the reason that they know that such as die faithful are immediately changed into the glorious likeness of the Lord Jesus Christ. No human power or Devil power can stay the onward march of Jehovah’s army, whom he likens unto locusts. They are for the King and his kingdom. They know that the King will be victorious. They are determined by His favor and the grace of Almighty God to be faithful in the full performance of their duty.
8 Further describing the activities of the faithful witnesses of the Lord, his prophet records: “They shall run to and fro in the city [they leap upon the city (R.F.)] ; they shall run upon the wall, they shall climb up upon the houses; they shall enter in at the windows like a thief.”—Joel 2: 9.
6 The faithful and zealous witnesses of Jehovah invade the places held by Satan’s agents, that is, in the organizations called “churches” or religious institutions, where the “prisoners” are held. The religionists, by coercion and threats, put fear into the minds of many of their parishioners and hold them in restraint. Jehovah’s witnesses hasten to carry the message of the kingdom to such prisoners, that they may learn of God’s provision for their escape to freedom and find a place of safety. Not only are the witnesses of Jehovah proclaiming his name and his kingdom, but they are doing a good work toward those who sigh and cry because of the restraint that is put upon them and the abominations that are practiced in the religious organizations.—Ezek. 9: 4.
10 The combined elements, which constitute the visible rulers of the “present evil world”, erect what they call “legal walls” by enacting laws to prevent anyone from speaking against religion. They enact laws or ordinances forbidding the advertising of the truth by banners or other means, thus discriminating against Jehovah’s witnesses. These so-called “legal walls” do not cause Jehovah’s witnesses to stop their work, nor are they frightened at the sight of such walls. Knowing that God has commanded his work to be done, and he having promised that the enemy shall not prevail against his faithful ones, those witnesses of Jehovah go straight ahead, trusting implicitly in the Lord and doing with their might what he has given them to do. “They shall climb up upon the houses.” God’s faithful servants go from house to house to bring the message of the kingdom to those who reside there, omitting none, not even the houses of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and there they give
230
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
witness to the kingdom because they are commanded by the Most High to do so. “They shall enter in at the windows like a thief.” They do not loot nor break into the houses, but they set up their phonographs before the doors and windows and send the message of the kingdom right into the houses into the ears of those who might wish to hear; and while those desiring to hear are hearing, some of the “sour-pusses” are compelled to hear. Locusts invade the homes of the people and even eat the varnish off the wood and eat the wood to some extent. Likewise God’s faithful witnesses, likened unto locusts, get the kingdom message right into the house and they take the veneer off the religious things that are in that house, including candles and “holy water”, remove the superstition from the minds of the people, and show them that the doctrines that have been taught to them are wood, hay and stubble, destructible by fire, and they cannot withstand the heat. The people are enabled to learn that “purgatory” is a bogeyman, set up by the agents of Satan to frighten the people into the religious organizations, where they may be fleeced of their hard-earned money. Thus the kingdom message plagues the religionists, and the clergy find that they are unable to prevent it. Therefore, as described by the prophet, the message comes to them like a thief that enters in at the windows, and this message is a warning to those who are on the inside that Jesus Christ has come, and they remember his warning words, to wit: “Behold, I come as a thief.” (Rev. 16:15) The day of Armageddon is very close, and that day comes upon the world in general like a thief in the night. (1 Thess. 5:2) To be sure, the Lord sees the efforts on the part of religionists to prevent his message from reaching the people, and he laughs at them and has such opponents in derision. The work that is now being done is God’s work, his “strange work”, and no power can stop it. God will finish it in his own due time.
11 Satan, having been cast out of heaven and down to earth, where he now operates in defiance of God and his kingdom, is desperately fighting against those who serve Jehovah, and he brings into action all his wicked spirits, attempting in every possible way and by every possible means to thwart the proclamation of the kingdom. Here at the earth the battle of truth is being fought and is carried on against the errors of religion, and it is shaking the religious institutions to the foundation. “The earth shall quake before them; the heavens shall tremble; the sun and the moon shall be dark, and the stars shall withdraw their shining.”—Joel 2:10.
“ Satan’s visible organization, religious, political and commercial, is now in a state of fear and trepidation, and the organization is quaking and trembling. The leaders thereof are enraged and are shaken at
the sound of the message of God’s kingdom, and in their desperation they resort to every possible means to stop it. The enemy tried to destroy the Lord’s work during the World War, but after the war the witness work was revived and soon thereafter the “strange work” began in earnest. “And after three days and an half the spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell upon them which saw them. And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their enemies beheld them. And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand; and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven.”—Rev. 11:11-13.
13 The Lord is now in command of his faithful witnesses, and the earthly governments are giving evidence of how they are quaking by enacting laws and making orders in council to prevent the activities of Jehovah’s witnesses. In some of the more benighted places they are preventing the importation of the kingdom message in the form of books, phonographs, records and magazines; yet the witnesses go straight on telling the people about it, and the efforts of the enemy cause the honest and sincere people to search out the reason for the opposition, and thus they are enabled to find the way of escape. Towns and states enact ordinances specifically directed against Jehovah’s witnesses, and judges and magistrates of some of the courts have exploded in anger from the judicial bench in words like these: “These Jehovah people come in here like a swarm of locusts, showing no respect for our ordinances nor for our churches.” Certain towns in Connecticut and New Jersey are striking examples of this.
“ Seeing the inability of the police to stop the witness work, the ecclesiastics tremble in rage and fear. Then the Devil and his host of wicked angels tremble and are viciously moved in their efforts to stop the work by Jehovah’s witnesses. Satan and his host of wicked spirits in high places constitute the “heavens”, meaning the invisible part now operating at the earth against God’s kingdom and his people. It is Satan and his angels that carry on the war against Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions: “And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make wai’ with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.”—Rev. 12:17.
15 These scriptures and facts are exactly in harmony with the words of the apostle Paul at Ephesians 6:12, which show conclusively that the warfare of God’s faithful witnesses on earth is against the Devil and his host of wicked angels and that the Devil and those wicked angels use human creatures
THE WATCHTOWER,
231
August 1, 1939
as visible agents to carry on their vicious work of opposition. This ought to convince any reasonable person, and certainly anyone who has the truth, that the kingdom of God under Christ is the most important of all things, because that kingdom will wipe out Satan’s organization and will vindicate the name of Jehovah and provide means for salvation for those who love righteousness. So understanding, those who love the Lord should be so enthused that they would want to increase their energies in looking after the kingdom interests and doing all within their power to make known the kingdom to others.
‘•During the past few months the number of the witnesses in the field has greatly increased, because more Jonadabs have learned of God’s kingdom and have joined the remnant in the service; and their increased activities have brought more fear upon the religionists and caused them to express their anger in a more vicious manner. 'The sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their shining.’ When the plague of locusts was upon Egypt (Ex. 10:15), "they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land was darkened; and they did eat every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees.” That pictured the plague that is now upon “Christendom”. The big clergymen, and the principal ones of their flocks, are the ones symbolically represented as “the sun and the moon” and the shining “stars”, and their ardent parishioners regard them as “the lights of the world”; but now their light is being very much obscured by the message of Jehovah’s kingdom proclaimed by his army of antitypical locusts. God’s message of truth is now informing the honest people that their hope is not in religious leaders, nor in the principal ones of their flock, but that their only hope is in Christ Jesus and his kingdom; and that truth shuts off the light from the big moguls of “Christendom”. To the honest and sincere people of today the words of Jehovah concerning Christ Jesus sound out with great encouragement, to wit: “In his name shall the nations hope.” (Matt. 12:21, A.R.V., margin) Thus it is seen that the truth makes dark the light of the clergymen, and the truth shines upon and brightens some of the sin-sick world. Jehovah’s “strange work” gives no glory or honor to men or to any creatures of the world. It is as the Lord has said through his apostle: “Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?” (1 Cor. 1:20) The worldly bright-lights are overshadowed and their shining grows less as the message of the kingdom is carried forward. Even the political leaders that have been shining lights amongst men for some time have yielded to Satan’s seductive influence and have turned to religion, calling out loudly for “more religion”, and their former bright shining as political leaders is disappearing. Jehovah’s army of
“locusts” moves steadfastly onward, and while the darkness increases upon the worldly-wise the light upon the Lord’s people continues to increase to their joy.
” Is the campaign now carried on for the glory of Jehovah’s witnesses ? Not by any means. It is the message of God, and he only should and does receive the honor and glory. “And the Lord shall utter his voice before his army [before his host (Roth.)]; for his camp is very great; for he is strong that executeth his word; for the day of the Lord is great and very terrible; and who can abide it?”—Joel 2:11.
18 By Christ Jesus his King and through his theocratic organization Jehovah roars forth his message proclaiming to all creation that the day of final reckoning is at hand. This is not for the purpose of exalting or praising the “locusts”, his witnesses, but for the express purpose of informing the people that the Almighty God is Jehovah. The “locusts” have no earthly king, but they are under their heavenly King, Christ Jesus, who commands them. He is invisible to human eyes, and he commands and leads the host of the Most High. It is the “voice” of Jehovah uttered by his duly authorized and commissioned Executive Officer, Christ Jesus. (1 Thess. 4:16,17) “His camp is very great”; that is, very numerous as respects the volume of the message that the Lord sends forth and that his camp puts out. It is the utterance of Jehovah, and it is his “strange work”, and he is very strong and he uses his campers to carry on his work regardless of opposition. Soon he will finish that work and will prove that he has found men on earth who will maintain their integrity toward him under pressure from the enemy. This is Jehovah’s day, and “the day of the Lord is great and very terrible”. The first part of the day of Jehovah is occupied with his “strange work” of proclaiming the message of his vengeance against religion and hypocrisy and announcing that his kingdom is the only hope of mankind. The judgment of the world has begun and is progressing, and the nations are now being separated, and all this must be done prior to Armageddon, and with Armageddon Satan’s organization shall cease.—Matt. 25:31-46.
16 The question is then propounded by the prophet: “And who can abide it?” that is, Who can maintain his integrity and abide as a member of God’s organization, whether said to be of the remnant or of the “other sheep”? It is a time of great test upon each and every one who has undertaken to do the will of God. Those who do abide in this day and prove their integrity are the ones who have full faith and confidence in God and in his King and who march forward in obedience to his commandments, regardless of the opposition on the part of the foe. These faithful ones now fully appreciate the fact that their fight
232
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
is not against human creatures, not against men because such men are Catholics or Protestants or Jews, or non-believers in anything (they are not fighting against human power or human governments), but that they are being assaulted and opposed by the Devil and his host of wicked angels, and that such invisible ones are using men to carry out their wicked works, and that men thus used are the ones who have yielded to religion and thereby have been seduced by Satan. The work of Jehovah’s witnesses and “his camp” is to obey God and magnify his name that the people may learn their only means of salvation.
WARNING HIS PEOPLE
20	Many centuries ago, and in the days of his typical people, Jehovah caused the prophecy of Joel to be uttered. Up to this point in the prophecy God tells of hypocritical religion, and of his purpose to destroy religion. He knew the end from the beginning, and in due time God informs his covenant people as to the meaning of the prophecy and what their duty is at this time. By his prophet Jehovah now addresses those who have made a covenant to do his will and to follow in the footsteps of Christ Jesus. Religion is Satan’s chief means of turning men away from God, and the warning from Jehovah to his covenant people is that they must put away now everything pertaining to religion and give themselves wholly and without reservation to his service. “Therefore also now, saith the Lord, turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning.”—Joel 2:12.
21	This part of the prophecy appears to have the beginning of its fulfillment in completeness shortly before the beginning of God’s “strange work”, that is, between the years A.D. 1918 and 1922. Long before that time God had caused his prophets to utter his judgment against religion and to foretell his “strange work” and what would be the effect on religion. His covenant people during the “Elijah period” of the church, and prior thereto, were walking with the religionists and had imbibed many religious formalisms and practices. It was difficult for them to get away from something that they did not understand was against God. The time came for them, however, to separate themselves completely from the religious institutions. While walking with religionists the condition of God’s covenant people was such that, figuratively speaking, they were clothed with filthy garments, which filth they had gathered upon them by association with the Babylonish religious systems and giving honor to high dignitaries in such organizations. The time came when they must be cleansed, and the Lord said to them: “And he answered and spake unto those that stood before him, saying, Take away the filthy garments from him. And unto him
he said, Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with change of raiment.”—Zech. 3:4.
22	The “Refiner’s fire” and “Fuller’s soap” did the cleansing work when the Lord came to his temple and began judgment. (Mal. 3:1-3) All those who stood before the Lord at the temple judgment are of necessity included in the foregoing admonition to forsake everything pertaining to the world and turn wholly to the Lord. Therefore Jehovah through his prophet says: “Turn ye even to me with all your heart.”
23	Prior to that God’s covenant people were trying to develop character, and that in such perfect form that Jehovah could approve them; that is to say, they were trying to grow up to perfection by their own efforts. They had been taught and believed that a Christian must so deport himself that he would have the approval of worldly people who looked upon him; that he must recognize the state as the “higher powers”; and that he must be careful to cause no offense to religionists, and particularly to the high dignitaries in the religious organization. The vindication of Jehovah’s name was unknown to those of the Elijah period, and the kingdom was a secondary matter to be looked forward to. Most of those of the Elijah period were looking forward to their resurrection change, when they would be taken to heaven to "help rule mankind and restore them’. In due time God revealed to his covenant people that such a course of action is not the proper one; that they must not bestow honor upon men; that it is impossible for these to bring themselves to perfection, but that their sufficiency before him is in Christ Jesus, their Head and perfect guide; and that each and every one must wholly turn himself to and obey the Lord’s commandments in support of the kingdom. (Isa. 6:1-9) These truths began to be revealed to his people after the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple. His witnesses must be equipped, and therefore they must forsake religion. They must recognize God and Christ Jesus as the only “Higher Powers”. They must put away the fear of men and really fear God. The filth upon their garments, received while in Babylon, must be put away, and this they would do by separating themselves entirely from the Babylonish systems and devoting themselves exclusively to God’s kingdom; and, thus cleansing their garments, they would be identified as for God and for his kingdom. Because of Babylonish practices the covenant people of Jehovah had been brought into a snare and, in a measure, made captives and prisoners by the enemy. God’s word addressed to typical Israel now became appropriately applied to spiritual Israel, to wit: “0 Israel, return unto the Lord thy God; for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity. Take with you
August 1, 1939
3THE WATCHT0WEK
233
words, and turn to the Lord: say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously; so will we render the calves of our lips.”—Hos. 14:1, 2.
24	Those gathered at the temple and who receive the Lord’s approval must show their love exclusively for God and for his kingdom. (Deut. 6: 5, 6; 1 John 5:3) They must turn to God “with all your heart [devotion], and with fasting, and with weeping”, because of the iniquity received in Babylon, and henceforth they must abstain from indulging the flesh according to religion, in order that proper service and worship might be rendered unto Jehovah God. “Fasting and weeping” would mean refraining from everything religious, because religion dishonors God’s holy name and is a reproach to his people. Mourning because of their past iniquity shows that his servants are in a right attitude toward Jehovah God and in a position to receive his blessings and approval. “Blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be comforted.” (Matt. 5: 4) The Lord does comfort and has comforted all of Zion who have turned entirely, wholly and completely to him, who have turned away from religion, and who have unhestitatingly exposed religion and declared themselves unequivocally and without compromise for Jehovah and his kingdom.
25	Such turning to the Lord must not be a formal matter, but must be done sincerely and truly, and in order to receive God’s approval his servants must see and appreciate that the issue that is now to be settled is the vindication of Jehovah’s name and that it is the most important thing; that therefore the kingdom is the most important doctrine because the means by which Jehovah vindicates his name.
26	The Lord does not command that his people shall go about in grief and sorrow before the world, nor even before one another. Note he says through his prophet: “And rend your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God; for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil.”—Joel 2:13.
” Outward signs of grief would count for nothing and could not be pleasing to God when indulged in that others might look upon such action. True sorrow of heart because of failure to do God’s will is manifested by the creature towards Jehovah, and not for the purpose of being seen by men. There must be a truly contrite spirit, that is, a genuine heart-sorrow because of failure in the past to show complete devotion to God and his kingdom. (Ps. 51:17,18) There must be a true inward sorrow, which the Lord alone sees; for he is the one whose approval must be had and enjoyed. The snare into which God’s sincere people had fallen was due to the religious influence about them and because of their own negligence and fear of creatures. When God revealed to them the plight in which they were, the sincere ones were truly
sorrowful and ashamed. They turned to the Lord, and his mercy was shown unto them. “For he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness.” The Lord must have a cleansed people, who would offer unto him an offering in righteousness, and those who were truly devoted to God when being judged at the temple received his mercy: “Therefore thus saith the Lord, I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies; my house shall be built in it, saith the Lord of hosts, and a line [of constructive work] shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem [Jehovah’s visible organization, which had been desolated in 1918 by the efforts of the enemy].”—Zech. 1:16.
28	It is not the will of God that his sincere servants shall perish, but that they should turn to him when they see the right way, and, doing so readily, receive his blessings: “The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness; but is long-suffering to us-ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.”— 2 Pet. 3:9.
29	God was angry with the erring ones during 1918, but when the faithful ones saw their condition they speedily sought the face of Jehovah, and that with true and sincere sorrow of heart. Then the Lord showed his mercy to such and filled their mouth with praise for him, and this he foretold by his prophet Isaiah (12:1,2): “And in that day thou shalt say, 0 Lord, I will praise thee; though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou com-fortedst me. Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid; for the Lord JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; he also is become my salvation.” Instead of destroying the sincere yet erring ones when the Lord came to his temple, he cleansed them, and then Jehovah “shortened” the day of tribulation for their sake, affording them an opportunity to prove their love for him. (Matt. 24:21,22) The destruction of “Christendom” was postponed or delayed that the “elect” might have full opportunity to bear testimony to the name of Jehovah before “Christendom” and might therefore have a part in doing God’s “strange work”.
80	God could not approve these sincere hearing ones unless such hearing ones, when informed of their mistake, would be diligent to repent and seek his face with prayer and fasting and sincere heart-sorrow: “Who knoweth if he will return [(I?.P.) whether he will not turn] and repent, and leave a blessing behind him; even a meat offering, and a drink offering, unto the Lord your God?”—Joel 2:14.
81	The faithful remnant did obey God’s admonition to turn to him wholly and to avoid religion and shun it, and now they have the proof from the Lord that their course was right and they know that God did turn away from them destruction and hence did
234
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
change his course of action and cleanse and purify the remnant and reinstated them in his service and did make them his witnesses. Those who held to religion and religious practice could not have God’s blessing, and such fell into the “evil servant” class. Jehovah’s “strange work”, as pictured by the locust plague, could not be stopped and set aside, but its coming did not do evil to the faithful remnant, but afforded great blessings to them by giving them a part in Jehovah’s “strange work”. “Christendom” did not repent, and therefore God sends upon “Christendom” his army of “locusts” that engage in his “strange work”, which results in destroying the food and the pasture of the religionists. God having given his witnesses, the “locusts”, a part in his “strange work” as stated in the prophecy, he has ‘left behind him blessings’ since 1922, and such blessings as had not been enjoyed by his people before. “A meat [meal] offering, and a drink offering, unto the Lord your God,” has been graciously provided by Jehovah for his faithful servants that they might serve him in verity and offer to him an offering in righteousness. (Mal. 3: 3) No one else has received such blessings from the Lord. As Jehovah’s witnesses go forward in the strength of the Lord, having a part in his “strange work”, their blessings continue to increase and their joy is greatly enlarged.
CALL TO ACTION
82	The “Elijah work” came to an end in 1918, and the consecrated throughout the earth reached a state of inactivity for some time. In the year 1919, and shortly after the removal of their restraint and their release from captivity, God’s consecrated people began to awaken to the necessity of busying themselves, and this without doubt was due to the fact that the Lord was directing them; and this is shown by the words of his prophet: “Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly.” (Joel 2:15) Zion (referring to God’s organization, and including the visible part thereof on earth) awakened. That blowing of the trumpet in Zion was for the good of God’s released and restored spiritual Israelites, his “remnant” on the earth, and did not call at that time for the activity concerning the “great multitude”. The time had arrived for God’s people to become active, and the call went forth for immediate action. The Society sounded the alarm from the columns of The Watchtower, and a solemn assembly was called. That call was to renewed activity in Jehovah’s service with that fearlessness that had been pictured long ago by the prophet Elisha. In the face of great opposition and much reproach the faithful witnesses of Jehovah responded with joy and zeal to that call, and in 1922 the witness work began in a really organized, systematic and increased manner.
MINUTE INSTRUCTION
33	Among the strongest proofs that Jehovah is guiding his people in the way they should go is that shown when Jehovah uses them to fulfill his prophecy and then afterwards gives them an understanding of the prophecy, and reveals to his people that they have been so used. During the World War God’s servants on the earth were broken up and scattered by the enemy, particularly the religious element thereof. They must be regathered and enter the service of Jehovah, and the prophecy of Joel shows God’s guiding hand in this matter. (Joel 2:16) In the year 1919 the servant class began to be gathered together and to prepare to devote themselves with renewed zeal to the service of the Lord, and therefore to be a sanctified company, set aside for the exclusive service of Jehovah. “Assemble the old men.” (R.V.) That instruction could not refer to the “elective elders”, but manifestly refers to those more mature ones amongst the Lord’s people, and which elsewhere are pictured by Mordecai and Naomi and who remained faithful under the test imposed upon them during the World War. “Gather the children,” says the prophecy; and that seems to apply to the younger ones coming into the servant class and who were pictured by Esther and Ruth, and who were added to the “faithful servant” class from and after 1922. Incidentally this instruction shows the will of God concerning minor children, that they should be brought along to the meeting or assembly place with the older ones and there hear and learn about God’s kingdom.
34	The admonition or instruction of the Lord applies to every one of the consecrated, regardless of position in the organization. Note that the prophecy says “the bridegroom” and “the bride” must go forth. Symbolically this means all those who have entered into the marriage relationship then must not permit that to be any excuse for inactivity in the service. The fact that one is the husband and the other is the wife is no justification or excuse to remain out of the service. When a person makes a covenant to do the will of God, that covenant takes precedence over all other covenants, whether made before or after consecration. The marital relationship will not excuse one from fulfilling his or her covenant to serve Jehovah, because the covenant with Jehovah is of paramount importance. The kingdom has come; and to announce the King, who will vindicate Jehovah’s name, is the privilege and duty of everyone who has taken the vow of consecration. To those who have agreed to follow Jesus he says: “If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.”—Luke 14:26.
35	With stronger force those words apply today to
THE WATCHTOWER
235
August 1, 1939
those who are in a covenant to do God’s will. To beseech the brethren, who have made a consecration, to make good that covenant by entering into the service and to zealously engage in the work of the Lord, is the privilege of each one of the remnant. The apostle Paul did that very thing: “I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.” —Rom. 12:1.
88	Some amongst the consecrated were inclined to think that because of their position and standing in the congregation they should not engage in the house-to-house witness work, but that their part was chiefly to make speeches and to serve at meetings. But note the instruction of the Lord through his prophet concerning such: “Let the priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them: wherefore should they say among the people, Where is their God?”—Joel 2:17.
87	The priests and ministers here mentioned picture all in line for the royal priesthood; and all of these, having been brought into the temple, must now offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness, to wit, “the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name.” (Heb. 13:15) Regardless of the position occupied, no consecrated one could be excused from the guilt and fault of God’s people, nor from sorrow from reproach upon His name, nor from praying for the vindication of His name. All were guilty who had been thus negligent, and all were admonished to weep and to show real sorrow and a contrite heart for the neglect or lack of zeal in making known the name of the Most High. Not that they should magnify themselves, but that they should show a real and genuine desire to magnify the name of Jehovah and make known that his kingdom is here. Then says the prophet : “Spare thy people, O Lord.” They were instructed to cry thus openly and admitting guilt, negligence, or failure to perform service under adverse conditions. The keenest interest of the consecrated must be in the kingdom and for the vindication of Jehovah’s name. God had taken out from the nations a “people for his name”, which consecrated people constituted the heritage of the Lord; and so these were instructed to pray to God: “Give not thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen [religionists who do not serve God] should [use a by-word against (margin)] them [should mock them (Rotherham)].” If God should send a plague upon his people the religionists would mock. They mock God by denying his existence and by saying: “God is not all-powerful; hence his people suffer.” It was necessary for the
“faithful servant” class to be shown mercy and to be recovered from the erring way, and particularly from religion and religious practice, that they might avoid the plague that was coming, which has now come upon “Christendom”, and that they might be servants to the honor and praise of Jehovah. In harmony with this God put in the mouth of his consecrated people this prayer, which they pray: “Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name; and deliver us, and purge away our sins, for thy name’s sake. Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God? let him be known among the heathen in our sight, by the revenging of the blood of thy servants which is shed. Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee; according to the greatness of thy power preserve thou those that are appointed to die: and render unto our neighbours sevenfold into their bosom their reproach, wherewith they have reproached thee, O Lord.”—Ps. 79: 9-12.
88	The admonition and instruction from the Lord, set out in the prophecy, is not for any selfish reason, but for the well-being of God’s covenant people, that they may be in a proper condition of mind and heart to serve Jehovah as they have agreed to do. If the servant class would follow the course marked out for them and would repent and reform and get busy to carry out their covenant, Jehovah would safeguard the interests of his people and prosper them; and such was the promise of the Lord: “Then will the Lord be jealous for his land, and pity his people.” —Joel 2:18.
89	Those who were approved at the temple judgment and taken into God’s organization, forming the remnant of his anointed, did repent and reform, and then Jehovah did show, and continues to show, his loving-kindness for them, and these are represented in the last-quoted prophecy as “his land”. God delivered them from being prisoners of Satan’s crowd and took away from them the fear of man. He opened the way for the remnant to enter fully into his service and to thereafter perform fearlessly his kingdom message.
40	Since 1922 the Lord has clearly revealed to his people that their fight is not against the weaknesses of the flesh, nor against flesh-and-blood creatures, but that their fight is against Satan and the host of wicked ones, invisible to human eyes, that have overreached men and used men to set up and operate religious institutions, by and through which they have made war against God’s covenant people. His faithful ones have learned that, in order to withstand the enemy, they cannot rely upon their own ability, but that each one must be fully equipped with the armor of the Lord and rely upon him. The covenant people of God have learned that the time is here for a complete showdown with the Devil’s crowd and that
THE WATCHTOWER
236
therefore this is “the evil day”. The time arrived, therefore, for specific instruction as to what course the anointed should take, and the Lord, through his Word, says to them: “Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and, having done all, to stand.” (Eph. 6:13) No time now to ask yourself, What will the people think about me if I go out in the service? No reason now to say, Shall I be able to demonstrate that I have developed a beautiful character and can always be sweet under all conditions? What creatures think of the remnant is not material. How God regards them is of all-importance. Mark well the equipment which the Lord has provided and which he instructs the remnant now to put on: “Having your loins girt about with [the] truth”; that is to say, show that you are a real servant of the truth who is not abashed or ashamed, but who boldly serves God and his King at all times. Put on the “breastplate of righteousness”; that is to say, demonstrate that your heart motive is wholly, entirely and without compromise for Jehovah and his kingdom and that you are pursuing a singleness of purpose to serve God and his kingdom. Have “your feet shod with . . . the gospel of peace”; that is to say, fully equipped to enter upon and go over rough and rocky roads, made so by the enemy, and at all times and under all circumstances of adversity proclaim the good news of ‘peace to those of good will toward God’. Note the fight is not against your fellow creatures. You are not fighting against some earthly institution or men of earth, but contending at all times for the kingdom under Christ, and your only hope is in God and
Brooklyn, N. Y.
in Christ, and you are warring against the enemies of God and the enemies of his kingdom. Then the admonition is given: “Above all, [take] the shield of faith,” against which the darts of the enemy avail nothing. Faith consists of a knowledge of Jehovah’s expressed purpose and a full and complete reliance upon his Word; and, having that shield, the darts of the enemy cannot deter the faithful servant in performance of duty. The Devil and all his angels cannot convince the remnant that their cause is hopeless. Their confidence and trust is implicitly in God and Christ his King. Furthermore, “Take the helmet of salvation”; that is to say, have an intellectual appreciation of the proper relationship between the remnant and Jehovah God and his kingdom and rely upon God’s Word, knowing that salvation belongeth to Jehovah and that there is no other means of salvation and victory. ‘Take the sword of the spirit, the word of God,’ and use it as the Lord has directed it shall be used. (Vss. 14-17) That means to completely expose the religion of the Devil and his angels, and to do so by pointing out to the people from the Word of God that religion is a snare and a racket, and against God and against his kingdom. Thus equipped with the armor which the Lord has provided for his covenant people, they could not be dismayed by Satan and his agents. Some of the consecrated, when brought before the temple for judgment, failed to obey and to meet the test, but leaned to their own understanding; while some were fully obedient. And now mark what has been the result upon each class.
(To be continued)
THE FIRST WOE
WHEN the “bright and morning Star”, Christ Jesus the King, received the key of the bottomless pit and opened the abyss, smoke arose. The record at Revelation 9:1-3 says: “And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth: and unto them was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power.” Verse eleven says that their king was God’s messenger or angel that had the key of the bottomless pit, and that here in this capacity his name in the Hebrew language is Abaddon, which means “destroyer”; in the Greek the name is Apollyon.
The Greek word Apollyon means “destroying one”, and is applied many times in the Scriptures to Jehovah, who is called the destroying One, as at Matthew 10:28; 21:41; Jude 5. If there could be any doubt about this, James settles it when he writes (4:12) : “There is one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy [Greek: apollymi] : who art thou that judgest another?” The overwhelming Scriptural authority, in both the Hebrew and the Greek books of the Bible, applies these titles to Jehovah. Christ Jesus being the chief executive officer of Jehovah, to whom is committed all power in heaven and earth, and being authorized to act
as Jehovah’s officer to destroy, the titles “Abaddon” and “Apollyon” therefore properly apply to him. (Num. 24:17-19; Mark 1:24; Luke 4:34) The only reasonable conclusion, therefore, is that Jesus, the glorified King armed for war and having the key to the bottomless pit, is the “king” over the “locusts”. This definitely identifies the “locusts” as members of God’s organization, to wit, the remnant of his faithful witnesses on earth. The day of God’s vengeance against the enemy organization having come, it is appropriate that Jehovah assume the role of Destroyer, that is, Abaddon, or Apollyon (“for our God is a consuming fire”—Hebrews 12:29), which title particularly applies at the time the kingdom of God is being announced. His beloved Son, then, the King, bears the same title, and the title has a special application in the “day of the Lord”, which day began in 1914 A.D. and continues thereafter.
The description of the “locusts” shows that they form a part of God’s army, the fighting organization, and therefore proves that the same symbolism refers to the remnant on earth, who “keep the commandments of God and have the testimony of Jesus Christ”. (Rev. 12:17) These are the
August 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER,
237
willing volunteers in the day of the Lord’s power. (Ps. 110: 3) John says: “And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto battle.” (Rev. 9:7) This further identifies them as the same ones who form the Lord’s army as -described by the prophet Joel.—Joel 2.
The horse is symbolically used in the Scriptures to represent warfare. Jeremiah 8:6: “The horse rusheth into the battle.” God’s remnant now on the earth have taken the offensive. Fearlessly they volunteer and move forward to battle under their Leader and Commander. (Ps. 110:3) Jehovah’s description of the horse, at Job 39:19-22, follows: “Hast thou given the horse strength ? hast thou clothed his neck with thunder? Canst thou make him afraid as a grasshopper? the glory of his nostrils is terrible. He paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth in his strength; he goeth on to meet the armed men. He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted; neither turneth he back from the sword.” Such is a good description of those who fearlessly follow the Lord Jesus whithersoever he leads.
Verse 7 further says of the locusts: “On their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men”. This shows that God’s militant remnant is clothed with divine authority to do kingdom work, which is the crowning work of all work now to be done, and their faces as of men symbolize that they are benevolent, loving and kind, and the motive is pure. They reflect God’s image because they represent him. They are not “bald” locusts, such as the Israelites were permitted to eat. (Lev. 11:22) They have not ‘cut off their hair’ for mourning, but are joyful in the Lord and are in the likeness of the Lord Jesus, in this, that, as Revelation 1:14 pictures Him, they have hair. The difference is that they have “hair as the hair of women” (Rev. 9:8), which symbolizes that they arc in subjection to their Head Christ Jesus.—1 Cor. 11:15.
“And their teeth were as the teeth of lions” (vs. 8) ; showing that they are prepared to eat “strong meat” and are not babes. They are wholly devoted to the Lord God. (1 Cor. 3:1-3; Heb. 5:14; Joel 1:6) “And they had breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron,” therefore unbreakable ones, because they have on “the breastplate of faith and love”, “the breastplate of righteousness,” and arc “strong in the Lord and in the power of his might”. (1 Thcss. 5:8; Eph. 6:12-17) Isaiah 59:17 says: “For he put on righteousness as a breastplate.” They know that they are right and on Jehovah’s side and they fear neither man nor devil. They are the fighting contingent of the Lord’s people, joyfully following their Head and Leader.
Verse 9 continues: “And the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses running to battle.” When the Lord’s remnant are in action they make a sounding noise which frightens the enemy. Their chief business is to make a joyful noise to the glory of the Lord. This is another proof that they arc of God’s organization. By the use of the radio and especially recorded speeches played on portable phonographs, transcription machines and soundcars, and the millions of books they distribute, they make a great noise; so it is thought by those who are frightened. One real Christian can put to flight a thousand ecclesiastical frauds: “One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one.” (Isa. 30:17) Joel 2: 5 says: “Like the noise of chariots on the tops of mountains shall they leap, like the noise of a
flame of fire that devoureth the stubble, as a strong people set in battle array.”
When God’s children learned that there is a remnant of spirit-begotten ones on earth to whom the Lord has committed the testimony of Jesus Christ (Rev. 12:17), and that they are the witnesses of Jehovah sent forth to declare his vengeance, it was easy for them to see that the description concerning the “locusts” exactly fits the remnant. It shows that this symbolically represents that division of the Lord’s army which is on earth and which delights to keep the commandments of God. About this there eannot be the slightest doubt.
Further describing this militant army of “locusts”, Revelation 9:10 (Diaglott version) says: “And they have tails like scorpions, and stings; and in their tails was their power to injure men five months.” God is his own interpreter. He says: “The prophet ... be is the tail.” (Isa. 9:15) If the prophet teaches lies, then he is a lying prophet; and if he teaches the truth he is a true prophet. God’s people under Christ Jesus are thus teachers of the truth. (Isa. 55:4) The prophecy or message which they deliver is from the Lord. This exposes Satan and his organization and his agents who teach lies; therefore the message which the locusts leave behind stings, and has power to hurt. It is the message of God’s vengeance. It is the prophecy, “the tail,” that docs the hurting. No physical force is to be used, but the “locusts” (God’s remnant) use their mouths to preach and leave behind the prophecy in printed form, and the message does the hurting.
The “Testimony” or resolution adopted at the international convention of Jehovah’s witnesses in London, England, in May, 1926, and the accompanying argument in support thereof, set forth that Satan is the god of this world; that the British empire is the seat of his beastly organization ; that the League of Nations is the child of Satan, and its mother is the beastly governments of earth; that God had set his beloved Son upon his throne as earthly rightful King and soon Satan’s organization must go down, and therefore the tottering and impending fall of the world powers. These statements were clearly proved from the Scriptures, or prophecy of God’s Word. The wide publication of this message stung the British imperialists advocating the League of Nations, and all the big men in Satan’s organization were stung and hurt by the prophecy. When more than fifty million copies were put in the hands of the people the stinging continued, and their torment increased “as the torment of a scorpion, when he striketh a man”. Those stung cried out in woe and in bitter indignation. The British press and the clergymen in bitter terms denounced those who had to do with the declaration of this stinging prophecy. The American clergy and public press joined in denouncing the message and the messengers.
This was the first “woe”, and the fact that it is called,a “woe” shows that it must be inflicted by God’s organization upon Satan’s organization; and this is further proof that the locusts represent the Lord’s army. Of this Revelation 8:13 foretold, saying: “Woe to the inhabiters [ruling factors] of the earth, by reason of the other voices of the trumpet of the three angels, which are yet to sound!”
The angels of the Lord were instruments used by him directing his people on earth to give out the message above
238
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
mentioned at London, and this was the first “woe”; and two more “woes” must follow, as Revelation 9:12 states. This proves that the two remaining trumpets must be woes upon the same organization, which is the enemy of God, and that these woes must be inflicted by God’s organization. God keeps an accurate account of the tormenting message and he shows no quarter to the enemy. His message is a torment to the enemy because they cannot get away from it.
The command given to the locusts (army of the Lord) was that they should not hurt the grass, nor any green thing, nor any tree, but hurt “only those men which have not the seal of God in their foreheads”; and they were not to kill, but to torment. (Rev. 9:4, 5) Exodus 10:13-15 says that the locusts God sent upon ancient Egypt ate up every green thing. The army of the Lord is differently pictured in The Revelation. Pictured by the “locusts”, they do not come to feed themselves upon the fruits of the labors of others. If these locusts represented the Devil’s agents they would devour everything they could lay hold upon, and particularly those who are sealed by the Lord in their foreheads. (Rev. 12:17) It is only God’s organization that can hurt the feelings of and torment the Devil’s servants. God makes it clear in this prophecy that none of his sealed servants shall be hurt by the locusts, and this is another proof that the locusts represent the army of the Lord.
A poisonous wound by a scorpion often proves fatal, but these locusts with the power of scorpions were not sent to kill, but they were sent to torment the Devil’s agents for a fixed period of time. The torment began in 1926, the year of the aforesaid London Resolution, and is still going on. Concerning the Devil’s visible organization that take counsel against God and his anointed he says: “Then will he speak unto them in his anger, and in his wrath confound them.” (Ps. 2: 5, Rotherham) Many instances of the crying out of their torment might be here given if space permitted, but a few are given to prove the fact.
The British and American clergy, through the public press and from their pulpits, set up a dreadful howl following the expose of the League of Nations and other parts of Satan’s organization. Big Business, working under cover with politicians and the clergy, proceeded to monopolize the radio in the lands of Britain, and did practically the same thing in America, although the radio belongs to the Lord. At a hearing before the Federal Radio Commission at Washington, D.C., Big Business was there with all of its power, flanked and supported by politicians and the clergy. The Federal Council of Churches of America put one of its clergymen on the witness stand to support the claim of Big Business. That clergyman was subjected to a cross-examination under which he suffered terrible torment and doubtless wished he might escape by sinking through the floor. He made himself and the organization for which he stands appear ridiculous in the eyes of all present.
Another agent of Big Business took the witness stand in an effort to show the importance of a monopoly. With
great boasting words he told of the attainments of Satan’s organization in the radio business. On cross-examination he was not only made very uncomfortable, but was taunted and tormented to the point that his own action at the time led to a further torment at the hands of his fellow servants of Satan that lasted many months. By his indiscretion he opened the way for the next “woe” to be broadcast by radio and to be forcibly inflicted upon Satan’s organization, and this brought torment to himself and many others of Satan’s organization. They fought among themselves and cursed one another and many others because of their torment. The public press and the clergy especially howled because of what took place. The “five months” of torment mentioned in The Revelation (9:5) evidently means the entire period of time until the other woes have ended, because five is a divine number and here marks a fixed period of time without designating how long in the fulfillment of the prophecy.
The public press of London devoted much space to an arraignment of those who had had to do with the passing of the resolution and its distribution. It is stated, at Revelation 9: 6, that in the period of torment men “shall desire to die”, or “seek death, and shall not find it”. The Lord’s army is commanded not to kill, therefore the torment must continue; and while the agents of Satan have tried to escape the 'pest’ of the continuous proclamation of the truth of God’s prophecy, they have been unable to do so. “Death” symbolizes a way of escape; but they were unable to find it. They must take their medicine as God has decreed, because, so Jeremiah 25:28 decrees, “it shall be, if they refuse to take the cup at thine hand to drink, then shalt thou [the locusts, God’s representatives] say unto them, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Ye shall certainly drink.” They tried for a time to be dead (indifferent) to the strong truths brought by the army of locusts; but that would not work, and then they began to howl because of their torment.
The British press and the New York Times and other like papers vented their spleen by repeated assaults upon the people of God. On September 12, 1926, and within five months after the passing of the “Resolution” at London, the London Sunday Express devoted two columns to a denunciation of the “Testimony” to the world powers and the address supporting it. By so doing it gave a further wide advertisement to the truth. Shortly thereafter the New York Times, the New York Sun, and the New York Herald supported the British press in an attack upon God’s people. These papers had entered into a contract to advertise a public assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses to be held at Madison Square Garden, New York eity, and then at the last moment repudiated their contract and said unkind things about the Lord’s people. (Sec The Watchtower, December 1, 1926.) The torment of these members of Satan’s organization is due wholly to the message of truth, which stings. Although knowing it is the truth, they repent not, but continue to blaspheme God. The army of the Lord, under its King Christ Jesus, continues to sing out the message of truth to the glory of God.
Praise ye Jehovah. Oh give thanks unto Jehovah; for he is good; for his loving kindness endureth for ever. Who can utter the mighty acts of Jehovah, or shotv forth all his praisel Blessed are they that keep justice, and he that doeth righteousness at all times.
’	--Psalm 106:1-3, A.R.V.
"BACK TO PALESTINE”? OR TO ZION?
••T^ROPHESY concerning the land of Israel, . . .
I-' Thus hath said the Lord Eternal, Behold, in my zealousness and in my fury have I spoken, because ye have borne the reproach of the nations: ... 0 mountains of Israel, ye shall send forth your boughs, and your fruit shall ye bear for my people Israel; for they are near at hand to come. And I will multiply upon you men, all the house of Israel.”—Ezekiel 36: 6, 8,10, Leeser’s translation.
There was a partial fulfillment of this prophecy upon Palestine in the days of Ezekiel and Governor Nehemiah, or from 536 B.C. on. (Nehemiah chapters 2-5) The complete, final fulfillment thereof does not apply to the literal land of Palestine, nor to natural Jews according to birth. The natural Jews were evicted from Palestine, in A.D. 70 and thereafter, and, as the Messiah said to them, 'Their house [of religion] was left unto them desolate,’ because they rejected the beloved and anointed King of Jehovah, to wit, Christ Jesus, “which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh.” (Matt. 23 :38; Rom. 1:3) To this day the Jews have not as a people repented of this wrongful act committed by their forefathers. For this, however, they may not and should not be persecuted. Many Jews have now been returned to the literal land of Palestine, but have been induced to go there because of selfishness, whether of selfpreservation or otherwise, and for sentimental reasons.
During the long period elapsing from A.D. 70 to the present day the Jews, although suffering, have not fulfilled Ezekiel’s prophecy and “borne the reproach of the nations”, that is, not for Jehovah’s sake, nor for the name of Christ. The once Jewish religionist, Paul, writing later as an apostle, sets forth the rule that “he is a Jew which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit”. (Rom. 2:29) So during all the period of exile of natural Jews from Palestine, and particularly during the persecutions of the World War, of 1914-1918, it has been the true Jews, inwardly, to wit, the true followers of Christ Jesus who are devoted to God and to his theocratic government under Christ, that have been bearing the reproach of the nations. As Christ Jesus foretold: “Ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake,” and for the sake of Jehovah’s name. (Matt. 24:9; Mark 13:13) In contrast with this, during the World War the natural Jews received recognition of the heathen or nations, Great Britain, the United States, etc. In 1917 the Balfour Declaration, sponsored by the “heathen” governments of this world (Satan’s organization), came forth, recognized the Jews as a people, and bestowed upon them great favors. In this Great Britain took the lead. Now Big Business and other wings of Satan’s organization place the natural Jews alongside of and in the same classification as the Gentiles or “heathen”, as Catholics, Protestants and Jews work together to defend religion. Furthermore, the fact should not be overlooked that the affairs of God’s kingdom with reference to the things of earth are of far greater importance than the rehabilitation of that little strip of land on the eastern side of the Mediterranean sea. Therefore Ezekiel’s prophecy must have its chief fulfillment upon spiritual Israel, the true people of Jehovah’s kingdom who are now on the earth and who arc of and for Zion, which is Jehovah’s capital organization.
During the World War spiritual Israel was trodden down by the enemy, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy in par-239
ticular, and the Kingdom interests committed to Jehovah’s servants were scattered and desolated. (Dan. 8:11-13) Ezekiel’s prophecy constitutes a promise of Jehovah to revive and reorganize this spiritual people and set them in their native condition, symbolized by the land of Palestine.
Their “native condition” is the condition of being occupied in the service of the interests of the theocratic kingdom, in order that the Kingdom interests might flourish and prosper on the earth. The facts since 1919 show fulfillment of Ezekiel’s prophecy upon spiritual Israel, that is, the people of Jehovah now on the earth anointed with his spirit to be his witnesses. Since the World War God has caused his King, Christ Jesus at his temple, to revive his witness work and also his consecrated people in behalf of the interests of his kingdom. In many lands companies of faithful witnesses have been formed and organized for active service amongst the people and are serving the Kingdom interests. New “plantations” in the form of branch offices, factories for printing Kingdom literature, and organizations for witness work have been established in many parts of the earth and are carrying forward the Kingdom work, in the face of great opposition and persecution by totalitarian forces. Jehovah’s people have pushed forward, and eaeh year he has blessed their efforts by a wider publication of his name and of his kingdom by means of the printed page, by portable phonographs and sound-cars and boats, and by radio. The work in behalf of those symbolized by the “desolate places”, to wit, the “great multitude” of people of good will, whether Jew or Gentile, Catholic, Protestant, or nonsectarian, is progressing and the name of Jehovah and his purpose are being made known to those who have been held as “prisoners” by the religious organizations and the totalitarian powers. This work of laying the foundation of the New Earth (Isa. 51:16) is a more important work than the bringing of some natural Jews back to the land of Palestine. Why should Jehovah God give any favorable attention to such Jews as continue to defame his name and to reject his Messiah, Christ Jesus, the Head of Zion?
“Not for your sake do I this, 0 house of Israel, but for the sake of my holy name, which ye have profaned among the nations, whither ye are gone. And I will take you from among the nations, and I will gather you out of all the countries, and I will bring you unto your own land.” (Ezekiel 36:22,24, Lesser) So the paramount issue is, Who is God? Does the name of Jehovah stand for a supreme and intelligent power? Who shall rule the universe? The issue must now be settled and the name of God made known to all creation. Therefore he says: “I do . . . for mine holy name’s sake.” Do what? Does returning of the natural descendants of Israel to Palestine vindicate the name of Jehovah God? It certainly does not; especially since they have returned there in unbelief. On the other hand, the restoring of his faithful remnant of spiritual Israel to their proper position as his true and bold witnesses after the World War, and his causing them to declare his name and his kingdom fearlessly and boldly, is for his own holy name’s sake and is for the vindication of his name. It is not for the benefit of the remnant, but is that the name of Jehovah God may be made known and be put in its proper place in the minds of all persons of good will, that they may know that He is the Supreme One, from whom they must get life by his Messiah.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
AMONG UKRAINIANS IN CANADA
“Most of our back-call work is among Ukrainians (most of whom are or have been Catholics), playing the lecture series ‘Exposed’ and ‘Religion and Christianity’ in Ukrainian, not too many at a time, to give them a better chance to assimilate them. It is interesting to see how prejudice is breaking down. The Drebit family would not let the publisher play in their home. Later Mr. D. was present when a publisher played at another home. Mrs. D. was present at still another home when a publisher was playing. Result: The publisher is now playing the series in the Drebit home. Another Ukrainian refused to let the publisher come into his home. Later she played at his neighbor’s and he heard the records there. When the publisher next called at the neighbor’s to play further records, the neighbor hurried over to tell the Ukrainian and he and his wife came to hear. Another family near by, on whom the publisher had not yet called, sent word asking how much she would charge to play for them. A lady for whom the publisher played reads Russian as well as Ukrainian, but when offered the Russian literature, she said: ‘No, no 1 I want Ukrainian, so I can lend it to my neighbors.’ ”
A 69-YEAR-OLD INDIAN SQUAW ACTIVE
“I placed nearly all the booklet Face the Facts; just four yet I have not placed, but I am going to try and place them this week. All the neighbors at Parmelee (S. Dak.) contributed for one, except two persons. One lady told me she has a Bible in the house and that was enough. Of course, I placed them with passers-by too. A Roman Catholic priest that comes around to visit the Indians, called ‘Father’ Bugol, when I try to place one with him, said: ‘No, I got more books, that I can’t get to read them.’ One lady that took one told me afterwards: ‘Them little books you sold were good little books. I read mine.’ . . . Thank the Lord for his great goodness, as I study my Bible every day and the books by Judge Rutherford, that the great mercy and love of our Lord helps me to understand what I am studying. I try to make my people understand as much as I can, when I get the chance.”—Iron Deer.
ZONE SERVANT DEMONSTRATES D.S. METHOD
“He would go to the door, set the phonograph on the doorstep, ready for use, and ring the doorbell. When the occupant came he said: ‘This record contains very important information. Would you like to hear it?’ If he said No, he was taken at his word, and the zone servant immediately showed Face the Facts and Fascism or Freedom. If he said Yes, he was asked if he would like to hear it on the doorstep or would prefer having it played inside. In one home the lady showed interest, but was definitely broke. In explaining she said she got her food supplies on credit at the corner store. It was suggested she go and get 25c worth of canned goods on credit, which she did. The result was that she got the bound book and the booklets. We arranged for a back-call to play the lecture series. To me, the outstanding feature was that the zone servant did very little talking. My trouble had been that I was talking too much. Upon following this method I visited six homes, making setups at three of them, and placed booklets at one home and a Watchtower subscription at another.”
AT GOLDEN KOPJE MINE, SINOIA, SO. RHODESIA
“We went to the compound and started work as usual. Just a few minutes later one publisher was detained by compound police boy and the books taken from him. They sent for me. I spoke to the policeman that it was not necessary for us to obtain his permission to do our work: for preaching God’s kingdom message one need not report to the authorities, because he is a peace messenger. Our friend was released, and we went on with the work. In less than twenty minutes two publishers were arrested by Lieut. Petros of ‘Salvation Army’ with assistance of this same head police boy. They were taken to the owner of the mine. All our bicycles were seized and detained by the mine manager. Another police was sent to arrest me and others. I was taken to the mine office. A very stout, ugly-looking and fierce giant shouted at me: ‘Where is your license to sell these books here?’ I said we are not selling books. ‘Don’t you know the Government has prohibited importation of this type of literature?’ he continued. I said: ‘I received these books from Cape Town in Salisbury last week. They were examined by customs before handing them to me. That Sedition Act of 1936 does not apply to our literature any longer. The Society appealed against it in 1937 and the High Court of Southern Rhodesia decided that Watchtower books are not seditious.’ ‘Do the police know you are out here ?’ he said. I said: ‘It is not necessary for them to know wherever I go, since I am not a criminal.’ He said: ‘I will phone the police to come and arrest you.’ We were kept for about fifteen minutes, during which Salvation Army Lieut. Petros (a native) was standing by scolding us and saying we will get it for interfering with his work in the compound. I told the publishers to keep quiet and not answer him. Sitting outside the office we saw books and booklets, taken from the friends, flying in the air, being thrown out of the office, with a 'Tell them to pick up their books and let them go.’ This man did not like to see me, as he was very ashamed. Of course, the answer from the police was: ‘We have nothing to do with those people.’ We went to our lodgings. Next morning we came back and placed a good amount of literature in this compound. We had the enemies to shame.”
IN ZONE NO. 6, JAMAICA, B.W.I.
“I saw two ladies looking very sad. I briefly introduced the testimony and asked for permission to run the record ‘Instruction’. I was invited into the house to have the phonograph put on a convenient table. While the lecture was on I noticed signs of a better and more joyful facial expression. At the conclusion the mistress of the house remarked: ‘Well, you have been specially sent here today with this very recorded speech to comfort me in this hour of grief. . . . Now hearing that the Watchtower publications offer consolation to the oppressed, and instruction in the way of righteousness to parents and children, I think I shall resort to same. What book would you recommend for home study?’ Riches was recommended, which she contributed for, together with the booklets Fascism and Face the Facts. Her friend took Preparation with two booklets also, and wanted to know about Armageddon. They gave me their names and asked me to return quickly.”
240
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act Is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS Journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, *1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, *1.60; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ..................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian...................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian........... 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African ................  Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating tlio reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid tho needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the Journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1819.
“DIVINE MANDATE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The entire month of August has been designated “Divine Mandate” Testimony Period. This midsummer witnessing Period is specially favored by the release, for distribution to the general public at the popular contribution of 25c a copy, of the new book Salvation. Circulation of no other book could be more appropriate for this Period than that of Salvation, with its beautiful treatment of the recently revealed truth on the “Divine Mandate”. What anointed witness, or what person of good will in line for this divine mandate, can hold baek from a prompt and large part in this Testimony Period? The Informant gives details to guide you. The regular report should follow up your activities at the close of the month.
“SALVATION”
We take special pleasure in announcing this new book, written by the president of the Society. It was the feature release at the recent world-wide convention of Jehovah’s witnesses with its hub at New York City. The author of this book for the times describes it as “A text-book for the Jonadabs”. But a study of its 384 pages of contents will prove to you it is meat in due season and a joy to all anointed Christians as well. The author’s edition is still available, containing a facsimile of a letter to the reader in the
author’s own hand and which you will much appreciate. This edition being limited, and the initial costs of manufacture being heavy, a contribution of 50c is asked per copy. Early translation of Salvation in more than twenty other languages is assured, and due announcement will be made on publication.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of September 17: “Doom of Religion” (Part 5), 1-25 inclusive, The Watchtower August 15, 1939.
Week of September 24: “Doom of Religion” (Part 5), 26-51 inclusive, The Watchtower August 15, 1939.
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The blank sent you one month before expiration of your Watchtower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office in the country where you reside. Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals for The Watchtower, should always use these blanks. By filling in those renewal blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the time of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a groat help if you sign your name uniformly, and note any recent change of address, on the renewal slip.
ffieWCTTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LX	August 15, 1939	No. 16
DOOM OF RELIGION
PART 5
“And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am Jehovah your God, and there is none else; and my people shall never be put to shame.”—Joel 2:27, A.R.V.
TEHOVAH’S NAME has been greatly reproached, I particularly since the time of Nimrod. The Devil J and his wicked angels had debauched the human race, bringing about the destruction of all flesh saving Noah and his family. Choosing Nimrod as his earthly representative, the Devil continued to bring reproach upon Jehovah’s name. Religion was the means employed to ensnare the people and to cause them to reproach Jehovah’s name. All nations round about fell into the snare of religion, including even the covenant people of God, and the religionists of Israel brought more reproach upon the name of the Most High. Jesus came to the covenant people of God, doing them good in Jehovah’s name, and the religious leaders brought great reproach upon his name, and Jesus informed them that they were of the Devil. (Matt. 15:1-9; John 8:44) This is further proof that it is the Devil and his angels that make war upon every one who declares himself for and walks in the way of righteousness. The apostle Paul, by the Lord’s grace, when made fully acquainted with the truth, under inspiration made known that the fight of the Christian is not against flesh and blood, but that the warfare of the followers of Christ is with the Devil and his host of wicked angels; and now in these last days the followers of Christ Jesus are appreciating the apostle’s statement more fully than ever before.
* From 1878 until 1918 many persons forsook the ultrareligious organizations and declared themselves for Christ, but almost all of them came away from “Babylon” with garments soiled by religion, many formalities of which they continued to hold on to. It was in 1917 that the religious element amongst God’s people rebelled against the Lord’s work in the earth and brought much reproach upon the name of Jehovah. In 1918 those rebellious ones joined forces with the clergy of the religious organizations and heaped more reproach upon those who stood firmly for the Lord and his kingdom. Even at that time those who were fully devoted to God and his kingdom
243
were unwittingly holding on to some part of religion and religious practices. In 1918 God permitted the witness work to practically come to a standstill, and, feeling their great reproach by reason thereof, those who had tried to be faithful inquired why it was so, that the witness work had practically stopped. There were two reasons why God permitted them to suffer further reproach: because (1) those who were holding on to some parts of religion must be separated therefrom; and (2) all who would remain true and faithful followers of Christ Jesus must be further tested and must .suffer reproach at the hand of religionists, because Jesus had thus suffered. Concerning reproaches he said, as recorded in the prophecy: “For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and the reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me.”—Ps. 69: 9.
3 Jesus stood firmly against all the religious influence of the Devil and his crowd, and because of his faithfulness to Jehovah Jesus was caused by the religionists to bear the same reproach which the enemy had heaped upon Jehovah’s name. All followers of Christ Jesus, that is, all Christians, must follow in his footsteps because called to that purpose, and all must suffer reproach. (1 Pet. 2: 21) Because such faithful ones withstand religion and remain true to Jehovah they must continue to suffer reproach at the hands of the enemy. Paul quoted the words of the above Psalm and applied them to the faithful followers of Christ Jesus, particularly in the latter days at the second coining of Christ. (Rom. 15: 3, 4) The experiences through which God’s people have passed, particularly in the years of 1917 and 1918, have been for the good of all who have been properly exercised thereby and who have held fast in the performance of their covenant.
* The time must come when Jehovah would vindicate his name and vindicate all upon whom his name is called and who remain faithful. In 1918 to 1919 those who really loved God and served him cried unto the Lord and, in substance, said: “Spare thy people,
244
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
0 Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach.” That prayer had been foretold by Jehovah through his prophet Joel: “Let the priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, 0 Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them; wherefore should they say among the people, Where is their God?”—Joel 2:17.
8	During that period known as the World War, when the Devil and his religious agents were heaping reproach upon God’s people, their condition looked very desolate. Jehovah foreknew everything concerning that condition, and so he foretold it through his prophet; and now after several years of prosperity upon those who have been faithful to the Lord he has revealed to them the meaning of Joel’s prophecy, and this revelation gives them increased faith and courage and causes them to greatly rejoice. Let all who love Jehovah and his kingdom, and who hate religion, now read the prophecy of Joel and rejoice. In answer to the prayer of the distressed faithful ones Jehovah by his prophet answers: “Then will the Lord be jealous for his land, and pity his people.” —Joel 2:18.
6	He heard the cry of his devoted servants: “Yea, the Lord will answer and say unto his people [(according to the Revised Version) And the Lord answered and said unto his people], Behold, I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith; and I will no more make you a reproach among the heathen.” (Joel 2:19) This is the promise of Jehovah long ago made for the benefit of his devoted ones now on the earth.
T Then in 1919 Jehovah began the fulfillment of this part of his prophetic promise. But at that time the consecrated did not know that the prophecy foretold to them the favor of Jehovah God. Later they must, by his grace, learn the meaning. In the summer of 1919 Jehovah’s people assembled in convention at Cedar Point, Ohio, and there began to realize that the “Elijah work” was done and had passed on and that they were about to enter upon the work foreshadowed by the prophet Elisha. Prior to that time they had been standing still by the “waters” (the people rushing on to final judgment), even as Elisha in the type had stood by the banks of the Jordan after Elijah had been taken away. As Elisha awoke to the importance of his work he immediately smote the waters of the Jordan and crossed over to his work. Likewise, the people of God in 1919 awoke to the responsibility that had been placed upon them and they busied themselves by beginning to prepare for their work. (2 Ki. 2:11-14) Then they began to move into action and their hopes began to rise. According to Rotherham this part of Joel’s prophecy literally says: “Behold me [Jehovah] I sending you” the
things needed to satisfy the hungry souls. There Jehovah began to open to his faithful people a new and clearer vision of his purposes toward them. From that time onward Jehovah has continued to send his faithful people, as foretold in Joel’s prophecy, “corn,” that is to say, “the finest of the wheat” (Ps. 147:14), upon which his people feed, “bread, which strengtheneth man’s heart” (Ps. 104:15); and “wine”, yea, the very best wine, “that maketh glad the heart of man.” (Ps. 104:15) The Lord Jesus was then at the temple, and even those of his faithful followers did not at that time know it; but under the lead of the Master, as Jesus had promised them, they there began to drink new wine with Him in the kingdom. (Matt. 26: 29) That meant active service in the Lord’s vineyard (Matt. 20:1-16), and after the work began it then meant the drinking of the wine joyfully with the Lord. Thus the faithful began to appreciate their privilege of again engaging in the service of the King, and their joy began to increase.
8	Furthermore, said the prophecy of Jehovah: “Behold me! sending you . . . oil.” For what purpose? ‘Oil makes the face to shine.’ The new truths revealed and the opportunities of service were a great refreshment to God’s people due to the fact that they were now taken into the covenant for the kingdom. Then the organization of the Lord on the earth began a forward movement, and since then the blessings of Jehovah and his King have been ever increasing upon them.
8	And what did Jehovah say would be the result upon the faithful ones? “And ye shall be satisfied therewith.” God’s people began to rejoice and to cease sorrowing because of the reproaches that had come upon them in times past. This was in harmony with what God had foretold by another prophet, to wit: “My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness; and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips.” (Ps. 63:5) His people there began to realize the prophetic promise of God, to wit: “Who satisfieth thy mouth with good things; so that thy youth is renewed like the eagle’s.” (Ps. 103:5) Before that the faithful had borne their affliction in sorrow, and so they now prayed unto Jehovah: “0 satisfy us early with thy mercy; that we may rejoice and be glad all our days. Make us glad according to the days wherein thou hast afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen evil.”—Ps. 90:14,15.
10	Jehovah responded to that sincere prayer of his faithful servants, as previously foretold through his prophet: “Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and old together; for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow. And I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with my goodness, saith the
August 15, 1939
WATCHTOWER.
245
Lord.” (Jer. 31:13,14) And also by another prophet, to wit: "I will abundantly bless her provision: I will satisfy her poor with bread. I will also clothe her priests with salvation; and her saints shall shout aloud for joy.”—Ps. 132:15,16.
11	Because his consecrated people during the period of the World War had yielded to fear and had held on to some of their religious practices Jehovah was angry with them. Yielding to the persecution heaped upon them by the Devil’s religious agents, God’s people had stopped preaching the gospel, fearing worldly powers, and still recognizing the earthly rulers as "the higher powers”. For that reason Jehovah was angry with them. But when the faithful awakened to their privileges, having a clearer vision of God’s purposes, and then flung their fears of men to the winds, they marched right on into the service of the King and Jehovah’s anger was turned away from them, and this he had foretold by his prophet: “And in that day thou shalt say, 0 Lord, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me.”—Isa. 12:1.
12	As to the effect of Jehovah’s loving-kindness toward his consecrated and faithful people in sending them the “bread”, “wine” and “oil”, they were so refreshed that there was no longer any reason why they should go about in an apologetic way in the service of the King, because Jehovah by his prophet Joel had foretold their increased happiness and had said to them: “And I will no more make you a reproach among the nations [the religionists].” (A.jR.V.) Why? Because the time now approached for the vindication of Jehovah’s name and those who faithfully and boldly declared his name and who continue to do so are not at all ashamed of the reproaches that come upon them by reason of their faithful service, and hence the reproaches of the religionists cast upon them do not disturb them nor deter them from service.
13	In 1918, because Jehovah’s people were restrained of liberty and service the religionists, and particularly the high clergymen, were much at ease, and so Jehovah says concerning that situation: “And I am very sore displeased with the heathen [the religionists, who claim to serve God but who do not] that are at ease; for I was but a little displeased [with my consecrated people in 1917 and 1918], and they [the religionists] helped [to] forward the affliction [upon my faithful servants].” (Zech. 1:15) Thus the religionists did by heaping reproach upon God’s consecrated people, claiming them to be enemies of God and calling them by all manner of false names and shamefully treating them.
’* Who was responsible for the persecution of God’s people during the World War? Without any question of doubt the responsible ones were the
Devil’s agents, his chief agent being Gog, leading the host of wicked angels which was said by the prophet to be the army coming from the north and which invisible ones employed religious agents, men on the earth, to persecute God’s faithful witnesses. (Ezekiel 38th chapter) Foreknowing their adverse action, God said concerning them: “But I will remove far off from you the northern army [the Northerner will I remove far from you (Rotherham)], and will drive him into a land barren and desolate, with his face toward the east sea, and his hinder part toward the utmost sea; and his stink shall come up, and his ill savour shall come up, because he hath done great things.”—Joel 2: 20.
15	During the “Elisha work” the enemy forces had been measurably held back or restrained by the Lord that God’s faithful witnesses might proceed, but not yet have they been fully removed far off. Therefore this prophecy must be taken as an assurance from Jehovah that at Armageddon the enemy will be completely removed by destruction. Concerning the enemy forces Jehovah says: “And I will turn thee back, and leave but the sixth part of thee, and will cause thee to come up from the north parts, and will bring thee upon the mountains of Israel.” “Thou shalt fall upon the open field; for I have spoken it, saith the Lord God.”—Ezek. 39: 2,5.
18	During the World War the religionists made the “land” (condition) of Jehovah’s people a place of nothing for his “locusts” to devour; but says Jehovah by his prophet concerning the enemy: “And [I] will drive him into a land barren and desolate.” This Jehovah will do, as the prophecy says, “because he hath magnified to do great things.” (Margin) The Devil and his religious host have tried to make themselves appear as very great. They boastfully strut about and attempt to exhibit their greatness. Thus the enemy is gathering all his forces against Jehovah’s government and his King, including his faithful witnesses now on the earth. The enemy is turning the mass of earth’s population against Jehovah and his King, and this is done in preparation for the final showdown at Armageddon. The result at Armageddon will be such that the “stink” of the slain enemy shall be greatest ever known: “And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will give unto Gog a place there of graves in Israel [memorializing the vindication of Jehovah’s name], the valley of the passengers on the east of the sea; and it shall stop the noses of the passengers; and there shall they bury Gog, and all his multitude; and they shall call it, The valley of Hamon-gog. And seven months shall the house of Israel be burying of them, that they may cleanse the land. Yea, all the people of the land shall bury them; and it shall be to them a renown, the day that I shall be glorified, saith the Lord God.” (Ezekiel 39:11-13)
24G
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
There shall the greatness of the enemy cease for ever, and there the reproaches upon God’s name will be taken away for ever.
ASSURANCE
17	This is the day of war, and God’s promises give full assurance to his people. These precious promises were long ago recorded, and now God reveals to his faithful ones the meaning thereof. The kingdom message uncovers the wickedness of religion, and that makes mad the Devil’s earthly agents who promote religion. It exposes their duplicity and uncovers their racket. It is to be expected that the agents of Satan would use all possible means at their disposal to hinder the work of Jehovah’s witnesses, and the facts that daily come to pass show that this is even so. Here the Lord’s prophecy, the meaning of which is now revealed, is an assurance coming from God to his own people: “Fear not, 0 land; be glad and rejoice ; for the Lord will do great things.”—Joel 2: 21.
1S	An invasion of the “land” or condition of Jehovah’s witnesses, such as by an army of locusts, would tend to work great injury to them, but the Lord assures his people that they need not fear because of such invasion. The enemy will not be able to destroy the earthly state or prosperity of the work of the remnant now on the earth. Regardless of all opposition the faithful remnant must and will push on with zeal and with rapidity, because we are now in the day of Jehovah; and hence the prophecy long ago written applies: “In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not; and to Zion, Let not thine hands be slack. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty; he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing.”—Zeph. 3:16,17.
12	From 1918 and onward Christ Jesus has been and is at the temple in full command of the remnant, and while building up the living stones in the temple the joy of those brought into the temple has been increased. As at the building of the walls of Jerusalem it was said, even so now the faithful say: “This day is holy unto the Lord your God . . . neither be ye sorry; for the joy of the Lord is your strength.” (Neh. 8:9,10) The remnant and now their companions with them see that this is the day for the vindication of Jehovah’s name, hence holy unto the Lord God, and, they being permitted to have a part in that work of vindication, their joy is greatly increased. This part of the prophecy of Joel, according to Rotherham, reads: “Because Jehovah hath shewn himself great in doing,” in behalf of his people. Jehovah is watchful for his own: “For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him.” (2 Chron. 16:9) The fulfill
ment of this prophetic promise has been particularly observed upon the Lord’s people from 1922 up to this very day, and the kingdom interests are continuously promoted. Jehovah’s faithful servants see and appreciate the presence of the Lord Jesus at the temple, and with full assurance they pray for prosperity and for the promotion of the kingdom interests: “The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner. This is the Lord’s doing; it is marvellous in our eyes. This is the day which the Lord hath made; we will rejoice and be glad in it. Save now, I beseech thee, 0 Lord: 0 Lord, I beseech thee, send now prosperity.”—Ps. 118: 22-25.
20	Continuously since 1922 there have been and still are those things which threaten to stop the progressive work concerning the kingdom. Concerning such the Lord gives assurance to his faithful people in these words, to wit: “Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field; for the pastures of the wilderness do spring, for the tree beareth her fruit, the fig tree and the vine do yield their strength.”—Joel 2: 22.
21	The words here employed, “ye beasts of the field,” do not apply to or symbolize living creatures in the fulfillment of the prophecy, but rather refer to those things which are actively employed to promote the kingdom work. The burdensome part of the work is done by mechanical means, labor-saving devices and transportation facilities, which Jehovah’s witnesses have employed to do the work committed unto them. Such burden-bearers are, to wit: manufacturing plants for the production of the message in printed form; the radio; sound-cars; phonographs ; motorcar service; service organizations, and such things. The radio was used as long as it appeared to be the will of the Lord and to the extent that his will was performed; and this was done without regard to the bitter opposition of the enemy. It has continued to be used only occasionally as the Lord permits. Speaking to the people by Jehovah’s witnesses when meeting them face to face affords a better opportunity for individuals to prove their faithfulness and to maintain their integrity and to claim the attention of those of good will. When it appeared that the radio could not be used much longer, some of the Lord’s children became deeply concerned; but the faithful were assured by the Lord that there was no cause for fear. The sound machines are now even more effective than the radio, and the results much greater. It appears that some who claim to be servants of God have lost their spiritual zeal and interest in the kingdom; but this does not hinder the work; since the Lord has brought others into the field, particularly the Jonadabs, to do the witness work. At the time these lines are written more than forty thousand phonographs, with many recorded speeches, are employed to carry the kingdom message to the
August 15,1939
THE WATCHTOWER
247
people. Such zealous work has brought about fruitful results. So, as the prophecy foretold, “the pastures of the wilderness do spring” forth with green and refreshing growth. And why? “For the tree [picturing the living creatures who witness] bear-eth her fruit, the fig tree and the vine do yield their strength.” These the Lord protects against the vicious efforts of the enemy, and his kingdom interests march triumphantly onward.
22	Therefore the Lord says to his faithful ones by and through his prophet: “Be glad then, ye children of Zion [that is, the remnant brought forth after the trying experiences of 1918], and rejoice in the Lord your God; for he hath given you the former rain moderately, and he will cause to come down for you the rain, the former rain, and the latter rain in the first month.”—Joel 2: 23.
22	Those faithful ones who show their loving zeal for Jehovah he commands to “rejoice in the Lord your God”. This part of the prophecy speaks concerning the great blessings which the Lord promised to send and which he has sent upon his people, particularly since 1922. Such blessings are not to be attributed to any man, but all honor and praise is due Jehovah: “For he giveth you the former rain in just measure.” (R.V.) Before 1922 the blessings from the Lord, likened unto rain, came upon God’s people moderately and in a just measure according to righteousness. As Rotherham puts it: “For he hath given you the seed-rain in right manner”; and, from 1922 onward, “yea he hath caused to descend for you a down-pour.” God, through Christ Jesus, has bestowed these blessings upon his people because it is his due time to thus shower his blessings upon those who are faithful and uncompromising in their service to him and his kingdom interests. Note here another prophecy, which corroborates that of Joel and refers to the same, and which follows the year 1922: “Consider now from this day and upward, from the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, even from the day that the foundation of the Lord’s temple was laid, consider it. Is the seed yet in the barn? yea, as yet the vine, and the fig tree, and the pomegranate, and the olive tree, hath not brought forth; from this day will I bless you.”—Hag. 2:18,19.
24	The facts showing fulfillment of the prophecy disclose that “the former rain” was had in that period of time between 1919 (when the work began to revive) and the year 1922, when the kingdom-interest work began more zealously and effectually, and in a better organized manner. ‘Downpours’ of truth from the temple and sent upon God’s faithful people were sent from 1922 onward, and such downpours of blessings continue with increasing force. Such have been a great refreshment to the Lord’s remnant, greatly blessing them and gathering them to the service.
They have brought forth and continue to bring forth the fruits of the kingdom, and those who are forming the “great multitude” (Rev. 7:9-17) are joining zealously in this work. In beautiful and heartening poetic phrase the Lord through another prophet states the matter in these words: “Ask ye from Jehovah rain in the time of the latter rain, Jehovah who causeth flashes of lightning, and rain in abundant showers giveth he unto them, to every man herbage in the field.”—Zech. 10:1, Roth.
25	Copious downpours of rain in season not only refresh and enliven the fields, but result in abundance of crops; and applying this figure of speech to Jehovah’s people and their blessings, the prophecy says: “And the [threshing] floors shall be full of wheat, and the fats [vats] shall overflow with wine and oil.” (Joel 2:24) The Lord uses three staple products to illustrate the productiveness and prosperity of his kingdom interests: wheat, olive oil, and wine; that is to say, bread from the wheat, giving strength and sustenance; oil, causing the face to shine with real pleasure; and wine, to make glad the heart. Particularly since 1922 Jehovah’s faithful witnesses, by zealous activity, well fulfill the picture seen at the threshing machines, and at oil and wine presses; and in doing this work they have greatly rejoiced in preparing such things for the use and enjoyment by those who will form the “great multitude”. To this end the Lord has put laborers in his fields, vineyards, and factories, as had been pictured in the language at Matthew 20:1-16. Those who have labored joyfully, looking always to the praise of Jehovah, have received their pay.
26	The World War and attending conditions from 1917 to 1919 made the fields of activity of God’s people appear as though the same had been invaded by a great swarm of pests; but when the Lord brought again his people from captivity he said to them, according to the prophecy: “And I will restore to you the years that the locust hath eaten, the cankerworm, and the caterpillar, and the palmerworm, my great army which I sent among you.” (Joel 2:25) This part of the prophecy shows that God’s consecrated ones received affliction according to the will of God. And why?
27	They were fearful, and hence delinquent in their service, and that was due to religion and religious practices. God’s people must be cleansed from such things as religion, and their garments (identification) made clean, and it must be clearly seen that they are the ones that stand out boldly and fearlessly to the honor of Jehovah’s name. Hence Jehovah permitted them to be chastised, particularly in the year 1918, and that chastisement or discipline resulted to the good of those really devoted to Jehovah, and the very opposite was the result to those who
248
THE WATCHTOWER,
were moved by selfishness in claiming to be the servants of God. “For whom the Lord loveth he chasten-eth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons.” —Heb. 12:6-8.
18	The “day of Jehovah” began in 1914, marking the beginning of the fulfillment of this prophecy, which corroborates the words of another prophecy, to wit: “Behold the day of the Lord cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee. For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city.” (Zech. 14:1, 2) God’s promise to restore to his people what the enemy had destroyed has been in fulfillment since 1922.
89	The great blessings that the Lord has bestowed upon his faithful since 1922 has made up for, and much more, what the faithful suffered prior to that time. That exact condition and blessing God foretold in the prophecy concerning Job, showing that Job was a picture of God’s faithful people: “And the Lord turned the captivity of Job, when he prayed for his friends: also the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before. Then came there unto him all his brethren, and all his sisters, and all they that had been of his acquaintance before, and did eat bread with him in his house; and they bemoaned him, and comforted him over all the evil that the Lord had brought upon him; every man also gave him a piece of money, and every one an earring of gold. So the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning; for he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand camels, and a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she asses. He had also seven sons and three daughters.”—Job 42:10-13.
80	In 1922 God’s faithful people, learning that Christ Jesus is at the temple, began to pray and thereafter continued to pray: “Save now, I beseech thee, 0 Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, send now prosperity.” (Ps. 118:25) That prayer of the faithful remnant, foreshadowed by the prayer of Job, was answered, and Jehovah has sent upon his people not only one blessing, but many, greatly increasing the same, and including the carrying of his life-giving message to those who will form the “great multitude” and fill the earth with a righteous people. Note that all the blessings mentioned with reference to Job are designated by the numeral “ten” or multiple of ten, thus indicating the bringing of blessings upon an earthly company by the Lord, and in which he uses the faithful members of his body.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
81	Now Zion is builded up and the Lord appears in his glory, and all who love him proclaim his praises. In the past the curse came upon those who had covenanted to do God’s will but who became derelict in the performance of that covenant. But now concerning the faithful ones this promise from Jehovah through Christ Jesus is given: “And there shall be no more curse; but the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him; and they shall see his face; and his name shall be in their foreheads.” (Rev. 22: 3, 4) God’s remnant, now continuing in faith and faithful in the service, are referred to in the following prophecy, to wit: “Thus saith the Lord God, In the day that I shall have cleansed you from all your iniquities, I will also cause you to dwell in the cities, and the wastes shall be builded. And the desolate land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all that passed by. And they shall say, This land that was desolate is become like the garden of Eden; and the waste, and desolate, and ruined cities, are become fenced, and are inhabited.” (Ezek. 36: 33-35) The revelation of the meaning of these prophecies in this day is for the benefit of the faithful people of God, for their comfort and for their increased hope.
82	Today the religious crowd on earth continue to fume, fuss and fight and howl against the people of the Lord, and while they are doing so, the faithful remnant are abundantly fed by the Lord and rejoice, and to them Jehovah says through his prophet: “And ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord your God, that hath dealt wondrous-ly with you; and my people shall never be ashamed.” (Joel 2:26) No person on the earth today who is wholly on the side of Jehovah and his King can have any cause to be ashamed, and none of the faithful are ashamed to declare uncompromisingly their devotion to the Theocratic Government. Those people on the earth who hold to religion, even though they may make themselves believe that they are Christians, have great sorrow of heart and great vexation of mind. They are without food. They have neither spiritual bread, nor oil, nor wine. God’s people have these things in abundance. God, by his prophet, forcibly contrasts such religionists with his faithful people who are feeding at his table: “Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry; behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty; behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit. And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen; for the Lord God shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name.”—Isa. 65:13-15.
August 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
249
88	In this day Jehovah has delivered his people from religion and religious snares, and the faithful sing his praises even as Jehovah foretold by his recorded prophecy long ago: “For the Lord hath redeemed Jacob [faithful remnant of Zion], and ransomed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he [prior to and during the World War, when religionists exercised much power over the consecrated]. Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock and of the herd; and their soul shall be as a watered garden; and they shall not sorrow any more at all.”—Jer. 31:11,12.
M The faithful remnant see that their greatest privilege is to have some part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name. They see that Jehovah through Christ Jesus has dealt marvelously with them, and they praise his name and advertise his kingdom, as foretold by the prophet of God. "And in that day shall ye say, Praise the Lord, call upon [(margin) proclaim] his name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name is exalted. Sing unto the Lord; for he hath done excellent things; this is known in all the earth.”—Isa. 12:4, 5.
85	All such must be witnesses to the name and majesty of Jehovah and his kingdom, and hence they cannot keep back the songs of praise. They are not ashamed to confess the name of Jehovah as their Father and the name of Christ Jesus as their Redeemer, Lord, Head and King; but with boldness, born of love, and without fear of the enemy, they proclaim the name of the Most High, and his Governor and his King. They delight to make known to the people that the theocracy is the only hope of mankind. This is exactly in keeping with the words of the apostle written under inspiration long ago: “For the scripture saith, Whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed.” (Rom. 10:11) “As it is written, Behold, I lay in Sion a stumblingstone and rock of offence; and whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed.”—Rom. 9: 33.
88	Religionists bow to idols in the form of hailing men and saluting flags, which stand as symbols of men for protection and salvation, and such shall be confounded. Exactly on the contrary, those who are of Zion maintain their integrity toward God and praise him and, continuing faithful, they shall never again be brought into captivity or shame; as it is written: “They shall be ashamed, and also confounded, all of them: they shall go to confusion together that are makers of idols. But Israel [those of God’s organization maintaining their integrity] shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation; ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end.”—Isa. 45:16,17.
THE THEOCRACY
87	In the mind and heart of God’s people The Theocracy is magnified today as never before. Religionists have no vision of The Theocracy and its application to the world. To those wholly devoted to Jehovah, however, The Theocracy is the grandest of all doctrines revealed, because thereby will the name of Jehovah be vindicated and then all who live shall forever sing his praises.
88	The Theocracy is the government of the world by the immediate command and direction of the Almighty God, administered by the Lord Jesus Christ. It is the kingdom long ago promised by Jehovah and therefore must take control of the affairs of the universe. It is the government which the faithful men from Abel to John the Baptist believed in and hoped for, “a city [organization] which hath foundations [everlasting], whose builder and maker is God.” For the love of that government and its Maker and King those faithful men of old laid down their lives. Having by faith the promises of God concerning that government, they were persuaded of them, believed and embraced them, and confessed themselves and boldly announced to others that they were strangers and sojourners in the earth. They desired “a better”, yea, the best, and the only government, and God has graciously provided they shall have a part therein. ‘Wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God.”—Heb. 11:10-16.
89	Jehovah was the friend of Abraham, and because of his faith Jehovah called Abraham “my friend”. (2 Chron. 20:7; Isa. 41: 8) All who are of the faith of Abraham are likewise the friends of God, and God is their friend. A friend is faithful and true, because “a friend loveth at all times”. (Prov. 17:17) The relationship of friends between Jehovah and his beloved Son is eternal. The perfect man Jesus, speaking to his disciples of that relationship, likened himself as the vine and his Father as the Husbandman. Then he added: "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.” (John 15:13) Jesus, because of his love for his Father, laid down his life that he might vindicate his Father, that being the will of Jehovah. Thus Jesus did that he might be the One who should fully carry out God’s will and vindicate his name. “Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that 1 might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father.”—John 10:17,18.
40	It was the love of Jehovah God that permitted his beloved Son to lay down his life that he might be the ruler in The Theocracy and the Deliverer and blesser of obedient men. (John 3': 16,17) Such love is known only to Jehovah and those of his organiza
250
THE WATCHTOWER
tion. How may one have Jehovah and Christ as friends ? “He that loveth pureness of heart, and hath grace in his lips, the king shall be his friend.” (Prov. 22:11, margin) Such may have the King, Christ Jesus, and the King Eternal, Jehovah, for friends.
41	The members of the royal organization are called to follow in the footsteps of Jesus and to be fashioned after him and conformed to his likeness. (1 Pet. 2: 21; Rom. 8:29) They must suffer as Jesus suffered, bearing the reproaches that have fallen upon him. (2 Tim. 2:12; Rom. 15: 3) What is the motive that leads them to do so? Love, the expression of unselfishness. Love for God and the King and necessarily for the kingdom, The Theocracy. Those who live with Christ Jesus as members of his royal organization must die as human creatures. And what would induce them to die with Christ? Love for the kingdom. (2 Tim. 2:11; Col. 1: 24) Did Jesus voluntarily suffer death merely to save sinful men from death? No! His death operates beneficially to those who were sinners but who later by faith and obedience are relieved of sin and devote themselves to Jehovah and his kingdom. Such, however, was not the primary reason for the voluntary death of Jesus. He suffered death because of his love for his Father and the love to do his Father’s will, and that means love for The Theocratic Government, which will vindicate his Father’s name. For this reason Jehovah raised Jesus out of death and exalted him to the head of his royal organization. “Thou lovest righteousness, and hatest wickedness [iniquity, lawlessness] : therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.”—Ps. 45: 7.
42	Jesus hates the lawless Satan and the lawless government that Satan by the use of religion has erected. He loves righteousness and the righteous government prepared by his Father, and for that reason Jehovah exalted him. Men unduly magnify their own importance by contending that Jesus died merely to save sinners. While men were sinners Jesus died, to be sure. He poured out his lifeblood, which produced the price for the purchase of faithful men, but his death results beneficially only to those who devote themselves to Jehovah and his King.
48	As Jesus laid down his life because of his love for his Father, so must those who will be members of his royal organization lay down their lives because of love for Jehovah, and which necessarily includes love for The Theocracy, which vindicates his name. How can a spirit-begotten one of the remnant now on earth be assured that he may continue to have God and Christ Jesus as Friends? Mark the words of Jesus in answer to that question, at John 15:13, which show that the greatest love one can have is to die for his friend. Then Jesus added: “Ye
Brooklyn, N. Y.
are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.” (John 15:14) What motive prompts one to keep the commandments of the Lord? Jesus, at John 14:15, says: “If ye love me, keep my commandments.” Love for whom? Necessarily for the King. Therefore those who really love the King and his kingdom will keep the Lord’s commandments. Now at the temple Jesus issues this great commandment to the spirit-begotten ones: “This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.” (Matt. 24:14) Here Jesus magnifies the importance of The Theocracy, and all who would have the King as a friend must obey this commandment by proclaiming the name of Jehovah and of his theocratic government. He who obeys with pureness of heart, speaking the gracious message of Jehovah, shall have the King for his friend. One who is spirit-begotten and anointed and who fails or refuses to proclaim The Theocracy and magnify it above everything else, and who compromises with the enemy, is not proving his integrity. The Devil now viciously opposes The Theocracy, and in doing so he employs religion and uses religionists as his instruments. Some claim to be the children of God but because of fear of the religionists take a course of least resistance by compromising with the enemy and by failing or refusing to boldly declare for The Theocracy. Such fail to show their love for God and Christ. To the faithful The Theocratic Government is the greatest of all truths declared in the Scriptures. Therefore they fearlessly declare God’s message that religion is doomed to early destruction.
44	The faithful will not fear death at the hands of the enemy. All who will be of the royal house must die in some manner, and some may die by the violent hand of the enemy. 'Mischief framed by law’ (Ps. 94:20), such as compulsory flag-saluting and the hailing of men, will not cause God’s faithful ones to compromise or to slack the hand of unstinted devotion and service to The Theocratic Government. Christ is enthroned as King and now here, and stands for The Theocracy. Over against that righteous government stands Satan and, with his religion and religionists, desperately trying to deceive all and turn them against Jehovah. Furthermore, in conjunction with his professed religionists the Devil uses dictators, Fascists, Nazis, and Communists to oppose The Theocracy. Who now is on the Lord’s side? There is no middle ground. Those who are for Jehovah and his kingdom will now stand firmly against the enemy, and, thus standing, they will win. To his faithful ones Jehovah says: ‘That crowd of enemies over against you will fight against you, but they shall not prevail against you, for I am with you to deliver you.’ (Jer. 1:19) Paul, once a religionist but after becoming the
August 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER.
251
child of Jehovali and fully devoted to The Theocracy, sounded the keynote for all of the anointed, to wit: "For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”—Rom. 8: 38, 39.
48	Jehovah gives assurance to those who hate lawlessness and love righteousness, and who prove it, that he will never forsake them. During the closing days of 1918 God did apparently forsake for a time his consecrated ones because they had shown fear of the enemy. But in due time these faithful ones were brought out of the depths of distress, and Jehovah has now given to such full assurance that if they continue faithful his love for them shall be unbreakable. God now commands those of Zion to sing with joy, and then reminds them of his boundless love expressed through his prophet: “But Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb ? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before me.”—Isa. 49:14-16.
46	In 1919, after the consecrated began to emerge from the depths of distress, Jehovah began to open to them the meaning of his prophecies. Now after a few years of faithful service Jehovah opens to his people the meaning of the prophecy recorded by Joel, and he shows that its fulfillment toward them began in 1922. No longer, therefore, is there any reason for the faithful to fear that Jehovah has forsaken them or ever will forsake them again. To those who have completely forsaken religion and given themselves wholly and uncompromisingly in loving devotion to the great Theocracy Jehovah says: “And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and none else; and my people shall never be ashamed.”—Joel 2: 27.
4T	Jehovah is the everlasting Friend of his chosen ones, and no power can prevail against them, and hence they boldly go forward in his service. Further giving assurance to the faithful ones the Lord says: “Moreover, I will make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them; and I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore. My tabernacle also shall be with them; yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And the heathen shall know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore.”—Ezek. 37: 26-28.
48	Religion has been the deceptive leader of many in times past, and continues to hold in subjection all
those who fail to give allegiance to The Theocracy. Under the misleading influence of religion the Lord’s people for a time divided their attention with other things and neglected or failed to carry out their commission. They must be made free from religion and entirely cleansed from every part of Satan’s organization. Jehovah by his representative, Christ Jesus, appeared at his temple and accomplished that cleansing work and since then has continued to open to the faithful the meaning of his prophecies. Jehovah’s name and his government are now made clearly to appear to the faithful as that which is of highest importance. He has put his name upon his people, fully revealing to them that he is the Almighty God, whom they must serve with joy. Now the faithful see that religion has reached its end, is doomed, and shall shortly be destroyed, and that Jehovah and his government alone shall be loved and served. From this time onward only those who give their full allegiance and devotion to The Theocracy will please God and receive his everlasting blessings. Truly Jehovah, according to his Word, has guided his faithful servants in their devotion as to what course to take, even as promised, to wit: “The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way.” (Ps. 25: 9) The “meek” are anxious to learn. “Judgment” means decision reached as to which way one should go. Jehovah has taught and guided them that have heeded his admonition, to wit: “Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.”—Prov. 3: 5, 6.
49	Such is proved by the fact that long before the meaning of Joel’s prophecy was known God through Christ Jesus at the temple guided his people, including The Watchtower, in the right way to go. Note this, that on January 1, 1926, The Watchtower published the article “Who Will Honor Jehovah?”; on May 1, 1926, the article “Character or Covenant— Which?” thereby exposing the fallacy taught by religionists that men can perfect themselves, and which fallacy caused the consecrated to be blind as to the commission given them. He continuing to lead His people, in 1929 the book Life was published, making known, by God’s grace, that the vindication of Jehovah’s name is the paramount issue for settlement. That was followed by the book Prophecy, setting forth more particularly the purposes of the Most High. In 1931 the book Vindication was published, calling particular attention to the fact that in the prophecy of Ezekiel Jehovah repeatedly announced his purpose that all shall know that he is the Most High. That same year, and at the same time Vindication was released for distribution, Jehovah’s people learned of their “new name”, which he had given them, joyfully learning that they are Jehovah’s witnesses,
252
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
by his grace and power.—Isa. 62:2; 65:15; Rev. 2:17.
80	And now Jehovah through Joel his prophet says to his people: "And my people shall never be ashamed.” (2: 27) This promise includes the remnant and Jonadabs, all of whom are for The Theocracy. These are not ashamed of the name of Jehovah, but, on the contrary, delight to make known that holy name. With full confidence these go forth now as servants of the Most High and in obedience to his commandment expose the fallacy of religion, to the end that those of good will toward God may flee from
religion and have part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
81	At verse twenty-seven the second chapter of Joel’s prophecy, according to the Hebrew, ends, and chapter three begins with verse twenty-eight. (See the translation by Leeser, the American Revised Version, margin, and Rotherham.) It was in 1922 that Jehovah, by Christ Jesus at the temple, sent his witnesses forth to make known the fraudulent things of religion, at which time something new and of great importance toward Jehovah’s people came to pass.
(To be continued)
REAL TIME OF REST
UNDAY (Day of the Sun), as the name of the first day of the week, is derived from Egyptian astrology. . . . During the first and second century the week of seven days was introduced into Rome from Egypt, . . . The Teutonic nations seem to have adopted the week as a division of time from the Romans, but they changed the Roman names into those of corresponding Teutonic deities. Hence the dies Solis became Sunday (German, Sonntag). . . . The Council of Elvira (300) decreed: ‘If anyone in the city neglects to come to church for three Sundays, let him be excommunicated for a short time so that he may be corrected’ (xxi). ... We find St. Caesarius of Arles in the sixth century teaching that the holy Doctors of the Church had decreed that the whole glory of the Jewish Sabbath had been transferred to the Sunday, and that Christians must keep the Sunday holy in the same way as the Jews had been commanded to keep holy the Sabbath Day. He specially insisted on the people hearing the whole of the Mass . . . From the eighth century the law began to be formulated as it exists at the present day, and the local councils forbade servile work, public buying and selling, pleading in the law courts, and the public and solemn taking of oaths. There is a large body of civil legislation on the Sunday rest side by side with the ecclesiastical. It begins with an Edict of Constantine, . . . emperor, who forbade judges to sit and townspeople to work on Sunday. He made an exception in favour of agriculture.”—Quoted from The Catholic Encyclopedia, Volume XIV, under title “Sunday”.
Sunday observance is not commanded anywhere in the Bible. Sabbath observance by the natural Jews was commanded by Jehovah God purely for a typical or pictorial purpose. Satan has seized upon this provision of God’s law given to natural Jews and has wrongfully caused men to make laws requiring people to refrain from doing work or indulging in certain pleasure on Sunday. Extremists have caused the enactment and enforcement of laws by which they attempt to prevent persons from going about from house to house on Sunday exhibiting books and delivering them to the people, which books explain and make clear the Bible. They proceed upon the theory that this is work and in violation of the Sunday law. Such wrongful laws have been invoked recently against the witnesses of the Lord who are preaching the gospel of the Kingdom on Sunday. No earthly power has the right or authority to make a law
that would interfere with the preaching of the gospel of the kingdom of God. No civil or municipal authority has any right to make a law that would make a deed done on Friday lawful and the same deed done on Sunday unlawful. Law is a rule of action commanding what is right and prohibiting what is wrong. If it is not wrong to play baseball on Friday, it is not wrong to play it on any and every day of the week.
Among other provisions of the law given to the natural Jews, or Israelites, was that which governed the sabbath day, to wit: “Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work: but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.” (Ex. 20: 8-11) “Six days may work be done; but in the seventh is the sabbath of rest, holy to the Lord; whosoever doeth any work in the sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death. Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant. It is a sign [not a seal] between me and the children of Israel [not the non-Israelites or Gentiles] for ever: for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed.” (Ex. 31:15-17) These scriptures show clearly an implied promise on the part of Jehovah to establish a righteous government amongst men.
The sabbath day enjoined on the natural Jews by God’s law is not the Sunday now observed by the nations of the world. The Jewish sabbath day was the seventh day of the week and corresponds with Saturday, as shown in the present-day calendars. Therefore the clergy of “Christendom” have the wrong day, even if they were interpreting the law properly. In the second place, the clergy are not properly applying the law. The law never did apply to the non-Jews, but was part of Jehovah’s law covenant exclusively with the nation of Israel; and the first record of the observance by man of the sabbath, and the first command to man to observe the sabbath, is at Exodus 16:22-30, in connection with the manna in the wilderness. As it is written : “And it came to pass, that on the sixth day they gath
August 15,1939
THE WATCHTOWER
253
ered twice as much bread, two omers for one man: and all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses. And he said unto them, This is that which the Lord hath said, To morrow is the rest of the holy sabbath unto the Lord: bake that which ye will bake to day, and seethe that ye will seethe; and that which rcmaineth over lay up for you, to be kept until the morning. And they laid it up till the morning, as Moses bade; and it did not stink, neither was there any worm therein. And Moses said, Eat that to day, for to day is a sabbath unto the Lord: to day ye shall not find it in the field. Six days ye shall gather it; but on the seventh day, which is the sabbath, in it there shall be none. ... So the people rested on the seventh day.” Genesis 2:1-3 merely records the fact of God’s resting, but does not command man to keep the sabbath. When Christ Jesus came and died upon the tree on Calvary, he put an end to Jehovah’s law covenant with the natural Jews by nailing it to the tree. As written at Colossians 2:14: “Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross [tree].”
Hence, at verses 16,17 following, the apostle, referring to the Jewish sabbath law, says: “Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath days: which are a shadow of things to eome; but the body is of Christ.” With Christians every day is the same, and what is wrong to be done on one day is wrong to be done on any other day; likewise that which is proper to do on one day is proper on other days. Therefore to the Galatians the apostle wrote (Gal. 4: 9,10,11, 21): “But now, after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage? Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years. I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labour in vain.” “Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the law ?”
If it be known and borne in mind that what happened to the Jews in connection with their law covenant was for the purpose of foreshadowing things future to happen, and which things are to be understood by those living at the end of the world, where we now are, then the whole matter becomes clarified. When the apostle under inspiration refers to the Jewish law covenant and writes that “the law [has] a shadow of good things to come”, we may know that it had a far different significance from that given it by religious racketeers.—Hebrews 10:1.
By establishing the sabbath day with His then chosen people the Jews, God gave an implied promise of establishing a government of righteousness for the benefit of man and that that government would be one of peace and rest. Over two thousand years before, God had finished his creation of things pertaining to the earth by the creation of man at the end of the sixth day, and on the seventh period called a “day” (each of those periods of time is actually seven thousand years in duration) he rested from his creative work.- (Gen. 2:1-3; sec the book Creation) That does not mean that during the period of rest God would be idle or inactive, but it means that God ceased from his creative work as to the earth with the creation of man. (See John 5:16,17; Hebrews 4:3-11.) During the seventh “day” or
period of time Jehovah God would afford an opportunity for his creatures to prove their proper appreciation of the Creator, and to prove this by showing faithfulness and loyalty to God.
At the beginning of the seventh day or period of time Lucifer, the invisible overlord stationed over man, rebelled and caused the rebellion of man. God could have ended the rebellion there by destroying Lucifer and man, but God chose to wait for the full maturity of his purpose. God would now teach the Jews of his purpose to vindicate his name by his kingdom under Christ and that this would take place at the end of Jehovah’s great seventh day and that therefore the seventh day is a day of rest, or sabbath. The word “sabbath” means rest. Jehovah’s immediate purpose in giving the Jews this law was to establish their belief or faith in him, so that they would know that man’s relief can come only from God and would come in his due time, and that they must by faith wait for it. By the law of his covenant with them he said, in substance: ‘The seventh day of the week shall be to you a day of rest; the seventh year shall be to you a year of rest; the sabbath year at the end of the cycle of seven times seven, or the forty-ninth year, shall be a year of rest to be followed on the fiftieth year by a jubilee. At the jubilee year everything that any Jew has lost must be restored to him.’—Lev. 25:1-16.
God stated his purpose in establishing the sabbath period when he said: “Ye shall not therefore oppress one another; but thou shalt fear thy God: for I am the Lord your God. Wherefore ye shall do my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them; and ye shall dwell in the land in safety.”— Lev. 25:17,18.
The emphasis must be laid upon the words stated: “I am the Lord [Jehovah] your God.” God would have the Jews know that he is the great Almighty One upon whom man must depend for his blessings. They must know that in order to receive the blessings they desire they must completely separate themselves from Satan’s rule. By keeping the sabbath they would show their faith and confidence in God and would trust him. By giving them the sabbath or rest period there is a clearly implied promise on God’s part to give rest and regeneration to those who shall exercise complete faith in him and that this he would do in his own good time. The apostle says that the purpose was to establish faith in God and that the Jews did not profit by the law concerning the sabbath because of their lack of faith or belief.—See Hebrews 4:1-11.
The statement of the law of the sabbath or rest period should have been good news or “gospel” to the natural Jews, and had they trusted God it would have been good news or gospel to them. The apostle says that this good news God caused to be preached to the Jews, but that the Jews did not profit thereby because they had not faith. (Heb.4:2) Had the Jews believed God and obeyed him, they would by faith have seen a day coming when God would bless them according to the promise that he had made to the patriarch Abraham ; and thus believing they would have rested in faith and patiently waited for that time. Their father Abraham had such faith, and rested in faith and rejoiced in the coming of that day and waited for it patiently. (Ileb. 11:8-14) But Abraham was not under any law to keep a weekly sabbath (Deut. 5:2-14), and there is no record in the Bible
254
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
that he observed a weekly sabbath on the seventh day. Hundreds of years later the weekly sabbath law was first given, to his descendants through Isaac and Jacob after the exodus from Egypt. By keeping the sabbath day as commanded the Jews would in substance have said: ‘Jehovah is our great God and Ruler. We have absolute faith and confidence in him; and we will show that faith and confidence by obeying his law, which we can obey. We have confidence that in his own due time he will give his people complete rest and all the blessings that he has promised.’
But why should God inflict the severe penalty of death upon those who refused to obey the sabbath day law ? (Ex. 31:15) The agnostic says it was so small a thing for which to receive so severe a penalty. He asks: ‘Was working on the sabbath day so heinous a crime against one’s fellow man that it would warrant death?’ The answer is, It was not a heinous crime against one’s fellow man. The fellow man was not involved. It was a small thing indeed to keep the sabbath day by refraining from work, and therefore it could easily have been kept by the Jews. It was a very small thing for God to ask them to do. Likewise it was a small thing for God to ask Adam and Eve not to eat certain fruit in the garden of Eden. In both instances the wrong lay in the fact that there was a willful violation of God’s law. It was the act of disobedience which constituted the wrong. It was a violation of an agreement the Jews had made with God in the covenant, and therefore showed a lack of faith in God and lack of loyalty to him. If the Jews would not learn to trust God in small things, how would they trust him in greater things? What God would teach them was that disobedience on the part of Lucifer and Adam had brought trouble upon all; that willful disobedience shows a disposi
tion to go in the way of Satan the Devil and to obey him rather than God; that those who go in the way of Satan must ultimately suffer death: and this he would teach them by inflicting the penalty of death for a willful violation of his law. If God had required the Jews to do something they could not do, and then put them to death for failing to do it, that would appear more reprehensible than requiring a small thing. When it is remembered that the purpose of the law was to serve as a teacher for the Jews, then it is readily to be seen that they must be punished for a willful violation of it. What Jehovah God was teaching the Jews was for their benefit and, through their experience, for the benefit of all men who obey. The infliction of the death penalty was equivalent to saying to the Jews: ‘If you follow Satan death will be the result; if you obey me you will get life.’ No penalty, therefore, could have been proper except the death penalty.
When Jesus was on earth he emphasized the rule when he said: “This is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent.” (John 17: 3) What the people need is the truth. God’s law to the Jews governing the sabbath day typically referred to the coming of God’s kingdom under Christ. Observance of that law showed faith in God and in his promised King that would bring rest and blessings to the people. Christ Jesus came and fulfilled the law because he was and is the King; therefore nothing could be gained by observing this typical sabbath law after the coming of Christ, nor does failure to observe it now give one the “mark of the beast”. The kingdom of God under Christ is now here, and within this short time before the battle of Armageddon all people of good will must be brought to a knowledge of God and his kingdom, and those who obey will live.
FROM LUCIFER TO SATAN
AMONG the spirits created by Jehovah God through his only begotten Son, who later became “the man Christ Jesus”, was Lucifer. The name means “the bearer of light”, or, according to the Hebrew, “morning star” or “brilliant star”. Lucifer saw that every creature in the universe gave honor and praise to the Almighty God. Lucifer coveted that honor and praise for himself. He presumptuously regarded himself as equal to the Almighty God, and concerning that it is written: “0 Lucifer, son of the morning! [who later became the invisible god-king of Babylon] . . . thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God; I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds: I will be like the Most High.”—Isa. 14:12-14.
To accomplish his covetous design Lucifer did this: He approached the woman Eve in Eden and spoke to her deceitfully, and is likened to the serpent, a beast that was in Eden. Any transgression of God’s law is sin, and God had fixed death as the penalty for the committing of willful sin. Adam and Eve had been so instructed by the Lord, that sin would result in their death. (Gen. 2:17; Rom. 6:23) Lucifer must have known this law of God and the penalty
for its violation. It was his duty to know, but apparently he did not believe it, and that unbelief was due to his own improper heart condition. He should have been governed by the word of God, but, regarding himself as equal to the Most High and considering that he could with impunity induce man to violate God’s law, he proceeded to do so. Eve yielded to the seductive influence of the great Serpent and did eat forbidden fruit and gave to Adam, and he did eat. Therefore both were lawbreakers. The eating of the forbidden fruit may appear to some to have been a small thing to call forth the death penalty, but it should be remembered that the offense consisted in the violation of God’s law and in doing so after having been informed that the penalty for such violation is death. “Adam was not deceived.” (1 Tim. 2:14) For this violation of God's law man was sentenced to death and expelled from Eden. (Gen. 3:19-24) But what of Lucifer?
Lucifer was sentenced to death, but for good reason Jehovah God gave him a suspended sentence, or, rather, delayed the execution of the death penalty until the battle of Armageddon. Lucifer had now become the avowed enemy of God. So, at the time of entering his judgment against the enemy, Jehovah God changed the name of that once
August 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER,
255
holy and once perfect creature Lucifer and assigned to him four separate and distinct names, each of which signifies a particular element of his wickedness. Since that time Lucifer has been named by the names (1) Satan, which means “adversary” or “opposer” of God; (2) Devil, which means “slanderer” of God, willfully bringing reproach upon God’s name; (3) Serpent, which means “deceiver” of creatures; and (4) Dragon, which means “devourer”. (Jer. 51:34) Therefore he is designated in the Scriptures (The Revelation 20:2) as “the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan”. He is the adversary or willful opposer of God, and therefore God’s chief enemy and the enemy of man. While Satan is the arch enemy, there are many other enemies. Every creature from that day in Eden to the present time that has willingly taken the side of the Devil and willfully engaged in the violation of God’s law is the enemy of God. The end of such is destruction.
The princes of the ancient city of Tyre were tools and visible representatives of the Devil. At Jehovah’s command the prophet Ezekiel speaks concerning the Devil: “Son of man, take up a lamentation upon the king of Tyrus, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord God, Thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty.” (Ezek. 28:12) Tyrus was part of Satan’s visible organization on earth. The king is superior to the princes of Tyrus; therefore he pictures the invisible ruler and “god of this world”. (John 12: 31; 2 Cor. 4:4) As Jehovah is the King of His organization (Jer. 10:10), so the mimic god Satan is the king or god of his organization. “Thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty.” These words are certainly addressed to the invisible ruler of Tyre, that is, Satan the Devil, and refer to the time when he was created and when his name was Lucifer. He was the glorious work of Jehovah God by and through Jehovah’s only begotten Son. It is likely that Lucifer was the first creative work of Jehovah by his Son, in the creation of creatures, and was the final word or seal in the realm of proportions and beauty and showed forth the wisdom of God’s creative power and not the wisdom of Lucifer. Therefore Jehovah says to him: “Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone was thy covering, . . . the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared in thee in the day that thou wast created.” (Ezek. 28:13) The broader application of this text is to the real garden of Eden, the garden of God. (Gen. 2:8) It is not necessary to conclude that Lucifer was bodily in Eden, but that his attention was there as to things of Eden, because Jehovah had appointed him to that position and to exercise power there. The statement of his being in Eden is to be understood as a favorable and beautifying background or setting for Lucifer. Eden was manifestly in the jurisdiction to which Jehovah God had assigned Lucifer.
That Lucifer was an officer in God’s universal organization is shown by Ezekiel 28:14: “Thou art the anointed cherub that covcreth; and I have set thee so: thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire.” This shows that the prophecy here given is applicable to one who is far higher than the visible earthly king of ancient Tyre, and, therefore, it is properly applicable to the invisible ruler Satan the Devil. It is reasonable to conclude that in the beginning
Lucifer was the only cherub having to do with the garden of Eden, and that he was charged with covering or guarding “the tree of life also in the midst of the garden”, in order that man might not partake thereof until God’s due time. When Lucifer became a traitor he would no longer keep the way covered, or guard the way to the tree of life, but evidently he advised Adam and Eve to go and eat of that tree. The eviction of man from Eden immediately followed, and Jehovah placed faithful officers, “cherubims,” on guard to keep the way and to close up access by man to the tree of life. (Gen. 3:24) It is certain that if Lucifer had continued to cover that way and to duly perform his official duties, there would have been no necessity for Jehovah to appoint other officers to perform that duty. Jehovah God had extended his universal organization to include the earth with his creatures Adam and Eve upon it and had given Lucifer the office of cherub to cover or look after God’s interests in the earth. Had Lucifer been grateful for his position he would have covered it faithfully. His ingratitude for favors received is proof of his selfishness.
Continuing, Ezekiel 28:15 says: “Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee.” Jehovah God created Lucifer, and God’s work is perfect. (Deut. 32:4; Ps. 18:30) At the time of his creation Lucifer was perfect, and he was bound to be in harmony with God at the beginning; thus he continued “perfect” until “iniquity” or “unrighteousness” (Rev. Ver.) or “wickedness” (Leaser) was found in him. Becoming selfish and ambitious he corrupted his moral existence and the purpose for which he was created. He distorted the truth about the creation of God and caused man to fall away from Jehovah’s favor and to be put to death. (John 8:44) The perversity of Lucifer began after he was assigned to his official position by Jehovah.
To Satan, the “king of Tyrus”, Jehovah says: “By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God: and I will destroy thee, 0 covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.” (Ezek. 28:16) Lucifer yielded to the willful desire to make merchandise of man. He foresaw a vast earthly “sea” of humanity, which would flow from perfect man and perfect woman. He determined to begin at the fountain head and exploit that sea of humanity. He alienated Adam and Eve from Jehovah God. When the human race had increased to multitudes like unto the sea, then the Devil brought forth out of the symbolic sea that beastly organization of his own creation and which he has used to oppress and kill mankind. He began by resorting to violence, and his ambitious desire has filled his beastly organization with great violence. He incited Cain to commit murder by violence. Satan, therefore, is the creator of the wicked system of commercial religion that oppresses mankind, and he has practiced this from the beginning of man. Therefore the great maritime commercial kingdom of Tyre fitly pictured that religious part of Satan’s wicked organization, and which is manifested specifically in the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, which is extended over the earth and has exploited and oppressed the human race. Hence Jehovah says to Satan : “I will destroy thee, 0 covering cherub.”
FIELD EXPERIENCES
SIDEWALK WITNESSING IN ENGLAND
“Saturday 22nd April the Hertford publishers had an interesting time in the pavement witnessing. The work was at Loughton, and the military authorities had chosen the same place and time for a recruiting campaign. The witnesses were placed in groups of two at intervals along the High Street, and “Fascism or Freedom” boards were well displayed to the people who had come out to see the military parade. From our transcription-lecture machine came the announcement: ‘Shall the world be ruled by arbitrary dictators?’ eth., and this greatly helped the pavement work. 121 booklets were placed. In spite of the fact that the clashing of the two events was a little disconcerting, Jehovah’s witnesses outstayed the military authorities, whose withdrawal provided further evidence of our year text: ‘They shall not prevail against thee.’ ”
FROM MODEL STUDY INTO SERVICE (CUBA)
“A model study was started with only the family (4 or 5 persons). The study continued with increased interest. On some occasions there was an attendance of 15 or 20. The night of ending of the last series there was an attendance of 16 persons. At the close of the study the chairman said: ‘I am sure every one of you that has followed carefully the studies is now fujly aware of the difference between the lies of religion and the truth of Christianity. Hence if you love God and Christ Jesus and would like to obtain life, this is your opportunity to take your stand on the side of Christianity and serve God and Christ. This booklet [holding up Face the Facts] contains a message of vital importance for the people and which Jehovah has commanded must be taken to them. How many of you would like to take part in this work of distributing these booklets?’ Eight came forward, and 25 booklets and a testimony card were given to each of them, together with a report slip.”
FLORIDA FILLING STATION LOCATES THE COPS
“With the assigned duty of obtaining the members of all the police officers in the city I made the first contact with a motorcycle officer, who uses my station as a hide-out to pounce out of and nab the unsuspecting speeders as they pass by. I approached another who had previously used the service station for the same purpose. I then approached another, a clerk of the court. I submitted the same proposition to him, in the same manner. Without hesitancy he offered to have a copy of the desired addresses from the files in his office by sundown, and was as good as his word. Since he had sent his son with the list of names and his car to be serviced from bumper to bumper as my appreciation of his efforts, as I had suggested, he came himself in a few days to inquire if the information was what I wished. Then he said the grease-job was satisfactory also, but that he would pay for the work I did on his car. He said he wanted to have a part in the good work Jehovah’s witnesses are doing. ‘Furthermore,’ he said, ‘I want you to know that I got the chief’s O.K. to give out such a list of names for the purpose made of them. The chief says it is a good .work and that he too is familiar with it and that that office is glad to be of any assistance to Jehovah’s witnesses at any time.’ With this ultimate result I feel that it is proof that persistence pays, and to succeed one must try and try again.”
PHONOGRAPH PLAYS IN YOUNGSVILLE (LA.) COURT
“ ‘This is my house and get the------out!’ he said, ‘I
don’t know why the officials let you work in this town.’ I went to the next house. In a little while the constable came in a car. He said: ‘I have orders to arrest you if you don’t get out of town.’ I said: ‘Then you will have to arrest me, because I can’t get out until I finish this town.’ . . . When the trial started there must have been at least 50 people in the courtroom. The mayor asked me if I had any phonograph. I asked if I could play it in the courtroom. He said: ‘Sure, go ahead.’ So he said to the people in court: ‘Listen to this, and I want you to see for yourself if they are doing anything wrong.’ I played a French record, then asked if I could play one in English. So I did. Then the mayor told me to explain my work to them in English, and my mother to explain her work in French. Then that big brute that put me out of his house got up to speak out of turn, but the mayor told him to keep quiet. Then to the people: ‘If you people have heard anything that they should go to jail for, speak up.’ They seemed to be very interested, except two men—the one that put me out, and another (later the sheriff told me they were just drunkards). After giving the witness in court the mayor said: ‘These people have not broken any laws.’ Turning to us: ‘You are free now. You can go.’ In court the sheriff said: ‘You can come to my house any time you like.’ He asked for a French book and contributed for it. We told him we would finish the town, and we did, without any more trouble. Willton was the only place in our parish we didn’t get put in jail; there was no jail in Willton. I guess that’s the reason. In just one little town, Carencro, we were put in jail three times. They took everything away from us, even our Bible. And then the priest had all our windows boarded up so that we could not witness to the people through the bars.”
ZONE SERVANT REPORTS ON BACK-CALLS
“Enclosed find application for company service at East Prairie, Mo. This is the result of back-calls I made yesterday, on the interested whose names you recently sent me. The lady who signed the application shows a real zeal for the Lord. After playing lecture ‘Fascism or Freedom’ she asked: ‘What does the Lord require of me ?’ After having the service explained to her and the others present, in detail, she said she would do that to the very best of her ability. No doubt in future visits I will be able to get the other interested to also see the importance of the service.”
WHY MANY CATHOLIC HOMES RUY NOT RECEIVE YOU
“In places in this city and province [Quebec] there is organized a concerted movement to bluff, threaten and bulldoze people who show interest. Young men watch the witnesses and as soon as they leave a home these men enter and frighten the people into destroying the books and to refuse further visits from Jehovah’s witnesses under penalty of losing their relief, their positions, excommunication, or any other unlawful course they see fit to take. In many instances where there was interest the people positively refuse to consider further visits or listen to the lectures or consider even free literature, so thoroughly are they frightened. Then, again, the people are warned continuously, at their churches to refuse admission to Jehovah’s witnesses.”
260




**
-
% &
I

r
-fv?
“M
If	s
,4«.
4;
.3


is-


O

£
ft!
ft
It
iff


«hZ£!
12
5,
ir.'i
"*1

^SSS^	/Is (■ li t ‘
-•	/< /.'^ ka 1W5
••	ylsgt'siljW'A.®/ r >'!■’ ib ^:i V-.i-Jtj fly-	,




tVMiiJ'i' -z" ffM-.
J' .'£'

0
assegai
CWS
E--	" --

J**



7*.

it
%

W>-
/ZM#

'$ >
/.
-•"a £ *
if
W-i


!
ii.
" r
:Sl'
&».

1s
/
7
r.
{-
M“
"it


1 "They shall know that lam Jehovah.” m	-Ezekiel 35:15.
«©
Vol. LX
Semimonthly
SEPTEMBER I, 1939
CONTENTS
No. 17
Doom or Religion (Part 6).........
AU Flesh ........................
Result ..........................
Contrast.........................
Strong ..........................
Who May Escape...................
Animal Souls on Earth Before Man How Many Get to Heaven f..........
Jehovah’s Provision (Letter) ......
Field Experiences .................
“Theocracy" Testimony Period .....
“Government and Peace".............
For Your Information .............
“Salvation” ......................
“Watchtower” Studies..............
259
261
262
262
263
263
266
268
270
271
272
258
258
258
258
271
K

&
f-'l=
■V.
JMMg


ib^s^sr
©W.T.B.&TS:

■.t^.i^Wj;'


3Ee WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. Van Ambuegh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloi ed King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $100; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1 no; Great Britain, Australasi 1, and South Africa, 6s. American remit, tances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should bo made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries oilier than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British.................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian.................40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African ________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
riciwe address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of tiio Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The iVatch-ioioer free upon written application to tho publishers, made once c*a< h year, stating tho reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid tho needy, but the written application once each year is.required by tho postal regulations.
. Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may.be expected to anpear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with tho journal one mouth before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879.
“THEOCRACY” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The month of October begins a new service year and has been named “Theocracy” Testimony Period. The great Theocrat’s provision for field service then is the book Salvation together with the ■new booklet Government and Peace, first to be released for distribution beginning with October. This combination of literature will be offered on a 25c contribution or corresponding value in other English-speaking lands. This Period is to be world-wide, and those lands not yet having translations of the above in their native language will offer a like combination of the latest book and booklet, Enemies or Riches along with Fascism or Freedom or Face the Facts. This announcement should suffice to start you to plan and prepare for an unstinted share in this Theocratic testimony. Your faithful report of. work will help to make up an accurate world record.
"GOVERNMENT AND PEACE”
Honest hearers of the two speeches by the Society’s president to the world convention and radio audience from New York city have been anticipating this new booklet, for it contains his rousing, Convention-feature speeches “Government and Peace” and “Victory”. Millions of others of good will also will be eager to read this booklet. It is of 64 pages, and is self-covered, but the
unusual cover sets forth pictorially the circumstances of the Madison Square Garden public address. Time of release for public distribution is stated elsewhere. Your personal copy you may now send for, remitting 5c contribution.
FOR YOUR INFORMATION
By reason of his unfaithfulness to the kingdom interests, and to those who serve the kingdom, 0. R. Moyle is no longer with the Society. The full board of directors of the Society on Aiigu-,1 8, by Resolution, unanimously demanded that the president sever Moyle’s connection with the Society immediately. It was done. Brethren will address their communications concerning their legal difficulties: Watchtower Bible and Tract Society, Legal Desk, 117 Adams St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
“SALVATION”
This new book, written by the president of the Society, was the feature release at the recent world-wide convention of Jehovah’s witnesses with its hub at New York City. The author of this book for the times describes it as “A text-book for the Jonadnlto”. But a study of its 38-1 pages of contents will prove to you it i» (Continued on page 271)
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX	September 1, 1939	No. 17
DOOM OF RELIGION
PART 6
"But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel: and it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour out of my spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams.”—Acts 2:16,17.
JEHOVAH’S SPIRIT is the holy power of the I Most High by which he carries out his purposes.
J That holy spirit is invisible to human eyes, but God causes it to move his creatures on earth into action to serve his purpose. He gives a commission of authority to certain ones to do and to perform the things designated by that commission, and this he does by putting his spirit upon such creatures. At Acts the second chapter is the record of what took place at Pentecost, ten days after the ascension of Christ Jesus into heaven. There the apostle Peter, moved by the holy spirit, or invisible power of Jehovah God, quoted the prophecy of Joel, applying it in miniature at the time of Pentecost.
2 The prophecy of Joel makes known something new and which never before was done by Jehovah toward those who should have to do with the carrying out of his purposes concerning the kingdom or theocratic government of the Most High. The record of Joel reads: “And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions.”—Joel 2: 28.
’ The word there written “afterward”, or, literally, “aftei' so,” manifestly means that which follows after God’s people have done and performed the things stated at chapter two, verses 12-17, and which marks a fulfillment of the prophecy in completeness. Since the words of the prophecy must in due time apply to the remnant of God’s people in fulfillment, this clearly appears to be after the consecrated come to a knowledge that they had been negligent in serving Jehovah and, having greatly grieved thereat, they repented and turned themselves wholly and entirely to the pure worship of Jehovah God and to the service of his kingdom and refused further to be deterred in that faithful service because of fear of man or devil. That would mean, therefore, that the time was when Jehovah brought his people out of captiv-
259
ity from the enemy and made them see their freedom in Christ.
* Because of yielding to religion the Jewish nation had forsaken the covenant with God and God had cast that nation away. Only a remnant of the Jews had stood firm to the terms of the covenant with Jehovah. Among such was Peter, the disciple of Jesus Christ, together with the other faithful disciples. The Scriptures disclose that this part of the prophecy of Joel had a miniature fulfillment at Pentecost, at which time God caused the disciples of Jesus to speak forth his purpose and to do so in many languages, which prior thereto they could not speak. The apostle Peter under inspiration there locates the time for the complete fulfillment of this part of Joel’s prophecy, and that time is named by the apostle as “the last days”. Other scriptures definitely show that “the last days” is the time of the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple for judgment (Mal. 3:1-3), and according to the Scriptural proof heretofore published in The Watchtower this appearing of the Lord at the time was in A.D. 1918. It was after that date that the consecrated ones repented and turned wholly to the service of Jehovah, as commanded by the prophecy recorded at Joel 2:12-17. The words of the apostle Peter make clear that the word “afterward” at Joel 2:28 applies specifically after A.D. 1918. At Pentecost the apostle said: “And it shall be in the last days, saith God, I will pour forth of my spirit upon all flesh : and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams.”—Acts 2:17, A.ll.V.
5	Mark now the surrounding circumstances leading up to and obtaining at the time of the miniature fulfillment of the prophecy. Peter with an oath had three times denied his Master, Christ Jesus. All the other disciples had abandoned the Lord and fled in the night of his mock trial because of fear of the other Jews. All of them had much cause thereafter
260
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
for godly sorrow and certainly a reason to repent. (Matt. 26:55-75; John 18:15-27) Even aftei- the resurrection of Jesus from the dead his disciples met behind closed doors because of “fear of the Jews”. (John 20:19-26) Afterwards those faithful disciples did show repentance and great sorrow, and Jesus forgave them and they were restored to God’s favor. (John 21:1-19) It was after they had been delivered from their fear of the Jews that the disciples were anointed with the holy spirit, as stated at Acts 2:1-14. Then the disciples became fearless and bold in declaring the name of Jehovah, his King and his kingdom. Ever thereafter they emphasized the importance of the kingdom. It was thereafter that God revealed to them his purpose to ‘take out a people for his name’ who should be witnesses to his name and majesty and power. (Acts 15:14) The disciples must be separated from religion and were so separated unto the Lord. At Pentecost God poured out his spirit upon all persons in the flesh who were then completely and wholly devoted to him. That was the miniature fulfillment of Joel’s prophecy above quoted.
6	In the years 1917 and 1918 (A.D.) there was a real test put upon the consecrated ones, and many of such failed to make a proper public confession of their devotion to God and to his kingdom; and that failure was due to fear. Because of such dereliction those consecrated ones were displeasing to the Lord. Therefore God’s favor could not be expressed toward the derelict ones until after they had repented and confessed to God and had set themselves wholly to do the will of God. Up to that time the consecrated held to the religious opinion that the chief purpose of Jehovah is to save men and take some of them to heaven and leave some on the earth, all of whom should assist God in carrying out his purpose. Although God’s people saw, in 1919, that the fear of man had ensnared them, they did not realize their really unhappy condition until 1922 or thereabouts. It was then that the Lord revealed to his people the truth of the presence of Christ Jesus at the temple and that God had used Isaiah the prophet to record a prophecy which had its fulfillment upon the consecrated in 1922, and which prophecy is, to wit: “In the year that king Uzziah died I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple. Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts. Then flew one of the seraphims unto me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar.”—Isa. 6:1,5, 6.
’ Coming to a realization of their condition, and repenting and crying unto the Lord, it was then that
the prophecy concerning the outpouring of the holy spirit began to have its fulfillment in completeness. Christ Jesus, then at the temple, acted for and in the name of Jehovah God to pour out His holy spirit upon the devoted ones whom he found approved at the temple judgment.—Acts 2: 33.
8	Later God’s people learned of his expressed purpose in ‘taking out from the nations a people for his name’. Long ago God had declared that he would permit the Devil to remain and carry on opposition to Jehovah for a period of a time fixed, at the end of which, God declared, he would cause his own great name to be proclaimed throughout the earth, and that this would be just preceding Armageddon, at which time he would exhibit his supreme power against the enemy. (Ex. 9:16) Those whom the Lord would send forth to be his witnesses to declare his name and his kingdom throughout the earth must therefore be anointed with his spirit and receive a commission from Jehovah and under that commission of authority do the work assigned to them. The terms of that commission God had set forth in his Word, disclosing that those in Christ Jesus, approved at the temple, would come fully within the class which should declare in the words of the prophet, to wit: “The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord hath anointed me”; that is, God has commissioned me to carry forward his purpose due to be done and performed, and which must be done by those so taken out from the world for his name. Commissioned to do what? The prophecy answers : “To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance [vindication] of our God.” (Isa. 61:1, 2) Vengeance against whom? Against all who oppose the Theocratic government, and which enemies on earth chiefly are the religious leaders. Therefore the commission granted to the taken-out and anointed ones requires each one of them to proclaim the truth, which truth of God’s Word exposes religion as a snare of the Devil and as a racket practiced amongst men for material gain of the religion mongers. The time then arrived for God’s “strange work”, and the taken-out ones must participate in that “strange work” by declaring God’s purpose as announced in their foregoing commission. To do that work the witnesses must have the spirit of God upon them. Upon all such in the flesh devoted to Jehovah he poured out his spirit by and through Christ Jesus and thus made them his witnesses and sent them forth to proclaim his purpose.
9	The “strange work” of Jehovah means a destructive work toward religion and the advocates and practitioners of religion, because all such are in opposition to the Theocracy. Proclaiming God’s name and his kingdom works destruction upon such opposers of the Lord. God’s organization in general is
September 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER.
261
symbolized by the name “Jerusalem”, which necessarily includes the kingdom. Note then the application of the prophecy from and after 1922, and which prophecy of Joel is corroborated by another prophecy of the Lord duly recorded: “And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek [cause] to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem. And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications; and they shall look upon me whom they [the enemy and opposers of God’s kingdom] have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourn-eth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.” —Zech. 12:9,10.
10	Those who were devoted to God and his kingdom, and who were privileged to do the “Elijah work” prior to 1918, were pierced and the work was killed, and for that reason they did mourn. The name of Jehovah and of his beloved Son were pierced through by the enemy in 1918, and there was great mourning amongst the consecrated people of God, and this the Lord foretold by the prophecy of Zechariah above quoted. (See book Preparation, page 230.) Upon those faithful ones God poured out his spirit, which embraced all in the flesh who were thus devoted to Jehovah. This had its specific manifestation at Cedar Point convention on September 8, 1922. At that time a great burden was lifted from the hearts of those devoted to Jehovah and they discerned that there was much for them to do.
11	Immediately following the anointing at Pentecost the apostles went forth preaching the kingdom to all who would hear, and their preaching was destructive of religion. The religionists opposed the apostles bitterly and heaped upon them great reproach. Saul of Tarsus had been a great religious leader and a persecutor of the disciples of Jesus Christ, and when the Lord opened his understanding religion, so far as he was concerned, was destroyed. (Gal. 1:1-14) Likewise immediately following the pouring out of the holy spirit on God’s devoted people in 1922 they were sent forth to declare the purposes of Jehovah, and the proclamation by them of God’s message was and since has been destructive to those who oppose the kingdom of God; and that destructive work will culminate when Jehovah’s "strange act” at Armageddon is performed. All who received the anointing of the holy spirit and who acted upon God’s command were completely separated from the worldly organizations in which religion rules. Every one of the anointed, being commissioned by the Lord to act in his name, must proclaim his message of truth, which is destructive to religion. In order to receive the approval of God all such must faithfully perform the terms of the commission and
therefore make themselves the objects of reproach, hatred, and persecution by the enemy. Anointed and performing their duty as commissioned, and being in Christ Jesus, such anointed ones are “the feet” of Christ, joyfully carrying out God’s purpose to make known his kingdom. (Isa. 52:7) As Christ Jesus the Head suffered great reproach and persecution at the hands of religionists, even so now “the feet of Him” are subjected to like persecution.
12	The witnesses of Jehovah are not moved by the influence of any earthly person. They have no earthly leader or earthly king. They are the servants of Jehovah God by and through Christ Jesus, and Christ is their Head and King. The words of Jehovah, as recorded in the prophecy, are: “I will pour out my spirit”; that is to say, God’s holy power, upon all devoted to him to do the work of proclaiming his message to the nations. The pouring out of his spirit is first upon the Head, Christ Jesus, and through him His spirit is poured out upon the members of his body. (Ps. 133:2) Christ Jesus is the Head and Leader of all of such, and no man can teach or lead such commissioned ones. They are all one, led and taught by their Head: “But ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things.” “But the anointing which ye have received of him abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you; but as the same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him.”—1 John 2: 20, 27.
ALL FLESH
18	What, then, is meant by the words of the prophecy, “upon all flesh”? Surely not, upon all the world of mankind, as has been stated by some in the past. When J esus was present in the flesh God poured out his spirit upon Christ Jesus. (Matt. 3:16,17) The holy spirit could not be poured out upon others until after Jesus was glorified. (John 7:39) The disciples had the promise of the holy spirit, and at Pentecost the holy spirit was poured out upon all the faithful disciples and others of the faithful ones then present who heard and believed and devoted themselves to Jehovah. (Acts 2: 38) Next thereafter the holy spirit was poured out upon the Samaritans who had wholly devoted themselves to God and to his kingdom. (Acts 8:14-17) Later and in God’s appointed time his spirit was poured out upon non-Jews in the flesh who had devoted themselves to Jehovah and his kingdom. (Acts 10:44-46) The terms “upon all flesh” certainly could not apply to anyone who opposes God and his kingdom. Manifestly the meaning of the words “upon all flesh” is that God’s spirit is put upon all creatures who are in a fleshly organism and who have been begotten of God’s spirit after fully devoting themselves to him and showing their full
2G2
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
faith and devotion to God and to his kingdom. When Christ Jesus came to the temple in 1918 he there began the trial testing and judgment of the consecrated ones. Those who passed that fiery test, proving their unselfish devotion to the Lord and his kingdom, received the Lord’s approval, and were brought into the temple and anointed by the spirit of Jehovah God being poured out upon all of them, and this while they are in the fleshly organism. Thus being brought into Christ and made a part of his organization, they were sent forth thereafter to “offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness” acceptable unto him, and this they do, as stated by the Scriptures, by declaring God’s name and his kingdom.—Mal. 3:1-3; Heb. 13:15.
RESULT
14	What is the result from the outpouring of the holy spirit? This question is answered in the prophecy : “And your sons and your daughters shall prophesy.” At Pentecost those words applied to the Jews, their sons and daughters, who had devoted themselves to God and his kingdom, because Peter, as well as the prophet Joel, addresses the message to “ye children of Zion”; “Israel . . . my people.” (Joel 2:23-27) The reference would therefore be to the antitypical Israelites at the time of the fulfillment in completion of the prophecy. Sons and daughters come after the parents, and therefore would picture the later or final ones forming God’s remnant, which are by the Lord brought into and made a part of “his faithful and wise servant” and to whom the Lord commits his kingdom interests on the earth. Being children, they would picture a young, vigorous group, keen of mind, unselfish of heart, and actively pushing forward in the performance of their covenant and commission from the Lord. (Isa. 44:1-8) Further concerning them the prophecy says: “And they shall prophesy”; meaning, they shall preach the truth. The apostles in their day did thus prophesy. All the other anointed ones prophesied; that is to say, they preached or proclaimed God’s message relating to the future, as well as to the present time, and all did so under the power of the spirit of Jehovah. As it is written in prophecy: “Jehovah hath spoken; who [that is devoted to him] can but prophesy?” (Amos 3:8, A.R.V.) The effect is that all such serve as witnesses for Jehovah by keeping his commandments, publishing his name and his kingdom according to the terms of the commission given, and thus they prophesy or proclaim the name and kingdom of the Most High. After the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple and the building up of Zion all who are taken into the temple and who remain faithful must bear testimony to the name and kingdom of Jehovah. “And the Redeemer shall come to Zion,
and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord. As for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the Lord: My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed’s seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.”— Isa. 59: 20, 21.
CONTRAST
15	The effect of that temple judgment was exactly contrary towards others, as the prophecy states: “Your old men shall dream dreams.” That would mean that the dreamers are not obeying God’s command. Such persons designated as “old men” have hard, fixed and closed minds and are therefore not teachable. Such persons conclude, and did conclude, as the facts show, that all of God’s truth was revealed through one man prior to October, 191G, and hence they refused to consider the revelation of God’s prophecy thereafter coming to those who serve him. Such “old men” retired from service in the field, took their ease and dozed and dreamed of the time when they might go to heaven and help administer the affairs there. They think more highly of themselves than they should think. All persons consecrated and who showed such a dreaming disposition at the time of the temple judgment were rejected by the Lord, as the prophecy shows, and all such persons as since then have been highly impressed with their own learning and greatness, and who have insisted on going their own way, have found themselves in the same class of the dreamers. That would mean that some who did receive the anointing, and who w’ould not vigorously put forth an effort to fulfill their commission, will be relegated to the ‘dreamer’ class. The dreamers are in exact contrast with the “sons” and “daughters”. Such dreamers are great in their own estimation, and concerning such it is written: “Great men are not always wise; neither do the aged understand judgment.” (Job 32:9) The dreamers, not willing to learn of God, set about to proclaim their own ideas, and follow their own way and become prophets of deceit; that is, they deceive themselves and deceive others who give heed to their oft-repeated dreams. They never get away from their religious habits, and they hold on to the traditions of men. Concerning such the Lord has said: “They are prophets [proclaimers] of the deceit of their own heart; which think to cause my people to forget my name by their dreams, which they tell every man to his neighbour, as their fathers have forgotten my name for Baal.”—Jer. 23: 26, 27.
16	Then the Lord draws a clear contrast between the dreamer and those who are guided by his Word, when he says: “The prophet that hath a dream, let
THE WATCHTOWER
263
September 1, 1939
him tell a dream; and he that hath my word, let him speak my word faithfully. What is the chaff [dreams are here likened unto worthless chaff] to the wheat [God’s life-sustaining Word]? saith the Lord.” “Behold, I am against them that prophesy false dreams, saith the Lord, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by their lies, and by their lightness; yet I sent them not, nor commanded them; therefore they shall not profit this people at all, saith the Lord.”—Jer. 23:28, 32.
12	In view of these plain words of God’s prophet let the anointed beware of and avoid the self-constituted wise men who think to exalt themselves by putting forth their own ideas or the traditional ideas of other men and who follow such and attempt to induce others to follow such dreamers.
STRONG
18	Those who really are devoted to God and his kingdom are by the prophet likened unto young men, to wit: “Your young men shall see visions.” Such are “strong in the Lord, and in the power [spirit] of his might”. (Eph. 6:10) Furthermore it is written: ‘The glory of the young man is his strength.’ (Prov. 20: 29) The visions which such young men have are not delusions, but a keen insight into and an appreciation of God’s Word. They discern the fulfillment of his prophecy and see that through Christ Jesus the prophecies are being unfolded, Christ Jesus the Head of the temple being the immediate Teacher of the members of his body. To such the apostle speaks, and prays, at Ephesians 1:17,18. Such young men see wonders, and have seen wondrous things in these “last days”, the meaning of which is revealed by the physical facts in fulfillment of prophecy, which the Lord has brought to pass. After being thus anointed they discern the kingdom and that Christ Jesus is at the temple carrying forward his Father’s purposes. They see and keenly appreciate the prophetic dramas long ago made and recorded by the Lord, foretelling the promotion of the kingdom interest and disclosing what is shortly to follow. In all of this they give glory to Jehovah God and to the King and take no credit to themselves.
10	The language of the prophecy of Joel makes it cleai' and certain that all who receive the outpouring of the holy spirit and who continue to abide thereunder must be active in the service of God. Those upon whom the spirit of God is poured out through Christ Jesus are members of “the body of Christ”. (1 Cor. 12:27) Is there a possibility of such losing that anointing and falling away? The Lord Jesus says: “If a man abide not in me, he is cast [away].” (John 15:6) Those who fail or refuse to bear the fruits of the kingdom, that is, to proclaim to others the life-sustaining truths of the kingdom, could not
abide in the Lord; and concerning which Jesus said: “Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me.”—John 15:4.
80	Surely this means that one might pass the test, enter the temple and receive the anointing, and then fail to carry out his commission, and fall and be cast away. In this connection note the words of Joel’s prophecy: “And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit.” (Joel 2: 29) Peter, in quoting those words, said, as will be noted: “On my servants and on my handmaidens.” (Acts 2:18) The prophecy does not say: “Upon your servants and handmaids.” Clearly the purpose of the outpouring of the holy spirit is that those receiving it must be the servants of the Lord; which means they must serve him. Such must not be eye-servants to be seen of men, nor “men-pleasers”, but, “as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart.” (Eph. 6:6) “As free, and not using your liberty for a cloke of maliciousness, but as the servants of God.”—1 Pet. 2:16.
21	Undoubtedly this means that while some are assigned to some place of service, and some to another, each one must render service unto the Lord, and not unto men. Previous condition as to worldly position, education or reputation would make no difference, because all the anointed ones of the Lord are commissioned to render service to the glory of Almighty God and to his kingdom.
22	Note further the forceful words of the prophecy quoted by Peter: “I will pour out, in those days, of my spirit”; that is to say, after the coming of the Lord to the temple in 1918. This adds further proof that the pouring out of the spirit “upon all flesh” means that all creatures in the flesh who are devoted to Jehovah God receive the holy spirit and must thereafter be servants of God and faithfully continue to be such servants even to the end, and that all such collectively constitute the ‘elect servant’ or “faithful and wise servant”, to whom the Lord commits his kingdom interests on the earth.
WONDERS
23	The pouring out of the holy spirit prepared and equipped those servants to begin to carry on their work as servants and witnesses of Jehovah, and further shows that those who faithfully fulfill their commission by the grace of God would have a part in the wondrous things described, to wit: “And I will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke.”—Joel 2: 30.
24	The anointed faithful ones themselves are wonders to many. Multitudes wondered at the apostles and others who received the holy spirit at Pentecost. (Acts 2: 6-13) Says the Psalm, referring to the faith
264
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ful ones of God: “I am as a wonder unto many: but thou art my strong refuge.” (Ps. 71:7) “Behold, I [Christ Jesus], and the children whom the Lord hath given me, are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of hosts, which dwelleth in mount Zion.” (Isa. 8:18) “Hear now, 0 Joshua the high priest, thou and thy fellows that sit before thee; for they are men wondered at; for behold, I will bring forth my servant, The BRANCH.” (Zech. 3: 8) (See also Ezekiel 12: 6,11; Ezekiel 24: 24-27.) Jehovah’s witnesses today under the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, fulfilled the picture of the wonders performed by Moses and Aaron in Egypt. (Ex. 4:21; 7: 3-9; Deut. 4: 34; 6: 22) His witnesses in these latter days have been used by Jehovah in fulfillment of some of his wonderful prophetic dramas. Jehovah’s “strange work” on earth now is a wonder to many, and God’s people have a part therein.
2S	As to seeing “wonders in the heavens”, as stated by the prophecy (Joel 2:30), Jehovah has opened the eyes of understanding or discernment of the faithful servant class to see the two great signs or wonders in the heavens, which John saw in symbol. “And there appeared a great wonder in heaven; a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars. And there appeared another wonder in heaven; and behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads.” (Rev. 12:1, 3) These signs or wonders are the great opposing organizations. The faithful servant class first began to see these “wonders in the heavens” in A.D. 1921, when The Watchtower for the first time gave publication concerning the Devil’s organization. {The Watchtower 1921, pages 90,91) Then in 1925 The Watchtower published the evidence showing that God’s people saw these wonders beginning to take place in 1914; and as to the wonders beginning to take place in 1914 and as to the “wonders ... in the earth” Jehovah has opened the understanding of his people to discern the earthly organization of the Devil, made up of religious, commercial and political elements, and has particularly pointed out the hideousness of the religious element. Also Jehovah shows his witnesses that he is using them in the earth, guiding them to do his work in having a part in pouring out the “seven last plagues” upon “Christendom” from and after 1922, and which plagues have tormented the enemy. These facts clearly fulfill the prophecy of Joel with reference to seeing wonders in the heavens and in the earth.
26	Further describing conditions that would obtain at the end of the world, Jesus says: “There shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring; [and] men’s
hearts failing them for fear.” (Luke 21: 25, 26) The faithful servants of God not only have seen these wonders but have boldly declared the same to others. Further describing the things to be seen by the faithful ones as wonders, the prophet says: “Blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke.” Poured-out blood is a symbol of death and that which is death-dealing. Such was foreshadowed when Moses poured out water in the land of Egypt and it became blood, and then he smote the waters of the Nile, which afterwards became bloody.—Ex. 4:9; 7:15-25.
2T	The meaning of that sign was revealed to Jehovah’s faithful servants through the publication of The Watchtower in 1934. Blood was also symbolized in the events that followed the blowing of The second trumpet’ (Rev. 8:8,9) and the outpouring of the vials of wrath of Almighty God. (Rev. 16: 3, 4) (See also Light, Books One and Two.) Thus was revealed that the waters of religion and commerce are deathdealing when viewed in contrast with the waters of light and truth which proceed from Almighty God.
28	Concerning “fire”, manifestly the fulfillment of this part of Joel’s prophecy is found in the fiery message of Jehovah God, which he has caused to be proclaimed throughout the earth, and particularly in the land of hypocritical “Christendom”. Jehovah’s witnesses, the faithful servant class, have been permitted to carry this fiery message among the people, and it has dreadfully scorched and burned the religionists : “Wherefore thus saith the Lord God of hosts, Because ye speak this word, behold, I will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour them.” (Jer. 5:14) “Is not my word like as a fire? saith the Lord; and like a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces?” (Jer. 23: 29) Again Jehovah’s witnesses, pictured by “the man clothed with linen”, are commanded to go into God’s organization and take the fiery message and scatter it over the city or land of “Christendom”, which has a destructive effect upon religion. (Ezek. 10: 2, 7) That which followed the blowing of The first trumpet’ was like a fire, by means of which the religionists were scorched.—Rev. 8: 6, 7.
29	As to the “pillars of smoke” (Joel 2:30), those appear well to denote the “smoke of [the] torment” of the enemies of Jehovah, particularly of the leading religionists and their organization, and this because of God’s fiery message delivered amongst them. The Lord’s army of locusts have carried this fiery message amongst the religionists, and that fire has resulted in much smoke of torment to religious leaders. (Rev. 9:17,18) “The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of
THE WATCHTOWER,
265
September 1,1939
the Lamb: and the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever; and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and whosoever receiveth the mark of his name.” (Rev. 14:10,11) The torment that Jehovah’s message brings to the religionists, particularly to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, increases daily in these “last days”, and this is shown by their repeated howls and cursings. They are so scorched and stunned that they incite mobs to assault Jehovah’s witnesses, thus showing their anger against God and against his kingdom.
80	Furthermore “pillars of smoke” arising denote the expression of God’s wrath against those who persecute his faithful servants; “There went up a smoke [in his wrath] out of his [Jehovah’s] nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured; coals were kindled by it. He bowed the heavens also, and came down; and thick darkness was under his feet.”—Ps. 18:8, 9, R.V., margin.
81	Ever and anon in these “last days” God exhibits his wrath against his persecutors, but the complete expression of his wrath will be at Armageddon, and thereafter the smoke will ascend forever, denoting that the class consumed by the fire that made the smoke have ceased to exist for ever.
82	Following the outpouring of the holy spirit upon all flesh greater light was shed upon the anointed ones. Exactly the contrary came to the religionists and the “evil servant” class, and these found themselves in darkness: “The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come.”—Joel 2: 31.
88	The sun is the work of God and is the source of light by day for his earthly creatures. Only God can turn that great light into darkness. God expresses his anger against the enemy by bringing darkness upon them. “I form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil [calamity]. I the Lord do all these things.”—Isa. 45:7.
84	The plague of three days’ darkness which God brought upon Egypt pictures Satan’s agents of this day in darkness. (Ex. 10:21-23) God makes known his displeasure with the enemy in these words: “Let their way be dark and slippery [darkness and slipperiness (margin')']; and let the angel of the Lord persecute them.” (Ps. 35:6) “But with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end of the place thereof, and darkness shall pursue his enemies.”— Nahum 1:8.
86	The spirit of God gives light, and the light God withholds from those who hypocritically claim to be his servants but who in fact are the servants of the Devil. All religionists oppose God and his purpose, and hence they are in darkness. Specifically the Lord names the “evil servant” class, which class at one
time was in the light but now is ‘cast into outer darkness’. (Matt. 24: 48-51) The kingdom light and truth, symbolized by the sun, God makes dark to the opposers, who have cast away his Word. All the physical facts show the fulfillment of this part of the prophecy in these latter days. Only those who have the spirit of the Lord see and appreciate the kingdom, and all the others, particularly the religionists, oppose the kingdom, and hence they are in complete darkness.
86	The moon also is the handiwork of God, made to give light by night to his creatures. Turning the moon into blood could be done only by Almighty God, and such he does to show his displeasure toward his enemies. “The moon under [the] feet” of God’s “woman” is symbolic of his organization guided by his law. (Rev. 12:1) So Jehovah’s provision is that his organization shall be guided in the right way. Those who have the spirit of the Lord are guided by his light into paths of righteousness, and they delight to do his will. As to the enemy, they have no such light, but in darkness continue to oppose God. To the enemy the Scriptures are meaningless and are very dark. The present-day rulers of the earth get no aid or comfort whatsoever from the Bible. All the rulers hold to and practice some land of religion, and God's Word of light, which is his law, appears to the enemy as a dead and hideous thing, symbolized by congealed blood, and thus as to them the moon is turned into blood. The religious practitioners, particularly, and which includes the political leaders of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, hate the truth, because to them it speaks bloody vengeance and destruction. (Deut. 32:43; Matt. 23:34,35) To such enemy God’s King and kingdom are loathsome. Dictators look with horror upon God’s law, and hence the Hierarchy and other religious practitioners support the dictators and fight against the light of God’s Word, and bitterly oppose his kingdom. They do violence to those who bring his message of light and truth of the kingdom to the attention of the people. During the day of God’s “strange work” now in progress all things pertaining to the kingdom speak woe and death to the representatives of Satan’s agents on the earth. Here is further corroborative evidence that the day of Armageddon is near, because the darkness of the sun and the turning of the moon into blood, as shown by the prophecy, take place immediately “before the great and terrible day of Jehovah” coming. Since 1925 particularly Jehovah’s witnesses have carried the kingdom message and placed it within the hearing of the people, which message tells of the day of vengeance of our God, and that it is very near. Such is their part in God’s “strange work”, and such work appears to the religionists as a very strange thing. This witness work must be done before Jehovah
266
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
shows to the enemy Ms great power, which he will do at Armageddon. Causing his name and his kingdom to be proclaimed throughout the earth, Jehovah thus gives warning to the enemy and at the same time extends his mercy toward those practitioners of religion who have been and are deceived and held as prisoners in the religious organizations, and who unwittingly have walked with religionists. Now in this day Jehovah makes it clearly to appear that religion is doomed, and the sounding of such warning of doom provides the opportunity to all persons of good will to flee to the kingdom for protection before the wrath of God is expressed against Satan’s organization.
WHO MAY ESCAPE
” To now be permitted to declare the name and kingdom of Jehovah and the approaching hour of his wrath upon all wickedness, is an unspeakable privilege granted to those upon whom he has put his spirit. The message boldly announces the supremacy of Jehovah, and this done in the midst of religious opposition makes it possible for those who hear and who obey to find protection and salvation; and this God foretold through the prophecy of Joel 2:32: “And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered: for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call.”
88	Necessarily it follows that whosoever shall not call upon the name of the Lord shall not be delivered. That makes it imperative for Jehovah’s witnesses to carry out their commission to proclaim his name, his kingdom and his vengeance at the present time.
88	When must one call upon the name of Jehovah, that deliverance may be had'? Not after the battle of Armageddon begins, at which time all may discern by the natural sight of the eyes the expression of God’s vengeance against wickedness. Faith must be exercised by those who find protection. One must first believe that the Almighty God is Jehovah and that protection and salvation belong to him. (Heb. 11: 6; Ps. 3:8) He must believe that Jesus Christ is the Redeemer and Deliverer, and then take action in harmony with that belief. Otherwise the inherited condemnation abides on such one to destruction. (John 3: 36) He must call upon the name of Jehovah before the battle of Armageddon begins; and this he must do by hearing, believing and acting upon the information of truth brought to him by those who are witnesses for Jehovah, and particularly upon whom God has placed his spirit. For this reason Jehovah sends forth his anointed witnesses to declare his name and his purposes: “How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and
how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher [one who bears testimony to the truth or proclaims the truth] ? And how shall they preach, except they be sent [which are sent by receiving the anointing of the spirit and commission from Jehovah to go and preach this gospel of the kingdom] ? as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things!” (Rom. 10:14,15) It is concerning these faithful witnesses that the prophecy is written: “How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him [Christ] that bringeth good tidings, that pub-lisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!”—Isa. 52: 7.
40	It is now easy to be seen why the dictators demand that the people shall salute flags and hail men, and why the Roman Catholic Hierarchy join in such demands upon the people, and why they cause the legislative bodies to frame laws working mischief, and why the Roman Catholic Hierarchy demands that the people should hear nothing except what the Hierarchy tells them. The acts of the dictators and of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their other religious supporters are proof conclusive that such are the agents of Satan and are desperately attempting to turn the people away from Jehovah God and to prevent them from hearing of his name and his kingdom. The dictators and religionists have rejected Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s anointed King, the Ruler in the Theocracy. Every attempt is to turn the people away from the only possible means of protection and salvation. This is clearly shown by the Scriptures as well as the facts that have come to pass in recent years. Concerning the King it is written: “This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other; for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.”—Acts 4:11,12.
41	The dictators and religionists are would-be builders of earthly governments and insist on ruling in the place and stead of God’s kingdom. They definitely reject Jehovah’s King and kingdom, and hence upon them Jehovah’s wrath will shortly be expressed. Those who remain with the religionists are certain to go down in that great catastrophe of Armageddon. Those who will find protection and salvation must hear the truth before Armageddon and must obey the Lord by fleeing from religion and religionists and diligently seek protection under Christ Jesus. The great Judge and Executioner of Jehovah is the Lord Jesus Christ, and he is the only One: “One only is the lawgiver and judge, even he who is able to save and to destroy.” (Jas. 4:12,
WATCHTOWER
September 1, 1939
A.R.V.) Let all who so desire to follow in the lead of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and dictators, and who desire to bow down to them and hail men and salute flags, follow their own desire, but let such be fully warned of this, that only those who show their faith in God and his King, and who obey God and his King by acting before Armageddon as Rahab did, will find deliverance.—Jas. 2: 24-26.
** Organized religion began with Babylon, and ever since then the religionists and their organizations have been designated in the Scriptures under and by the name of “Babylon”. As God sent Jeremiah to warn those of Israel who were of good will that they might flee out of the Devil’s organization, so now he sends his anointed ones, accompanied by their companions, the Jonadabs, to give warning to all others who desire protection and salvation, and to those warned Jehovah now says: “Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul; be not cut off in her iniquity; for this is the time of the Lord’s vengeance; he will render unto her a recompence.” “My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger of the Lord.”—Jer. 51: 6, 45.
48 This message must be carried to the people now, and upon every one who has received the anointing of the holy spirit God has placed the responsibility to participate in delivering that message. A failure or refusal to perform the commission thus given is certain to be disastrous to the ones thus failing or refusing.
** In the typical days Jerusalem and Zion were located on adjoining mountains, and pictured the universal and the capital organization of Jehovah. Zion was a type of Jehovah’s capital organization, made up of Jesus Christ and the 144,000 members of his body, anointed by the holy spirit, and upon which mountain, antitypically, now Jesus Christ and his body members stand, and there they are strongly fortified against the enemy. (Rev. 14:1,3) Those who will compose the “great multitude” are not pictured as standing upon Mount Zion. All persons of good will who flee to the mountains as commanded, and faithfully abide there under the protection of Christ until the end of Armageddon, will be delivered and will form the “great multitude”. “For in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance,” says the prophecy. Here the word “deliverance” means “an escaping”, and may be properly applied to the act of escaping and to those who do escape. (Isa. 4:3,4) Jehovah’s provision for those of good will is by and through Christ Jesus, the Head of his organization Zion. “But upon mount Zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be holiness; and the house of Jacob shall possess their possessions.” (Obad. 17) Mount Zion is the Theocracy or King
267
dom, and deliverance shall be there because Jehovah God will fight for his organization, as it is written: “For thus hath the Lord spoken unto me, Like as the lion and the young lion roaring on his prey, when a multitude of shepherds is called forth against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them: so shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight for mount Zion, and for the hill thereof. As birds flying, so will the Lord of hosts defend Jerusalem; defending also he will deliver it; and passing over [covering it with complete protection] he will preserve it.” (Isa. 31:4,5) Thus the Lord shows that protection and salvation come only from him by and through his royal organization. This he makes known for the benefit of the Jonadabs, or persons of good will.
45 Escape and deliverance shall be found in no other place than in the Lord God’s organization, “as the Lord hath said.” Repeatedly God has thus said by his prophets, the “holy men of old”. He has said it through Christ Jesus and his apostles, and now he uses the remnant, or the anointed ones, to bring this message to the attention of the people of good will. All of these, from the faithful men of old, and including the remnant, have been and are witnesses to the name of Jehovah and his purpose. The remnant now bear this message which the Lord has said, and they must continue to carry that message to the people, because that is the purpose of their anointing.
40 The prophecy of Joel 2: 32 shows that the remnant constitute a part of Jehovah’s organization and now represent it on the earth, particularly Jehovah’s capital organization Zion, concerning which it is written: “And in [(R.F.) among] the remnant whom the Lord [doth] call.” Furthermore this makes clear that those who do escape and find refuge must now hear the message of and concerning the kingdom, must believe it, and must seek the Lord, and must take their place among those of the remnant and become companions of the remnant in the service. This part of the text according to Rotherham says: “And among the survivors whom Jehovah doth call.” The survivors of the remnant, of course, must abide in the organization in order to find protection and salvation. The remnant Jehovah has called from all nations to be witnesses for his name, and upon such he has poured out his spirit. Prior to 1919 many of these were held in prison to the enemy organization, and the Lord called them out and sent them forth as his commissioned witnesses. These witnesses, in order to maintain their integrity, must bo faithful in the performance of the commission which Jehovah has issued to them, and therefore they must give great diligence in proclaiming the name and purpose of Jehovah, the great Theocrat. Faithfulness in such performance of duty necessarily exposes religion
268
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and religionists, and for this reason great persecution is heaped upon Jehovah’s witnesses by the religionists.
ir Furthermore for the encouragement, comfort and hope of those who have received the anointing of the holy spirit, and who therefore constitute the duly comrqissioned servants of Jehovah in these “last days”, they must keep in mind always this fact, that such anointed ones constitute God’s “locusts”, which he calls his “great army” (Joel 1: 4; 2:11, 25); and that these are sent into the field of warfare there to have part in “his work, his strange work”. Jehovah has pronounced his judgment of doom and everlasting destruction upon religion and religious practitioners. It follows that the religionists, particularly the leaders thereof, will fight Jehovah’s witnesses to the bitter end. The prophecy shows that many of the leaders will hide behind walls and induce their dupes to go forth and fight Jehovah’s witnesses. Nothing else should be expected than increasing opposition from the enemy from this time forward. Jehovah therefore says to his people that this will be true, and he also says that in this fight the enemy shall suffer complete defeat and destruction: “And they
shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee.” (Jer. 1:19) It was in the year 1918 that the then faithful ones were gathered to the temple and received the outpouring of the holy spirit. Those who since that have been brought into the body of Christ have also received the outpouring or anointing of the holy spirit by and through Christ Jesus, the Head of Zion. Mordecai and Nacini pictured the first-mentioned class, while Esther and Ruth pictured the latter ones. All these together make up the "faithful and wise servant” class, to whom the Lord Jesus has committed his kingdom interests on the earth. They must faithfully promote such kingdom interests at all times. Because of their faithfulness in performance of their duty in fulfillment of their commission they are the objects of reproach and persecution at the hands of the religionists. But let all of the anointed, together with their companions, now be of good courage as they study the remaining portion of the prophecy of Joel and discern God’s purpose to dispose of the enemy, and to give complete protection and salvation to those who love him.
(To be continued)
ANIMAL SOULS ON EARTH BEFORE MAN
LIFE on the earth begins! God’s fifth creative day or time-period had now opened. “The waters which were above the firmament” (according to Genesis 1:7) were in the form of an aqueous ring or watery rings surrounding the earth and “swaddling” the earth like a canopy (according to Job 38:9). Now they received the light from the sun, and this would produce a condition conducive to the existence of animal life upon the earth. The “spirit”, or invisible power, of the Almighty God now operated upon the “waters which were under the firmament” and which God called “seas”. This action caused these waters to bring forth abundantly moving, living creatures, such as fish and other creature life, and fowl that flew above the earth. Man, of course, had not yet appeared upon the earth, and did not appear until the close of the next, or sixth, creative time-period or “day”. But what was or is the classification of these active, moving, living things that were thus brought forth before man’s creation? Were they and are they soulless creatures, as scientists and religionists have long taught? Did a soul first inhabit the earth at man’s creation?
The original language of the Bible, the Hebrew, is very clear in its answer to these questions. Because Rotherham’s The Emphasized Old Testament is very faithful and accurate in its translation of the original sense and meaning of the original Hebrew text of the Bible, the following quotation from the Bible is according to Rotherham’s version (Genesis 1: 20-23) :
“And God said, Let the waters swarm [with] an abundance of living soul, and birds shall fly over the earth, over the face of the expanse of the heavens. And God created
the great sea-monsters, and every living soul that moveth, [with] which the waters swarmed after their kind, and every winged bird, after its kind. And God saw that it was good. And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful and multiply and fill the waters in the seas, and let the birds multiply in the land. So it was evening, and it was morning, a fifth day.”—See also the marginal notes in Auth. Ver. Bible.
During this fifth creative period God caused to come into the waters great swarms of living souls (Hebrew text: nephesh chayyah), to wit, whales, reptiles and creatures which could live out on land or in water, also shellfish and like creatures. Geologists have discovered that there are immense beds of limestone in various parts of the earth wherein are great quantities of shells of fish, and these are called “shellfish cemeteries”. This would support the conclusion that after the beginning of this fifth creative day there was a falling of one or more of the canopy rings near the north and south poles of the earth, and an inrushing of snow and ice which swept to the earth’s equator and destroyed great quantities of these living creatures; and afterwards the way was opened for the creation and bringing forth of other living creatures or souls (Hebrew: nephesh chayyah).
With the opening of the sixth creative period or day the dry land had been separated from the waters on the earth for a period of approximately twenty thousand years. The earth’s surface was cool by this time. It produced grass and herbs and fruit, this having begun on the third creative day. (Gen. 1:11-13) These, together with the climatic conditions, were suitable for animal life. The Scriptural account con
THE WATCHTOWER
269
September 1, 1939
cerning this creative period reads, according to Rotherham’s accurate translation of the original Hebrew text: “And God said, Let the land bring forth living soul [nephesh chayyah] after its kind, tame-beast and erecping thing and wild-beast of the land after its kind. And it was so. And God made the wild-beast of the land after its kind, and the tame-beast after its kind, and every creeping thing of the ground after its kind. And God saw that it was good.”— Gen. 1: 24, 25.
Beasts of the earth have not always been the same. At one time there were upon the earth great numbers of mammoth animals, some of them measuring eighty feet in length. Proof of this is now found in skeletons digged from great depths in the earth. Great numbers of these mammoths roamed the earth. Some have been found frozen in the ice and snow, while skeletons of others have been digged from the beds of earth and stone in the tropical regions.
The reasonable conclusion is that each one of the ages or creative periods, of 7,000 years each, ended with a great catastrophe, caused by the breaking and falling at the poles of one of the aqueous or watery rings. This, in turn, permitted the inrushing of great bodies of water and ice and snow which swept away the animal and plant life and rendered desolate the earth. In the course of time other animals and plants took their places on the earth. Different kinds of animals appeared at different stages of the animal creative period. During these periods a hothouse condition existed on the earth, due to the translucent aqueous rings above the firmament and surrounding the earth. This hothouse condition was thus destroyed by snow and ice at times; and this is proved by the physical facts found on the earth.
When it is considered that each one of these creative days or periods was of seven thousand years’ duration, it can be understood how one kind of animal appeared and perished, to be succeeded by another kind and within the same creative day. In due season God created the cattle after their kind, and everything that creeps upon the earth, including all the domestic animals, some of which kind are still on the earth. Each one had come in its due time according to the divine will, each kind had its function to perform, and all were necessarily important in the creative work of Jehovah relative to the earth.
The time came for the creation of the intelligent creature man. It seems certain that Jehovah held conversation with his beloved One, his only begotten Son, the Logos or Word of God, concerning His purpose of creating man. Again quoting the Rotherham translation, the inspired record reads: “And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness, and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the bird of the heavens, and over the tame-beast, and over all the land, and over every creeping thing, that creepeth on the land. And God created the man in his own image, in .the image of God created he him, male and female created he them.” God then issued to the perfect man and woman His divine mandate: “And God blessed them, and God said to them, Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the bird of the heavens, and over every living thing that moveth on the land. And God said, Lo! I have given to you every herb yielding seed
which is on the face of all the land, and every tree wherein is the fruit of a tree yielding seed, to you shall it be for food; and to every living thing of the land, and to every bird of the heavens and to every thing that moveth on the land, wherein is a living soul [nephesh chayyah; however, not separate and distinct from the animal’s body and able to escape from the animal’s body at death and thereafter live somewhere outside the animal’s body], every green herb for food. And it was so. And God saw every thing which he had made, and lo! it was very good. So it was evening, and it was morning, the sixth day.”—Gen. 1: 26-31; see also marginal note, A nth. Ver. Bible.
Jehovah furnished the specifications for the building of the first man. Marvelous wisdom is displayed in those specifications. Provision was made for the exact number of bones, to wit, two hundred and six, to form the human skeleton. A perfect system of circulation of the blood was provided. Provision was made for the lungs to keep the blood pure, and a heart to keep up the circulation; and the most marvelous electrical system, which we call “nerves”, was provided for. All the minute details were carefully worked out, even to the numbering of the hairs of the head. —Matt. 10:30.
Then Jehovah’s only begotten Son, the Logos, or Word, proceeded to build man exactly according to these specifications. (John 1:1-3) It is written that the man is of the earth and earthy. (1 Cor. 15:47) This is true because he was made out of the elements that form the earth. For this reason the earth contains every element that goes to make up a perfect human organism. The process employed in the creation of man is stated thus, according to the Rotherham translation: “So then Jehovah God formed man [of the] dust of the ground, and breathed in his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul [nephesh chayyah].” —Gen. 2:7.
The animals created prior to the creation of man were also designated “souls”, because every creature that breathes is a soul. There is no intimation in the record that God made man and then gave him a soul, and an immortal one at that. God formed him, and then into the nostrils of that organism God breathed the breath which he has provided for all living creatures, and a soul resulted: “man became a living soul.” Soul means a breathing, sentient creature having life. Thus it is seen and Scripturally proved that animal souls preceded man’s appearance on earth.
Could it be said that, because God is immortal and man was made in His image and likeness, therefore God gave man an immortal soul? Such conclusion is both unreasonable and unscriptural. If God gave man a soul, then the Record would state so; and if that soul so given were immortal, then God could never put it to death for a violation of his law. That would mean then that when God would start a life he would have no power to stop it; and this idea is not consistent with his limitless power. Furthermore, it is written that “[God] only hath immortality”. (See 1 Timothy 6:16.) From the fact that God is the life-giver, it follows that he has the power to take away life at his pleasure. The Scriptures show that he reserved to himself the right to deprive his creature of life; therefore it is conclusively proved that man is mortal.
270
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Is not the breath (Hebrew text: neshamah'), which God breathed into the nostrils of man, the so-called “divine or immortal spark” of man which God planted in man? The answer to that must be, No, for the reason that the Scriptures show that God did nothing of the kind; but that he made man of the elements of the earth, and when the breath of life was put into man’s nostrils a moving, breathing creature resulted, which creature is a soul. The breath which man breathes belongs to Jehovah, because everything is God’s. The right to life proceeded from God. The “breath” (neshamah') is not immortal. The breath itself possesses no life. The breath is that which keeps the blood in circulation by which the human body is animated. The Scriptures plainly state that the life is in the blood. (Deut. 12:23) Man is the highest order of animal creation. All animals, including man, have the same kind of breath. (Eccl. 3:19) Human experience conclusively shows that man dies, and any creature that dies is not immortal. A creature to be immortal would necessarily be not subject to death. God was pleased with his work in the creation of man the “living soul”, and pronounced that work “very good”. Man was the earthly son of the great Jehovah God, and God loved him. The environment he made for man’s happiness.
A portion of the earth, which was called Eden, God had caused to be brought to a perfect condition. It must have been a beautiful place. The man whom he had made for it, and to have dominion over it, was perfect; and his home also was made perfect, because all the works of Jehovah
are perfect. (Deut. 32:4) In the eastern part of Eden God planted a garden which was a veritable paradise. Trees that brought forth marvelously beautiful flowers were there to please the sight of man with their blossoms, and to perfume the air that he breathed. Other trees that bore all manner of fruit were there, and from these man had provided for him his food supply. There were found numerous birds with marvelous plumage, the bird of paradise and the bird of song. Every kind of beast was there, but they were not wild. These beasts were gentle, tame and obedient. They walked before Adam, their master, who gave each one of them a name; and they heard his voice and responded thereto. The divine record of this reads, according to the Rotherham translation:
“Now Jehovah God had formed from the ground every living thing of the field, and every bird of the heavens, which he brought in unto the man, that he might see what he should call it, and whatsoever the man should call it, any living soul [nephesh chayyah], that should be the name thereof. So the man gave names to all the tame-beasts, and to the birds of the heavens, and to all the wild-beasts of the field, but for man had there not been found a helper as his counterpart.”—Gen. 2:19, 20.
In Eden’s garden or paradise the climatic conditions were perfect, and a sweet perfume floated through the zephyrs, which were at the same time filled with song and praise to the glory of Jehovah God. Created with perfect veneration, man must worship his glorious Maker.
HOW MANY GET TO HEAVEN?
THE WORLD is composed of heaven and earth. “Heaven” has reference to the things not seen with the natural eye. “Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.” (2 Pet. 3:13) The new heaven and new earth constitute the world of righteousness. That new heaven is Jehovah God’s capital organization, named Zion, of which Christ Jesus is the Head. That organization is composed of 144,000 associate members together with Christ Jesus who share with him in his riehes and glory, and it is supported and accompanied by a host of holy angels attending upon the Lord Jesus.—Matt. 25: 31.
The 144,000 associate members of that capital organization are spiritual Israelites and taken from among men. (See The Revelation 7:4-8; 14:1-4.) These human creatures are first given a knowledge of the truth, then separated from those of the world, put through a test, tried, and approved by Jehovah God. All this work is done by Christ Jesus, the great High Priest of Jehovah. Christ Jesus was himself first chosen, then tried and fully proved, and, showing his faithfulness in maintaining his integrity toward God till death, he was then exalted to the highest position in Jehovah’s universe. After his resurrection and his ascension on high Christ Jesus begins the selection of the associate members that shall be in his organization, and this continues until it is accomplished at the “end of the world”, Satan’s world. The holy and royal capital organization of Jehovah will always be invisible to human eyes, because Christ Jesus is a divine spirit and the members of Jehovah’s royal house
are spirit creatures, and no human eye can see a spirit creature as such. This royal house constitutes the new heavens, of which the apostle Peter speaks.
The entire period of time from Pentecost of A.D. 33 until the coming of Christ and his kingdom is occupied in the selection of those who will be associated with him in his kingdom. It is the 144,000 that are selected to be made members of the royal house. Are these selected merely to get them into heaven ? No; they arc taken out from among the peoples of the nations of earth to be witnesses among men to the name of Jehovah and to his kingdom. Concerning this it is written: “God at the first did visit the Gentiles [the nations], to take out of them a people for his name.” (Acts 15:14) While on the earth these selected ones, begotten of Jehovah’s spirit, must show forth the praises of Jehovah God and his King Christ Jesus, and for that purpose they are called out of darkness and given the light of God’s Word. (See 1 Peter 2: 9.) Many have been led to believe that God has caused the Kingdom gospel to be preached merely to save men from eternal punishment in fire and brimstone and to give them a home in heaven. That is not God’s purpose, as His Word clearly shows. The company of persons so taken out from among the nations for Jehovah’s name are the elect company of God, all of whom must be put to a certain test and must perform certain specific duties while on the earth.—Rom. 8: 1G-18.
During the period of approximately 1,900 years Jehovah has been calling, instructing and selecting those who make up his royal house, of which Christ Jesus is the Head and
September 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER,
271
Lord. (Heb. 3:1-6) Faithfulness unto death is required of all who are thus brought into His royal family. Millions of persons have been led to believe that they are Christians, and claim to be followers of Christ, almost all of whom have never even learned what is required of a follower of Christ. The Scriptures definitely show that the number of the royal house of Zion is limited to 144,000. Christ Jesus is the Lord of lords and King of kings, and “they that are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful”. (Rev. 17:14; also 7:4; 14:1-4) Those who enter into a covenant of consecration to do the will of God and who are invited into the covenant for the kingdom of heaven and who joyfully prove their faithfulness unto death are permitted to share the heavenly riches as joint-heirs with Christ.—Rev. 2:10.
The 144,000 members of the royal house are the only ones taken from among men who find their everlasting abiding place in the invisible spirit realm of Jehovah God, and concerning these it is written: “Beloved, now are we the sons of God; and it doth not yet appear what we shall be [in heaven] ; but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.”—1 John 3: 2.
Does that mean that none aside from the 144,000 will ever be the possessors of riches which are bestowed by Jehovah? No, such is not the teaching of God’s Word. The 144,000 spirit creatures constitute the royal house, which company shares with Christ Jesus in his kingdom. To
Christ’s twelve apostles, representing all the faithful disciples, the promise is made: “And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That ye which have followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.” “And you are they who have continued with me in my trials. And I covenant for you, even as my Father has covenanted for me, a Kingdom, that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.” (Matt. 19:28; Luke 22:28-30, Diaglott version) This proves that there must be and will be a regeneration, including the regeneration of the obedient ones of mankind who will never go to heaven but will abide for ever on the earth perfected, and in this work of regeneration of men of good will the 144,000 shall share with Christ Jesus, “The Everlasting Father,” they serving under his direction.
Does one have to go to heaven in order to lay up “treasures in heaven” (Matt. 6:19-21) ? No. A person may lay such up even though he remains on earth for ever and does not go to heaven. All riches of treasures proceed from heaven, and riches from such treasure house result to those who receive a knowledge of God’s purposes, as stated in his Word, and who then are diligent in their endeavors to do God’s will. Jehovah is the source of riches, and Christ Jesus the dispenser thereof. The riches that obedient men shall receive on earth come from heaven.—Jas. 1:17.
JEHOVAH’S PROVISION
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Jehovah has graciously blessed his people in the provision of the new book Salvation, and we wish to tell you of our deep gratitude to our loving Father for the gift copy which we have all received. Your thoughtfulness in making this possible is but one of the many provisions which you have made in caring for our spiritual and physical welfare.
We would like to tell of our joy in learning of Jehovah’s provision for the salvation of those who love him, and the particular appeal of the subtitle “A text-book for the Jonadabs”.
During recent months the nations around us have been sorely perplexed and in dire distress anxiously looking with fear to what the future may hold. In contrast, our privilege to be taught of Jehovah under his Theocratic Government has been a source of joy and thankfulness; for w’e know that Jehovah will protect those who serve him. The seven chapters of the book are thrilling, and an appreciation of this great emergency and the need of salvation TO life which must be found by the great multitude through God’s provision of the ransom, if they are willing to meet His requirements and serve under God’s government, has greatly thrilled us to use our all in proclaiming the Kingdom message so that the “other sheep” may enjoy the wonderful privileges extended to obedient men.
We would like to add just a word of our appreciation of the
great International Watchtower Convention. It was indeed a privilege to share with our brethren in receiving the strengthening instruction and encouragement of your Saturday broadcast, “Victory,” and to know that Jehovah is now so shortly to command his people to complete their work in victory. It was wonderful to share in the united release of the book Salvation. On Sunday it was a joy to declare ourselves wholeheartedly on the side of God's “Government and Peace”, a message of vital necessity to all of good will in these last days. The reception was marvelous, by the Lord’s direction, and a mighty witness to the honor of Jehovah’s name was given to the many thousands who packed out the British auditoriums.
We are indeed happy to record the joy of our service in Bethel, and we are determined, by the Lord’s grace, to take our position in the front against the devilish forces of wickedness now seeking to destroy God’s faithful servants. We realize that the fight is on, and we earnestly pray that Jehovah may continue to richly bless and sustain you, and our desire is to follow your fearless lead as set by Jehovah’s King, Christ Jesus. Our prayers are on behalf of all our brethren laboring with you, and we look forward to the speedy annihilation of the Devil and his crowd of racketeers.
We all unite in sending you our  warm love and gratitude.
Your brethren in the service of Jehovah’s Government,
London Bethel Family.
(Continued from
meat in due season and a joy to all anointed Christians as well. The author’s edition is still available, containing a facsimile of a letter to the reader in the author’s own hand and which you will much appreciate. This edition being limited, and the initial costs of manufacture being heavy, a contribution of 50c is asked per copy. Early translation of Salvation in more than twenty other languages is assured, and due announcement will be made on publication.
page 258)
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of October 1: “Doom of Religion” (Part 6), j] 1-13 inclusive, The Watchtower September 1, 1939.
Week of October 8: “Doom of Religion” (Part 0), j] 14-31 inclusive, The Watchtower September 1, 1939.
Week of October 15: “Doom of Religion” (Part G), j] 32-47 inclusive, The Watchtower September 1, 1939.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
IN THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
HOW SHUT-INS ARE WITNESSING
"As in the northern part of this priest-ridden country, so with the southern islands, the priests of the Hierarchy have been trying to follow our pioneers from house to house, inducing the people to burn the books if they had taken any. Yes, they are getting so low in their activities, and, so doing, they do more good than harm to the Lord’s work. Their evil works have advertised the publication of the Kingdom message. Even the uninterested are beginning to investigate what they call ‘unusual’, and there are those who want to learn what it is that aroused the ire of ‘father’ So-and-so. Strange work indeed. In some places where the Kingdom has been proclaimed, the truth that religion is a racket is now becoming common knowledge. An incident will illustrate : A pioneer on his way to his territory was invited to come to an office of a certain rubber company. Much to his surprise he was requested to read an advertisement written on the office bulletin board, that ‘Religion is a racket and is of the Devil’. This happened the day after a long discussion occurred between a publisher and a Protestant pastor, where the truth badly exposed the ‘reverend’ to ridicule and contempt. Some government officials who were present not only expressed their gratitude and appreciation in learning the truth, but provided themselves with books and subscribed for The Watchtower, which the publisher offered them.”
LIKE RAHAB ROUNDING UP HER RELATIVES
"We went to Nebraska mainly to give our relatives and friends a witness. We knew four of them were in the truth long enough to go out in the service work. After we got there, we found all of their married children were interested in the truth. We played the three lectures ‘Face the Facts’, ‘Fascism or Freedom,’ and ‘Fill the Earth’ over and over again. They liked the lectures so well they just couldn’t hear enough of them. After witnessing to twenty of our relatives’ families we found they all had been reading the literature, and some of them were ready for service. In two weeks, the result of these twenty families is as follows: 8 new Kingdom publishers; placed with them (and coming and going on our trip) 21 bound books, 273 booklets; 49 hours, 176 sound attendance, 13 Watchtower subscriptions, 1 Consolation subscription, 15 back-calls, 26 Consolation Copies and 36 sample Watchtower copies. When we left, they were going to have their first new Watchtower study, with 26 new attendance. We also placed 3 Bibles, and 1 Year Book. Ten more of this phonograph attendance have stated they will go out in the service as soon as they have studied their Watch tower a little more. We thank our great Creator, Jehovah God, for giving us that wonderful privilege of serving him, guiding us all the way.”
WHEN MISTAKEN FOR A RELIGIONIST—
“Being turned away at the door by a woman, I saw a man at the barn. Immediately after greeting him and explaining my work I was ordered rudely off the farm. Thinking the man had sized me up wrong I paused and stated: ‘From the feeling expressed in your voice I take it you are fed up with religion’; and received the reply: ‘You d----
right I am.’ I immediately turned the heat on religion and explained Christianity, and the man said: ‘You’ve got something there. I’ll take those two booklets.’ ”
“People unable to go from house to house because of illness can have part in witness work too, by telling the message to baker, groceryman and insurance man. One of my back-calls who was unable to go from door to door witnessed to her insurance man and told him to take his choice of any of the books. He said: ‘That’s fine.’ He selected Government. The following week he returned and said: ‘I stayed up all night and finished it, and then sat down and ordered the set for myself. I intend to read all of them.’ I told her I would be glad to let her have one of my phonographs and latest records to play for him. She is delighted with the offer.”
“One publisher with arthritis finds a marvelous way of witnessing is to go through the telephone book and, upon calling, ask people to come to her apartment to hear a very important message. When the people come in, she has them wind up the phonograph and play the records and has all the books on display.”
PHONOGRAPH DURING NOON HOUR AT THE SHOP
“The place where I work is a small foundry. I had never played any records in the shop before, but felt that this important series should be played wherever possible. The way I proceeded was this: I drew up a sign and tacked it up on the company billboard. I played the series for three days in a row, with an audience of 60 to 70 people daily, which consisted mostly of Italian, Portuguese and Polish workers of the younger generation. They listened to ‘Fascism or Freedom’ pretty attentively, with, of course, the usual comments from a few cranks. One fellow said: ‘That’s a Communist lecture’; and a big Finnish molder hollered back: ‘Shut up; you confess to the priest, you!’ And nothing more was heard for the rest of the lecture from that man. At the conclusion a copy of the lecture was offered to them free if they personally requested it, but no one came up to ask. However, about ten fellows told me they enjoyed the lecture and would like to hear more. So I posted another sign: ‘All persons of good will who desire to learn more of the schemes of the Fascists to gain control of the world may hear another series of lectures to be played at the pattern storage department from now on during noon hours. Upon request these lectures will be played in Italian, Polish and Portuguese.’ Two persons have showed up at the Pattern Storage Dept, and like the series. I am going to continue to play the series, and whoever shows interest, try to place the seven-booklet combination with them and otherwise aid them to get a knowledge of the truth. I have come to the conclusion that the phonograph can be played practically anywhere. I carry it with my lunch to work, or, if I’m out walking in the park or any other place, the phonograph is with me. This is a time of war, and one should be always on guard to save as much time as possible for the Lord’s business.”
REACHING THOSE IN ALASKA
“The phonograph record is surely grand to place Watchtower subscriptions. I will take four times as many subscriptions as I expected. I am mailing to about 200 subscribers for Consolation in Alaska the booklet Face the Facts with a letter asking them to subscribe for The Watchtower; also to many that subscribed in the past.”
272
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to lite.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ..................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian...................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian........... 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African ..................Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating tho reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid tlie needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will bo sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, 1879.
“THEOCRACY” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The month of October begins a new service year and has been named “Theocracy” Testimony Period. The great Thcocrat’s provision for field service then is the book Salvation together with the new booklet Government and Peace, first to be released for distribution beginning with October. This combination of literature will be offered on a 25c contribution or corresponding value in other English-speaking lands. This Period is to be world-wide, and those lands not yet having translations of the above in their native language will offer a like combination of the latest book and booklet, Enemies or Riches along with Fascism or Freedom or Face the Facts. This announcement should suffice to start you to plan and prepare for an unstinted share in this Theocratic testimony. Your faithful report of work will help to make up an accurate world record.
“GOVERNMENT AND PEACE”
Honest hearers of the two speeches by the Society’s president to the world convention and radio audience from New York city have been anticipating this new booklet, for it contains his rousing, Convention-feature speeches “Government and Peace” and “Victory”. Millions of others of good will also will be eager to read this booklet. It is of 64 pages, and is self-covered, but the
unusual cover sets forth pictorially the circumstances of the Madison Square Garden public address. Time of release for public distribution is stated elsewhere. Your personal copy you may now send for, remitting 5c contribution.
“SALVATION”
This new book, written by the president of the Society, was the feature release at the recent world-wide convention of Jehovah’s witnesses with its hub at New York City. The author of this book for the times describes it as “A text-book for the Jonadabs”. But a study of its 384 pages of contents will prove to you it is meat in due season and a joy to all anointed Christians as well. The author’s edition is still available, containing a facsimile of a letter to the reader in the author’s own hand and which you will much appreciate. This edition being limited, and the initial costs being heavy, a contribution of 50e is asked per copy. Early translation of Salvation in other languages is assured.
"WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of October 22: “Doom of Religion” (Part 7), If 1-21 inclusive, The Watchtower September 15, 1939.
Week of October 29: “Doom of Religion” (Part 7), 22-46 inclusive, The Watchtower September 15,1939.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX
September 15, 1939
No. 18
DOOM OF RELIGION
PART 7
“For it is the day of the Lord’s vengeance, and the year of recompences for the controversy of Zion.” —Isa. 34:8.
JEHOVAH makes it clearly to appear that he always squares the account with the enemy. For a long period of time God permits the enemy to carry on without let or hindrance and then Jehovah chooses his own due time to fully pay the enemy for all they have done. The present time is the day of Jehovah and the time when his faithful witnesses must declare the “vengeance of our God”. This must he done before the pay-off. The religionists now make a great controversy with Zion, God’s capital organization, which is represented on the earth by the faithful witnesses of Jehovah, and so Jehovah says: “It is . . . the year of recompences for the controversy of Zion.” God first informs his faithful servants of his purpose to duly recompense the enemy, and then he sends his witnesses forth to serve notice on the enemy that within a short time God will destroy them.—Jer. 51: 6, 56.
* Today “Catholic Action” is extremely vicious within every part of “Christendom”. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy-Nazi combine, in their bitter opposition to the Theocracy, make war upon Jehovah’s witnesses. By threats and by the practice of boycott against the commercial dealers the men of the Hierarchy get themselves exalted and praised by the newspapers, and this at the expense of others. The Hierarchy try to make themselves and others believe that they are actually riding on the top of the world and that they shall rule the world in the place and stead of God’s King, Christ Jesus. The clergy are proud, boastful, arrogant and cruel, and at the same time they show their cowardice. Unable to longer hide from the honest people their practice of a religious racket, the clergy send out the vicious young Nazi element to commit assaults upon Jehovah’s witnesses. The real criminals, guilty of such vicious assaults, are the higher-ups of the Hierarchy. They think out the means of performing wicked deeds and have others to do such deeds for them. They think they can get away with their wicked deeds committed against those who serve God and his King. In his due time the Lord God will take a hand
and bring down that self-exalted Hierarchy; nor will the religious racketeers come to their end in peace, but their end will be in war at the hand of Christ the King.
8 King David was a type of the Lord Jesus Christ. It is written of David that the word of God was in his mouth and that he spoke as the spirit of God directed him. (2 Sam. 23:2) The “serpent” breed of Saul pictures the religionists, and that enemy had cruelly fought against David, the Lord’s anointed. In his last days David gave to Solomon the charge that he should duly recompense those who had persecuted him and carried on a campaign against David, and which cruel campaign pictured what today is called “Catholic Action” against Jehovah’s anointed ones now on the earth. David named some of the leaders of that wicked campaign against him and their specific deeds of wickedness, and among which was Joab. Concerning him David said: “Do therefore according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoar head go down to the grave in peace.” (1 Ki. 2:6) Shimei cursed and assaulted David, even as the Hierarchy and their deluded agents have cursed and assaulted Jehovah’s witnesses. Shimei means “renowned”; even as the big men of the Hierarchy now are renowned. Both Shimei and the Hierarchy are the seed of the Serpent. The prophet of Jehovah said of that wicked persecutor Shimei, and which words of the prophet apply with even stronger force to the wicked Hierarchy, to wit: “Now therefore hold him not guiltless; for thou art a wise man, and know-est what thou oughtest to do unto him; but his hoar head bring thou down to the grave with blood.” (1 Ki. 2:9) As the Lord through David directed Solomon what to do, he thus foreshadows what He will shortly bring to pass with reference to the Catholic Hierarchy and wicked allies.
* The Hierarchy and Nazi combine have heaped affliction upon Jehovah’s witnesses, committing many cruel deeds of wickedness against them, and they continue to do so. So concerning them the Lord says: “And shall not God avenge his own elect, which
275
276
THE WATCHTOWER
cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth ?”—Luke 18: 7, 8.
8	Jehovah now by revealing the meaning of the prophecy of Joel to his people informs them of his purpose toward the enemy. Furthermore, with reference to the just recompense that God will visit upon the Hierarchy, the leaders of the religious organization and religious persecutors which compose the Devil’s organization called “Babylon”, the Greater David, Christ Jesus, says: “For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities. Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her works; in the cup which she hath filled, fill to her double. How much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her; for she saith in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow.” (Rev. 18: 5-7) Thus is the judgment of Jehovah written against that wicked, religious crowd that has defamed his name. Let the faithful followers of Christ Jesus now know that these things were written in the Scriptures for the information, aid, comfort and hope of those who now proclaim the theocratic government while the enemy heaps upon them great persecution. (Rom. 15:4) Jehovah’s witnesses in Germany have suffered and continue to suffer at the hand of the Nazis and Hierarchy conspirators; but let such faithful followers of Christ continue for a little season, fully trusting in God. He will square the account and see to it that those religious conspirators shall not go down to the grave in peace. What follows in the prophecy of Joel discloses what Jehovah will do to the religious conspirators who fight against his witnesses and his government by Christ the King. First God informs his people what he purposes to do, and then discloses to them how he will do it.
8	In preceding issues of The Watchtower Scriptural evidence has been published showing that Jehovah has anointed with his spirit the faithful ones whom the Lord has brought into the temple, and that these are then sent forth to proclaim Jehovah’s name and the day of his vengeance, and that this divine commission given them they must faithfully perform and rendei1 unto the Lord a full report. From 1918 onward is the period known as “those days” and “that time”, which words are used by the prophet; and it is the time in which the Lord gathers unto himself his people, anoints them, commissions them and sends them forth to do his work, and within that time God also assembles the enemy, gives them notice and warning, and then administers a just recompense of reward; and therefore he says through his prophet: “For, behold, in those days, and in that
Brooklyn, N. Y.
time, when I shall bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem.” (Joel 3:1) Particularly since 1922 the Lord has brought out of captivity those of “Judah” and “Jerusalem” and has put them to work.
7	In this part of the prophecy Jehovah foretells that in those days when he pours out his spirit upon his people he calls upon the remnant to come to Zion to be anointed and commands them to have a part in his work, as mentioned in Joel 2:29. At that time, that is, after the Lord appears at the temple for judgment, he brings his faithful people out from Satan’s organization and sets them free from fear of Satan’s crowd that they may boldly and fearlessly serve God and his King. This is the first time the prophecy of Joel mentions the captivity of God’s remnant, the faithful oppressed ones who, after 1918, were brought out of captivity for a purpose, and concerning which faithful ones God, by his prophet, declares : “Thus saith the Lord of hosts, The children of Israel and the children of Judah were oppressed together, and all that took them captives held them fast; they refused to let them go. Their Redeemer is strong; the Lord of hosts is his name; he shall thoroughly plead their cause, that he may give rest to the land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.” (Jer. 50:33,34) This shows that the Lord Jesus Christ, the Field Marshal of Jehovah who commands His warriors, comes forth fully prepared for war when a just recompense shall be ministered unto the enemy.
8	Jehovah then begins to maneuver the enemy into a position for their destruction, and these who compose the enemy on earth are gathered from all the nations. “I will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my people and for my heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and parted my land.”—Joel 3: 2.
8	All parts and all elements of Satan’s visible representatives are gathered. This prophecy is further corroborated by the testimony of another prophet of Jehovah, to wit: “Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey; for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger; for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.”—Zeph. 3: 8.
10	The gathering work of the Lord begins after the outpouring of the holy spirit upon his approved ones. The facts show that this has been done since 1922. How is the gathering done? Jehovah sends forth his duly commissioned witnesses to declare (and who do declare) his message of vengeance, that his time of final settlement of the account which will vindicate his name is come. He also causes his wit
September 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
277
nesses to proclaim that his anointed King and his kingdom are come. Instead of compromising with the Devil’s organization the faithful witnesses under the command of Christ Jesus serve notice that within a short period of time the Lord will cut the enemy to pieces.
11	The inevitable effect of the proclamation of God’s message aforementioned is to expose the Catholic Hierarchy and their religious allies, clearly disclosing that religion is a fraud and a snare and the means of carrying on a racket by those who are agents of the Devil, and which crowd defame Jehovah’s name and turn the people into the way of destruction. Stung by God’s message of truth, the Hierarchy and agents urge all the nations and the ruling element thereof, as well as the hoodlums, to join in a world-wide conspiracy against the witnesses of Jehovah and hence against the Theocracy. The Hierarchy of Authority joins dictators of totalitarian governments in an effort to crush the witnesses who bear testimony for Jehovah’s kingdom. The complete proof of this conspiracy against Jehovah’s King and kingdom is daily brought to light. For instance, one Jesuit priest, in a radio speech, recently said: Tf the American people would stand up on their hind legs they could destroy Jehovah’s witnesses within an hour.’ That Jesuit priest is the agent of the Papacy, acting with the full approval of the pope and the others of the Hierarchy, even though the Hierarchy tries to hide this fact. In its efforts to hide the truth of its relationship to this Jesuit priest the Hierarchy resorts to lies, even as the Lord Jehovah foretold in Isaiah 28:15. The ambition of that Jesuit radio priest is to be the dictator of America when the Papacy takes over the control of the American nation. Similar programs are progressing in other nations of the earth. Thus the enemy are playing right into the hand of Jehovah’s Executioner, Christ Jesus, by taking their position that they may be destroyed at Armageddon.
12	The enemy forces must be brought to the site of battle, and therefore says Jehovah: “I . . . will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat.” The enemy must be brought there in order to see and be convinced that Jehovah is supreme and the One whose power must prevail against the totalitarian rulers and all other parts of Satan’s organization, all of which oppose the Theocracy. The enemy forces are not brought down to the so-called “valley of Jehoshaphat” which is shown in the maps of modern days. The Bible expression “valley of Jehoshaphat” does not apply to such literal valley. This statement of Joel is the only place in the Bible where the expression “valley of Jehoshaphat” occurs, and it is certainly symbolic and refers to the same thing pictured by the valley where Moab, Ammon and the
hordes of Mount Seir fought it out and were destroyed. (2 Chronicles 20) Thereafter King Jehoshaphat called that place “the valley of Berachah” because there his people blessed the name of the Lord for the vindication of His name, which he had done by the complete destruction of the enemy. (2 Chron. 20:26) The name “valley of Jehoshaphat” means “Jehovah judged” or “Jehovah vindicated” and shows that the battle site refers to the time of the complete vindication of his name by his anointed Vindicator, Christ Jesus, the great Judge and King.
18 Further says the prophecy: “And will plead with them there for my people.” The pleading here named does not mean that it will be done by petitions, protest, warning, or other means employed by Jehovah’s witnesses during the period of his “strange work”. It means much more than that. When the pleading here mentioned takes place the “strange work” of Jehovah will have been completed. The Hebrew word here rendered “plead” is shaphat, and which word is a part of the name of the valley of Jehoshaphat. This is proof that the valley is symbolic and does not refer to the valley of Palestine where the Jews buried their dead, but is symbolically applied to the time and place when Jehovah will perform his “strange act” resulting in the complete destruction of the enemy. God does not plead for “Christendom”, but his pleading act is in behalf of his people who bear his name, to wit, the faithful servants of the Most High. At Armageddon Jehovah will deal with all nations and peoples and will cause them to know and fully realize that the faithful witnesses whom he has anointed are truly his own people who serve him without compromise. He will show the nations that Jehovah’s witnesses, whom the religionists and allies hate and denounce as unpatriotic and against whom the enemy applies many wicked epithets, are truly God’s anointed ones who bear his holy name and who now represent him on the earth. Note other corroborative prophecies bearing upon this point: “For, behold, I will shake mine hand upon [over] them, and they shall be a spoil to their servants; and ye shall know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me.” (Zech. 2:9) “And when this cometh to pass, (lo, it will come,) then shall they know that a prophet hath been among them.”—Ezek. 33: 33.
“ The people in whose behalf Jehovah pleads, as the prophecy says, are “my heritage”. Such are the 144,000 members of the body of Christ and are the ones that Jehovah inherits of the earthly people; that is to say, Jehovah takes them out from and away from the earth and they are his firstfruits and rightly belong to him, and he takes them for his service in heaven with Christ Jesus. Concerning this it is written: “And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four
278
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
thousand, having his Father’s name written in their foreheads. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder; and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps; and they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders; and no man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth. These are they which were not defiled with women; for they are virgins. These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth. These were redeemed from among men, being the firstfruits unto God and to the Lamb.” (Rev. 14:1-4) These faithful ones being God’s “firstfruits” and his “heritage”, no one can with impunity touch them or use them for selfish purposes. Any creature or class of creatures that try to destroy Jehovah’s anointed people shall bring upon their heads their own destruction. These great truths the nations must learn when at Armageddon Jehovah pleads for his people, and that is the time he will vindicate his name and his people who bear his name.
15	God declares his purpose to have in mind at Armageddon his people whom the enemy has persecuted and do persecute, and this is seen when he says: “Whom they [the enemy] have scattered among the nations, and parted my land.” During the World War the religious enemy and allies broke up the world-wide work of Jehovah’s people operating together as a Society. The enemy did not then want to believe that these faithful Christians were Jehovah’s servants and representatives on the earth. The enemy do not believe it now, because they continue in their efforts to destroy Jehovah’s witnesses and the work in which they are engaged. A striking example of the enemy’s efforts was made manifest on June 25, 1939. Madison Square Garden was the key assembly, from which point originated the program of Jehovah’s witnesses which throughout the English-speaking part of the world was heard by other assemblies. The enemy made a desperate effort at New York and at London and at other places to break up that convention of God’s people, but, by God’s grace, the enemy did not succeed. True to his promise, “they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the Lord.” (Jer. 1:19) God thus put his hand over his servants and over the work they were doing.
18	Now the Lord has gathered his people into his spiritual temple by Christ Jesus, and henceforth no matter what the totalitarian nations made up of religionists and dictators may do to the physical body of the various members of the temple company, or to their material possession, the enemy cannot put the anointed out of the temple or break up their spiritual unity in Christ Jesus their Head. He who
is The “Faithful and True” Servant of the Most High will defend those who are with him. The vicious acts of the enemy toward Jehovah’s witnesses increase constantly. Such vicious acts of violence are incited by the clergy or leaders amongst the religionists, and it is to be expected that such acts of opposition and violence will increase until Armageddon. The Scriptures show that, immediately before Armageddon begins, the Devil’s host will, by Gog, the field marshal of Satan, come against all those wlio are on the side of Jehovah in an effort to destroy those faithful to the Lord and that such horde of wicked ones will not succeed in their efforts, but, on the contrary, Christ will gain the victory over them.—Ezekiel chapters 38 and 39.
RESISTANCE
17	Shall the people of Jehovah God resist with force the efforts of Satan’s agents to prevent the forward work of proclaiming the message of the kingdom f If that question is answered in the affirmative, how can such course of action be harmonized with the scriptures which follow: “For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds.” (2 Cor. 10: 4) Religionists, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, in an effort to make the people acknowledge and obey their religious tenets, have used and continue to use and employ force and violence. All who will not become religionists and support the Roman Catholic Hierarchy are denounced as heretics, and says the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, “The killing of heretics may be rightly done by Catholics whenever Catholics are strong enough.” During the Inquisition the Hierarchy employed carnal weapons to compel the people to become submissive to the Papacy and practice the Hierarchy’s religion, and many people suffered cruel punishment and the destruction of their property and life because they refused to obey the demands of the Hierarchy to become Catholic. In contrast to such wicked action the apostle Paul, under inspiration of the holy spirit, points out what is the proper course for God’s servants. Jehovah’s witnesses now go forth to preach the truth of God’s kingdom, and not to compel anyone to accept that truth. They place the message of the kingdom before the people, and it is the privilege of the people to accept it or reject it. They are commanded that in doing their work they shall not employ carnal weapons, as the Catholics have repeatedly done to make others accept their doctrines. The weapons of God’s people consist of “the sword of the spirit, which is the Word of God”, and which is mighty to the pulling down of strongholds. The words of the apostle, therefore, apply strictly to the means of carrying on their work of preaching this gospel of the king
September 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
279
dom. Jehovah’s witnesses are messengers of peace, telling forth the purposes of God, and they have no need of carnal weapons to compel the people to hear the Word of God.
18	Another scripture that is often used in this connection is this, spoken by Jesus: “But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.” (Matt. 5: 39) “Evil” is properly defined as that which brings just punishment upon the wrongdoer. God says: “I . . . create evil.” (Isa. 45:7) All of God’s creation is right and perfect, and therefore evil is far different from wickedness. (Deut. 32:4) The law covenant with Israel inflicted just punishment upon the violators of that covenant, and that punishment was evil to the Israelites justly administered. Jesus was addressing the Israelites, and his language employed at Matthew 5: 29-42 surely does not literally mean that a man should pluck out his physical eye or cut off his hand. His speech was used symbolically. Jesus used figures of speech in pointing out to the Israelites what was and should be their proper attitude toward their adversary, that is to say, the law covenant. As further proof of this Jesus said: “Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.”—Matt. 5: 25.
18	If one suffered from his adversary, the law covenant, that was evil which proceeded justly from God and was not to be resisted, but, in further corroborative phrase, the Lord Jesus said: 'If the wrongdoer was smitten upon one cheek, he should even turn the other and receive a just smiting, rather than to resist; thus he would show his submissiveness to the will of God.’ All the scriptures are consistent, and none are contradictory. The words of the foregoing text could not be literally applied to such as Joshua, who led the army of Israel against the enemy, and many other like instances which are recorded in the Bible. Jesus, in speaking of being smitten on the cheek, was addressing his words specifically to the Jews who were under the law covenant and which law covenant was their adversary to keep them in line and punish them when they violated the terms of the covenant. The resisting of evil, as those words were used by the Lord Jesus in addressing the Israelites, therefore, could not mean that God’s people are to willingly submit to a beating at the hands of others who assault God’s servants while they are preaching the gospel of the kingdom. Jesus had no reference to such when thus addressing the Israelites ; rather his words must mean that if evil comes upon those in the covenant from the adversary, the law covenant, they must not resist, but receive the
same as a just punishment from the Lord, and to further prove their willingness they must go the limit of their ability in obeying their lawful adversary. In support of this note the context, to wit: “And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloke also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.” (Matt. 5:40,41) Note here also that Jesus said nothing about resisting wickedness. One who assaults the servant of the Lord in the performance of his duty is acting wickedly.
20	When Jesus was arrested Peter cut off the ear of one of the high priest’s servants and Jesus commanded Peter to put up the sword: “And, behold, one of them which were with Jesus stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest’s, and smote off his ear. Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his place; for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword. Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?”—Matt. 26:51-53.
21	Note the reason why. It was not the proper time to engage in physical combat, because Jesus’ time had come for him to be taken. Before Pilate Jesus said: “My kingdom is not of this world; if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews.” (John 18: 36) “This world,” as here used by Christ Jesus, would mean this wicked world over which the Devil is the god and which Jesus was not permitted to interrupt until God’s due time, when Jehovah, in 1914, sent him forth to rule. The clear inference to be drawn from the words of Jesus here is, there would in the future be a proper time to fight, but Jesus must wait until that due time fixed by Jehovah, and then he will fight to a finish. (Ps. 110: 2, 6; Rev. 19:11-20) There is a time for everything. “A time of war; and a time of peace.” (Eccl. 3:1-8) The foregoing scriptures do not mean that the Christian can with impunity go about hunting trouble and getting into a fight; nor do they mean that the Christians must willingly permit the agents of Satan to destroy their efforts to preach God’s kingdom message.
DEFENSE
22	Do the Scriptures approve of a Christian’s defending himself against an unlawful assault and using force to repel such assault? Self-defense is the right of every man to ward off an attack and to use such force as to him appears to be necessary to safeguard himself from personal injury or injury to his property. The same right of self-defense may be exercised by him for the protection of his near relations or close friends, his brethren. Such is the law of the nations or states, but that law does not rest
280
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
upon tradition, nor upon the conclusions of men alone, but finds complete support in the Word of God.
28 Moses saw an Egyptian smiting his Hebrew brother, and Moses, to protect his brother from such assault, slew the Egyptian. (Ex. 2:11,12) Moses fled from Egypt that the Egyptians might not kill him. Moses did not receive any punishment or even a rebuke from Jehovah God for what he had done. Afterwards God specifically used Moses to do and perform service particularly picturing Christ Jesus the Messiah and his work. God also made Moses his prophet and used him to write the first five books of the Bible. Since then every nation has invoked the law of self-defense, extending that right of selfdefense to the protection of near-of-kin.
24 The law of self-defense is further emphasized by what is written in the Scriptures which showed that it is right and proper for Jehovah’s servants to prepare in advance for self-defense. Nehemiah, the approved servant of Jehovah God, led a company of his brethren, whom Jehovah brought forth from captivity and sent to rebuild the walls of Jerusalem. When those faithful men in obedience to God’s commandment began the building of the wall, Sanballat (picturing the religious leaders who oppose God’s kingdom) and his followers made repeated threats against Nehemiah and his brethren, which threats were brought to the attention of Nehemiah. Then Nehemiah prayed to God, and this was his prayer: “Hear, 0 our God; for we are despised: and turn their reproach upon their own head, and give them for a prey in the land of captivity; and cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out from before thee: for they have provoked thee to anger before the builders.”—Neh. 4: 4, 5.
28 The enemy had conspired together to fight against Nehemiah and his brethren; as it is written: “But it came to pass, that when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites, heard that the walls of Jerusalem were made up, and that the breaches began to be stopped, then they were very wroth, and conspired all of them together to come and to fight against Jerusalem, and to hinder it.”—Neh. 4: 7, 8.
26 Did Nehemiah instruct his brethren to willingly permit themselves to be smitten on one cheek and to then turn the other cheek and ask to be smitten on that also? Did Nehemiah tell his brethren to quit work and hole up to safeguard themselves from the attacks of the enemy ? He certainly did not, but made ready for self-defense, and his answer is written in the Scriptures, to wit: “Therefore set I in the lower places behind the wall, and on the higher places, I even set the people after their families with their swords, their spears, and their bows. And I looked,
and rose up, and said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people, Be not ye afraid of them: remember the Lord which is great and terrible, and fight for your brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your wives, and your houses"— Neh. 4:13,14.
2	T In order that the Jews might work and that they might not be stopped in their work by reason of the enemy’s assaults, Nehemiah further says, “they which builded on the wall, and they that bare burdens, with those that laded, every one with one of his hands wrought in the work, and with the other hand held a weapon. For the builders, every one had his sword girded by his side, and so builded. And he that sounded the trumpet was by me.”—Neh. 4:17,18.
28	Surely the Jews did not have those swords there merely as a bluff, but to be used when necessary to protect themselves and to prevent the enemy from interfering with the work which God had commanded them to do. Can anyone successfully contend that the enemy of God’s kingdom can compel the servants of God to now cease their work which God has commanded them to do in order that they might avoid trouble? Did not Jesus command that they must go forward with their work without regard to threats and without fear of those who might kill their physical body? (Matt. 10: 28) The watchfulness of Nehemiah and his brethren, who even slept with their clothes on in order to be ready, is a striking example for those to whom the Lord has committed the kingdom interests at the present time.
29	Again the Lord God approves the use of force to be applied against one “breaking up” that which does not belong to the ‘breaker-up’: “If a thief be found breaking up, and be smitten that he die, there shall no blood be shed for him.” (Ex. 22: 2) One who attempts to commit an unlawful act against another may be dealt with, and against such wrongdoer such degree of force may be used by the one assaulted as may to him appear to be necessary to protect his property or himself or kin from an assault of the wrongdoer. Jesus used whips to drive the disorderly ones out of the temple, and he did not invite them to smite him on the cheek.—John 2:15.
80	Now Christ Jesus, the antitypical Moses, is present. His kingdom is come. He sends forth his representatives under command to proclaim “this gospel of the kingdom”. No one has the right to interfere with the execution of that command. Even the law of the land provides that when one unlawfully attempts to “break up” a meeting or assembly of people who have come together to hear proclaimed the Word of God such disturber or ‘breaker-up’ is guiit\ of a misdemeanor and may be dealt with accordingly. On the 25th of June, 1939, approximately 20,000 people assembled peaceably and lawfully at Madison
September 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
281
Square Garden, New York, to hear proclaimed the message of God’s Word concerning his kingdom. Persons who oppose God’s kingdom had repeatedly made threats that they would break up that assembly, and these threats had been brought to the attention of the Lord’s people. Even the police officers had been notified of such threats. On the day of the meeting several hundred of such wicked ones entered the Madison Square Garden meeting after the program had begun, and made a violent attempt to “break up” that meeting. Ushers, whose assigned duty was to keep order, commanded the disturbers to stop their disturbance or else leave the building. Instead of complying with that request the disturbers violently assaulted the ushers. Some of the ushers in the exercise of their God-given and lawful rights resisted such assaults and used reasonable and necessary force to repel such wrongful assaults. In doing so the ushers acted strictly within their rights and in the performance of their duty and certainly have the approval of the Lord in so doing. The ushers were not using carnal weapons in order to preach the gospel, but they were using force to compel the enemy to desist in efforts to prevent the preaching of the gospel.
ADMONITION
81	In the exercise of self-defense caution must be strictly observed and no one should act hastily and without warrant. Christians must obey the law. They must not use physical force in repelling an assault unless it appears to them as reasonably necessary for their own protection and the protection of their brethren and of their property or work. The Christian should do what he can to avoid physical combat and should never seek physical combat. But when, in the lawful performance of his duty, a Christian is attacked by the enemy and the enemy attempts to destroy the Christian’s property or to violently assault the Christian, then the Christian may use such force as at the time appears to him to be necessary to ward off such an assault. When going about in the service of the Lord, and by distributing literature pertaining to his Word or in performing other like and proper service, if Jehovah’s witnesses are attacked by a mob, and if it appears necessary that such witnesses employ force to repel or ward off such assault, then they may properly use such force as to them appears to be necessary for their protection or defense of themselves and their property. They should employ physical force only as a last resort for their self-protection against the wrongdoers. But no one, because he is a Christian, is compelled to willingly and without resistance submit to an attack of a ruffian or others who attempt to prevent him from going lawfully about his work of preaching
the gospel. This gospel of the kingdom must be proclaimed, and it will be proclaimed. God has warned his people that the enemy will fight against them, and has plainly told them that the enemy shall not prevail. Hence they should go forward without fear in the performance of their duty, exercising their lawful rights.
82	If an officer of the law in the exercise of his official duty places a Christian under arrest, then the person so arrested should not resist the officer but should go quietly with the officer and await the proper time to have a hearing and make his defense before the properly constituted tribunal. Such course is acting in an orderly and proper manner. The officer may have no right to arrest the Christian or interfere with his work, but the officer is acting in behalf of the state and there is a proper place to determine the question as to whether he is right or wrong.
33	When Christians are assembled together to hear discussed the Word of God or to study the Word of God no one has the right to attempt to break up that assembly, and when any person or crowd of persons attempt to do so they may be properly resisted and dealt with, and in so resisting them such physical force may be used against the disturbers as may to the ones peaceably assembled appear to be reasonably proper. At Madison Square Garden meeting a crowd of lawless men entered for the expressed purpose of breaking up the meeting. They started a riot without any excuse. One of the rioters, struck an usher a terrific blow on the head, and that assault was resisted. Then the wife of that rioter rushed forward and grabbed the usher by his secret parts. God foreknew that the Devil would put in operation such wicked tactics, and he made provision in his law for such, and which law of God reads: “When men strive together one with another, and the wife of the one draweth near for to deliver her husband out of the hand of him that smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand, and taketh him by the secrets; then thou shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall not pity her.”—Deut. 25:11,12.
84	Although complaint was made against this woman, she was not arrested. All of God’s laws are just and right, whereas the law of nations and the enforcement thereof often comes short of what is just and right. We must let the Lord properly recompense such wrongdoers. Jehovah’s witnesses and companions are here admonished to walk circumspectly and strictly within the pale of the law and never seek a controversy. They should act in a dignified and considerate manner with all. But when wrongfully assaulted by representatives of Satan who oppose God’s kingdom and the proclamation of the kingdom message, then it is the privilege and
282
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
duty of those who fully trust and serve God to resist such unlawful assault.
85	The ushers at Madison Square Garden carried light walking sticks as a means of identification. They had been threatened by lawless ones, and it now appears to have been well, for the safeguarding of themselves from cruel assaults, that they had such walking canes. According to the law of the land and the law of God, when one is threatened with bodily harm, he has the perfect right to arm himself for the purpose of self-defense.—Neh. 4:7-18.
86	Religionists, and particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, are never diligent to abide by the law of God, nor even by the law of the land, unless it suits their convenience. The Hierarchy proceed according to their own rules, and that without regard to the rights of others, and many of their chief men advocate cruel punishment of all those whom they call “heretics”, even to the point of killing of men who do not agree with their Catholic doctrines. God foreknew and foretold this very thing by and through his prophet. Note now that in these “last days” God makes known to his people the true condition and calls attention to the wrongful acts of religionists and tells his people in advance of such ill-treatment of his faithful servants. Such persecutors shall soon receive at God’s hand a just recompense. (Joel 3: 7) Concerning ill-treatment it is written: “And they have cast lots for my people; and have given a boy for an harlot, and sold a girl for wine, that they might drink.”—Joel 3: 3.
87	Mark the indisputable facts showing fulfillment of this prophecy: “They have cast lots for my people.” During the World War the religionists conspired together to destroy Jehovah’s witnesses, and in that conspiracy they were aided by that “extinguished” “Knight of St. Gregory” who held some of those Christians in prison without bail, while that man, bearing the title of a high judicial officer, betrayed the nation and sold his judicial decisions for filthy lucre; concerning which unlawful commercial dealings with his high judicial office, and concerning his conviction of that crime, the Catholic press today remains absolutely silent. During the World War faithful Christians, who were endeavoring to inform the people of God’s gracious provision for their salvation, were captured by religious conspirators and then were debased to the level of mere stake or prize money of common gamblers, acting exactly as the former religionists, the Edomites, had done toward God’s typical people. (Obadiah 11) The religionists treated Christ Jesus cheaply, when he was impaled on the tree, by casting lots for his garments. (Matt. 27:35) To this day the religionists continue to use violence, to devise methods and practices against faithful followers of Christ Jesus, and also
to incite the ignorant to use violence towards God’s servants. In this connection God calls attention to his purpose to duly recompense such wrongdoers as he did to other wrongdoers in the past: “Yet was she [Nineveh, in Assyria] carried away, she went into captivity; her young children also were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets; and they cast lots for her honourable men, and all her great men were bound in chains.”—Nahum 3:10.
88	In this day chance or lot-casting no more decides into whose possession or control God’s faithful people shall fall. God has his hand over his own, and he will avenge them in due season.
88	Further citing examples of the wicked acts of religionists, which acts point to what the Roman Catholic Hierarchy has long since been doing, the prophet of God says: “And have given a boy [of Judah, that is, those who serve and praise Jehovah God] for an harlot.” Such exchange is a gross insult to God. In order to commit illicit acts (which are commonly called “fornication”) with Satan’s world, the clergy have handed over the young and faithful servants of God to their worldly allies that such faithful Christians may be traded and dealt with by political and judicial men as though they were the most debased of earth. The clergy have thus been willing to surrender up the servants of God and Christ, whom the clergy had sworn to serve, in order to deliver over the true servants of God and Christ that the religionists might receive the favor of political rulers of the land. The Scriptures plainly set forth God’s conclusion concerning such, to wit: “Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.”—Jas. 4: 4.
40	Further describing the wicked practices of religionists towards God’s faithful covenant people his prophet records: “And sold a girl [of Judah, that is. those who serve and praise Jehovah] for wine, that they might drink.” Rather than stand for the defense of the Lord’s true servants, the religionists have commercialized them for the sake of imbibing the wine of Satan, who rules this world, that they may act hilariously with the visible rulers of the world. For this reason the religious leaders, particularly the Hierarchy, indulge in crooked politics of the land and create and boldly operate a political machine and brazenly carry on their work under the pretense of serving God, and thus deceive the people by naming their organization a “religious” one. In order to gain such worldly exhilaration the religious leaders surrender all their privileges of serving God and receiving his approval. Not only did they betray the Lord’s cause and kingdom during the World War but they still continue to do so, approving and aid
Sfte WATCHTOWER.
283
September 15, 1939
ing the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses in Germany and in other totalitarian states. They oppose freedom of assembly and freedom of speech and freedom of worship and urge their fanatical and benighted dupes to indulge in violence against those who peaceably assemble for the true worship of God and Christ.
41	Further addressing his opposers, Jehovah says: “Yea, and what have ye to do with me, 0 Tyre, and Zidon, and all the coasts of Palestine? will ye render me a recompence? and if ye recompense me, swiftly and speedily will I return your recompence upon your own head.” (Joel 3:4) Literally, according to the Revised Version, this text reads: “What are ye to me?” That is to say, What acts have you to settle with me that you feel justified in persecuting those who represent me and who belong to me? The Bible record shows nothing that would furnish an excuse, much less any justification, for Tyre’s malicious conduct toward the typical people of God. Ancient Tyre had been permitted to remain in the land of Palestine, although God had given the land to the Israelites according to his promise to Abraham. (Judg. 3:1-3) Tyre was a type of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization, and modern Tyre has long been permitted by the Lord to operate her political racket without interference. Jehovah’s faithful servants have never been guilty of violence or any unlawful acts against the Hierarchy. They have never even called in question the liberty of that organization to practice their religion. They have never objected to their freedom of speech. Jehovah’s witnesses have only obeyed God’s law and commandments in pointing out to the people the distinction between religion and the practice thereof and the true worship of Almighty God properly called “Christianity”. This Jehovah’s witnesses have done and are doing in obedience to the Lord’s commandment.
42	As to Zidon, mentioned in the foregoing text, that city pictured the heathen religions which are much older and from which the Papacy sprang. Concerning such Jehovah’s witnesses have only pointed out the truth of all religions, and none of such religions have either excuse or justification for ill-treating Jehovah’s witnesses in doing this in obedience to God’s law. These heathen religionists, operating in Japan and other places, led by and working with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, are included in the word “Zidon” used here. To all religionists, and particularly their leaders, God says: “Will ye render me a recompence?” That is to say, Are you trying to pay me for exposing your crookedness and pointing out that you have been and are serving Satan, my adversary? Is it your purpose to do acts of opposition to me as if you could get away with it, and thus show your contempt of me? Do you think
yourself immune from punishment, as if you were independent of and superior to me? As described at Joel 3:2,3, religious leaders who pretend to serve God have treated Jehovah’s witnesses contemptuously and are therefore in line for due recompense at the hands of the Lord, because he says to them: “Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my [servants], ye have done it unto me.” (Matt. 25:40) Furthermore says the Lord: “And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily.”—Luke 18:7,8.
43	Now in these “last days” it is not, “If ye recompense me,” as stated in the language of the prophecy, but, having done their wicked deeds, as the prophet foretold, in their contempt and defiance of Jehovah God, therefore the day of settlement has arrived and the account will be settled at the battle of Armageddon, when the enemy will be completely paid off for their wrongdoing. The Lord is now at the temple and plainly says that as soon as the witness work, which is God’s “strange work”, is done, there will be no delay in the settlement of the account with the enemy, for then “sudden destruction cometh upon them”, and none shall escape.
44	The capital organization of Jehovah is symbolized by gold, and so God says to his opposers: “Because ye have taken my silver and my gold, and have carried into your temples [of Devil worship] my goodly pleasant things.” (Joel 3: 5) Thus the religionists and allies forcibly and wrongfully snatch up the servants of Jehovah and throw them into prison. Such wrongful seizure of the things belonging to God has been indulged in by religionists at many times in the past, foreshadowing what modern-day religionists have done and are doing to those who serve Jehovah and his kingdom today. One of the wrongful acts in the type is set forth at 1 Samuel 5:1, 2, where the account shows that the Philistines took the ark of the covenant and ‘"brought it into the house of Dagon”. Again it is noted, the Babylonians got their religion from the Devil, as did Nimrod, and the Babylonians carried off the vessels of the house of the Lord (Jehovah) and put them in the temple of Babylon. (2 Chron. 36:6,7; Dan. 5:1-4) Truths of the Bible set forth in the publications by Jehovah’s witnesses have been seized by the religionists and destroyed. In their religious newspapers they have roasted, and some maliciously lied about, the Lord’s people and have misapplied Bible texts, and therefore tried to make it appear that Jehovah’s witnesses are unpatriotic, anti-Christian and sedition-ists. Everything that belongs to the Lord and that should be devoted to his service the religionists have seized hold upon and used for their religious temples,
284
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
to make it appear that Jehovah’s witnesses obey a God who is weak, feeble and unable to protect those who faithfully serve him.
48	Continuing to recount the wicked deeds of religionists, God, through his prophet, says: “The children also of Judah and the children of Jerusalem have ye sold unto [(E.R.V.) the sons of] the Grecians, that ye might remove them far from their border.” (Joel 3:6) “Judah” and “Jerusalem” refer to those who serve and praise Jehovah God. The religionists have sold Jehovah’s witnesses unto Devil worshipers, the enemies of God, who war against his people, and therefore God says to them by another prophet: “I have . . . raised up thy sons, 0 Zion, against thy sons, 0 Greece, and made thee [Zion] as a sword of a mighty man.” (Zech. 9:13) Religionists, led by the
Hierarchy, deal with and treat Jehovah’s witnesses as a thing for sale or commercial gain. They have also “sold themselves” to do wickedly in the sight of God and “to provoke him to anger”.—2 Ki. 17:17.
48	And why have religionists done so ? The prophecy answers: ‘That ye might move them from their border,’ the purpose of the enemy being, if possible, to separate the faithful from God, even as the Devil claimed he could do. The effort of the religionists is to deliver Jehovah’s witnesses to their foes and to deprive them of their liberty to serve God. Thanks be unto Jehovah that the time is at hand when he will render a just recompense to the enemy, because the day of his vengeance is at hand; and now mark what God says he will do, and the manner of his doing, to the vindication of his own great name.
(To be continued)
THE THREE GODS OF RELIGIOUS RACKETEERS
THE Bellarmine Society, of England, in its 24-page published attack on the witnesses of Jehovah, admits, on page 13, paragraph one: “Of course we cannot fully explain the mystery of the Blessed Trinity, by which three persons exist in one nature. But we can see that human nature is common to (but not numerically the same in) John and Paul. Yet John and Paul are different persons. The Divine Nature is numerically one, but in God there are three divine Persons. Thus, if we ask What is the First Person of the Blessed Trinity? the answer is: God. If we ask Who is the First Person? the answer is: The Father. And if we ask What is the Second Person, What the Third ? the answer each time is: God. But if we ask Who are these Two? the answer is: The Son and the Holy Spirit (respectively). So there is only one God, but three divine Persons. This is very different from saying that in God there are three Persons in one person.”
That the very word “trinity” is not found even once in the inspired Scriptures is admitted by The Catholic Encyclopedia, Volume XV, under subhead “Trinity, The Blessed”, reading: “The Persons are co-eternal and coequal: all alike are uncreated and omnipotent. ... In Scripture there is as yet no single term by which the Three Divine Persons are denoted together. The word trias (of which the Latin trinitas is a translation) is first found in Theophilus of Antioch about A.D. 180. He speaks of ‘the Trinity of God [the Father], His Word and His Wisdom’.”
There is no scripture to support the doctrine of the “trinity”. The text usually quoted by trinitarians as support, to wit, 1 John 5: 7, is spurious and is therefore omitted in all modern revised Bible "versions, including the American Revised Version Bible. The Catholic Douay Version Bible (Haydock) is unwilling to admit this text is spurious. Its footnote thereon reads: “Ver. 7. There are three that give testimony in heaven: the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one: i.e. one in nature, in substance, and in all perfections, in the same sense as when Christ himself said, (Jo.x.30.) I and the Father are one,
or one thing. The Socinians [antitrinitarians of the sixteenth century] object that this verse is wanting in many Greek manuscripts; and even Erasmus in one edition, and Mr. Simon in his Critics, have questioned it, or rejected it, as a false reading, . . . The Socinians also object that this passage is not brought by S. Athanasius [of the Niecne creed of A.D. 325] and some other fathers against the Arians [antitrinitarians, followers of Arius], which they could scarce have omitted had they read this verse, but this only proves that this omission had happened in some MSS in their time, or, as some conjecture, that the Arians had corrupted some copies. S. Fulgentius [468-533 A.D., or over a century later] made use of it against the Arians, and also others about that time.” Says the Emphatic Diaglott translation’s footnote: “This text concerning the heavenly witness is not contained in any Greek manuscript which was written earlier than the fifth century. It is not cited by any of the Greek ecclesiastical writers; nor by any of the early Latin fathers, even when the subjects upon which they treated would naturally have led them to appeal to its authority. It is therefore evidently spurious.” The three oldest manuscripts in existence, to wit, the famous 4th century Vatican Manuscript No. 1209, the equally old Sinaitic MS., and the 5th century Alexandrine MS., do not contain the words of the text now numbered as 1 John 5: 7.
There is but one First Cause: He who is “from everlasting to everlasting” and “whose name alone is Jehovah", as stated at Psalms 90:2 and 83:18. He only original!' possessed immortality, “whom no man hath seen nor can see,” because he is divine, as shown at 1 Timothy 6:16. In his Word he states: “I am Jehovah, and there is none else; besides me there is no God.” (Isa. 45: 5, Am. Rev. V< r.) “I am Jehovah, that is my name; and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise unto graven images." (Isa. 42:8, A.R.V.) “Hear, 0 Israel: Jehovah our God [Elohim] is one Jehovah: and thou shalt love Jehovah I h.' God [Elohim] with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.”—Dcut. 6: 4, 5, A.R.V.
Septembeb 15,1939
THE WATCHTOWER
285
It is a dishonor to his name and a reproach to his name to teach the people that there are three gods in one or one in three, to wit, God the Father and God the Son and God the Holy Ghost. The great Jehovah God is completely separate and distinct from all. He is the Creator. All others are creatures.
Jesus Christ is the Son of God. The name by which he is first known in the Scriptures is The Word, or (Greek) Logos, which means the one who is the mouthpiece or word, or speaker, as Jehovah God’s instrument. He was the beginning of God’s creation, and from and after that time was the active agent by whom Jehovah God created all things that were created. According to the interlinear reading of the Emphatic Diaglott and which is a literal word-for-word translation of the original Greek the account at John 1:1-3 reads: “In a beginning was the Word [Logos], and the Word was with the God, and a god was the Word. This was in a beginning with the God. All through it [him] was done; and without it [him] was done not even one, that has been done.”
The Hebrew word elohim, as applying to Jehovah, is translated “God”. The great Jehovah is The God. The Son, the Logos, is A God. The name “god” (Hebrew: el or eloah) is applied to mighty ones, even to angels and magistrates, as at Exodus 21:6; 22: 8, 9, 28 {margin), and Psalm 8: 5. The name “god” is therefore properly applied to the Son because he is a mighty one. The name “god” is appropriate to him because he is the agent used by the great Creator in the creation of all other things. The names Jehovah, Almighty God, and Most High are never in the Scriptures applied to Jesus, the Son of God.
Jesus himself testifies that he was the beginning of God’s creation, by announcing himself, at Revelation 3:14, as “the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God”. When the time came for the creation of man, manifestly Jehovah God addressed his Son the Logos in these words: “Let us make man in our image, after our likeness.” (Gen. 1:26) Later, when man had sinned and was to be expelled from Eden, manifestly Jehovah addressed his Son when He said: “Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil.”—Gen. 3: 22.
The Scriptures clearly show that Jehovah God, the great Creator, used another as his mighty instrument by which He has carried forward his purposes. That great One whom he has used as his instrument is his Son the Logos, Jesus, the Christ. The apostle Paul, with authority from God, wrote concerning Jesus as follows: “Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature: for by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him: and he is before all things, and by him all things consist.”—Col. 1:15-17.
Religious racketeers, in order to support their false dogma of the trinity, have been forced to accept from Satan and to teach another lie, to wit, that the ehild bom of Mary the virgin, which child grew to manhood and was crucified, was God himself; that while on earth he was a spirit and that the body of flesh that he used was merely an incarnation, whereas John 1:14 says: “The Word was made llesh, and dwelt among us.” They say God took upon himself the
form of man and went about in this body of flesh for thirty-three and one-half years, and that during that time he was known as “the man Christ Jesus”. Their contention is that by being bom as a man child the so-called “second person of the trinity” assumed a human body and that during all the time he was on earth Jesus was both God and man. Frequently, however, some of them say: ‘Jesus was very God and very man; he was God incarnate.’
Note the absurdities to which such doctrine leads: The doctrine is: God is one, made up of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. The logical conclusion then is that when God left heaven and took upon himself the form of man, which form he assumed for thirty-three and one-half years, during that time heaven was without God; therefore heaven must have operated itself. At the end of that period of time Jesus died an ignominious death upon the tree on Calvary, at which time he cried: “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” (Matt. 27:46) Jesus did thus cry either sincerely or for a fraudulent purpose.
The Scriptures show that God is immortal and cannot die. (1 Tim. 6:16) Therefore the trinity-incarnation dogma leads to the unavoidable conclusion that the so-called “dying” upon the tree was merely a sham and that Jesus did not die at all; and furthermore, that the words of agony uttered by Jesus were merely a subterfuge to deceive the people. If the one dying upon the tree was really God, how would it be reasonable for him to cry unto himself: “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” If Jesus was God himself and the Holy Ghost also, to whom was Jesus crying when nailed to the tree? The clergy look wise and say: “It is a mystery.” The fact is, it not only is a mystery but is a snare and a racket and a greatly magnified untruth.
Furthermore, if at the time Jesus was on earth and if when consecrating himself to do God’s will at the time of his baptism in Jordan Jesus was God, then Jesus was more than a perfect man and could not be a ransom price corresponding to that which the perfect man Adam forfeited in Eden by sin and rebellion. His death could thus not furnisli the ransom price as the basis for man’s reconciliation to God. (Deut. 19:21) By Satan’s making it appear that Jesus was God, the reasonable mind must conclude that Jesus’ cries upon the tree were a subterfuge, that there was no real purchasing value in his death, and that therefore the whole scheme is unworthy of the consideration of an honest man. The result of that conclusion would be to completely destroy faith in God and faith in the great ransom sacrifice and to blind man to God’s purpose. Jesus was not begotten by a human father, but begotten in the womb of Mary his mother by the holy spirit of God. The Scriptures do not give the details as to how, but the fact is stated that he was begotten by the power of the holy spirit, which is God's invisible power, and that is the end of all controversy.— Matt. 1:18; Luke 1: 34, 35.
When Jesus offered himself in consecration to do his Father’s will he was then and there fulfilling what God’s prophet had before written concerning him, to wit: “Lo. I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, 0 my God: yea, thy law is within my heart.” (Ps. 40:7,8; Hob. 10:5-10) Then and there at Jordan God gave proof of his acceptance of Jesus’ consecration. There was a voice from heaven saying: “This is
286
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.” At that time the spirit of God descended upon Jesus and outward evidence thereof was given. (Matt. 3:1G, 17) The clergy would have the people believe that there stood he who was “God the Son”. The clergy are clearly wrong. Jesus was not “God the Son”, but was and is the Son of God, whom Jehovah God had sent to the earth to perform a great work.
The clergy teach that the so-called “holy ghost” is the third person of the “triune god”. The generally accepted thought is that a ghost is a spirit being. The word “ghost” in the Scriptures is mistranslated from the original language of the Bible, to wit, from the root word that is properly translated wind, breath, in various scriptures. The word “spirit” is properly translated from that root. Its true meaning is invisible power. The spirit of the Lord God is invisible to man and is powerful. It is properly called the “holy spirit” because all power of God is holy. The holy spirit (mistranslated “holy ghost”) is not a person or being, and no scripture authorizes the conclusion it is. When God puts his spirit upon a creature that creature is clothed with power and authority to act as the representative or agent of Jehovah God. The holy spirit is not one of the gods of a trinity. It is the holy power of Jehovah God conferred upon his beloved Son and upon others whom He authorized to represent him.
The trinitarians say: 'God, Jesus and the Holy Ghost are one, equal in power, in person, and in eternity, and arc three in one.’ Jesus, after being begotten of God’s spirit at his baptism in the Jordan, said: “My Father is greater than I.” (John 14:28) The clergy say: ‘Jesus was his own father.’ They do not tell the truth. The true relationship between God and Jesus is that of Father and Son, and this relationship Jesus always acknowledged. He said: “For the Father loveth the Son, and sheweth him all things that himself doeth.”—John 5: 20.
The Scriptures testify that God “only hath immortality”. (1 Tim. 6:16) At Jesus’ resurrection from the dead Jehovah God bestowed the gift of immortality upon Christ Jesus. (Rev. 1:18; 1 Cor. 15: 53, 54) That means that when Jesus stood upon the banks of the Jordan he was not immortal, and therefore not equal to God. Jesus’ own words are further proof he was not his own Father, and was not equal in power and eternity with God: “For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself; and hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.” (John
5:26,27) Let the people of good will determine whether or not Jesus here told the truth; and if so, then they must conclude that the clergy who teach the trinitarian doctrine are false witnesses.
Speaking concerning his sheep, Jesus said: “My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father’s hand. I and my Father are one.” (John 10:29,30) No so-called “third person”, or “holy ghost”, is mentioned here in connection with this oneness, a blasphemous omission if the “holy ghost” were God and equal in power and glory and eternity with Jehovah God. The time came for Jesus to finish his work, and he prayed unto God his Father in heaven; and amongst other things he said to his Father: “Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word; that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me. And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one [no mention of any ‘holy ghost’].” (John 17:20-22) Here Jesus was praying for those who would believe on him and who should be anointed as member's of “his body, which is the church”. God gave Jesus to be the head over the church, that Jesus and the church “may be one”. This was what he taught the disciples, and this is what afterward the disciples taught. As Christ Jesus is over the church, even so God is over Christ. (1 Cor. 11: 3) Therefore they are all one in organization. The church recognizes Jesus as the head, and Jesus recognizes God as the Head. (Eph. 1:21-23) Thus is proved the complete uniting of God, Christ, and the church. By one invisible power they are united, and therefore are said to be one in spirit. There is complete harmony between God the Father and Christ Jesus the Son of God and the church, the members of his body.
Why, then, have the religious racketeers ignored the statements of Jesus and the apostles and seized upon a doctrine which they themselves cannot explain and which no one can understand? and why do they insist on teaching a doctrine that dishonors Jehovah God and destroys the value of Jesus’ great ransom sacrifice? There is but one answer : They are willingly or unwillingly the instruments in the hands of “the god of this world”, Satan, the Devil, who has used them to blind the minds of the people, to prevent the people from understanding Jehovah’s great provision of salvation through Christ Jesus.
LETTERS
BOUNTIFUL PROVISION JEHOVAH IS MAKING
Dear Brother Rutherford :
It is with a heart full of gratitude and appreciation to Jehovah that we make haste to acknowledge our appreciation and love for you in the heat of the battle and the bountiful provision Jehovah is making through His agency, the Watchtower Society.
Find enclosed an expression of our feelings in a resolution that was unanimously approved by the general assembly of Texas Zone .Number 8, assembled at Ranger, Texas, on May 21, 1939.
RESOLUTION
Be it therefore resolved: That Texas Zone Number 8, assembled at our second zone assembly at Ranger, Texas, this 21st day of May, 1939, do move and adopt the following resolution:
1.	That we heartily co-operate with Jehovah’s visible agency, the Society, in the advancement of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government.
2.	That we now here renew our consecration and determination to advance the kingdom interests in our zone as never before and that we will put in more time in the service, make more back-calls, as well as see to it that more model studies are started within each of our individual companies.
3.	That we greatly appreciate the recent instruction from The Watchtower concerning the Achan class, and that, regardless of the representation of the “evil servant” in our zone, we shall go from this place with a burning determination and zeal for Jehovah’s house, to push our part of the “strange work” to a victorious completion.
September 15,1939
WATCHTOWER.
287
4.	That we, personally and collectively, will see to it, by the grace of Jehovah, that we are delivered from the blood of all people within the confines of this, our Zone Number 8 in Texas. That the people of good will will receive our undivided attention as never before. That we, by the grace of Jehovah, will see to it that we, personally and collectively, are making kingdom interests of paramount importance with greater zeal, which certainly means that everything else must wait.
5.	That, in the drama of vindication, we have definitely located ourselves under the Greater Joshua, our ‘position round about the camp’ (Judges 7: 21) being assuredly Texas Zone Number 8, with the victuals of spiritual food for our strength in battle coming from the bountifully spread table, The Watchtower, and with the trumpets in our hands heralding the message of the Kingdom and Theocratic Rule, we know that no weapon formed against this invulnerable band shall prosper. We therefore take courage and with increased boldness step out into the field of most intense action, well knowing that we are appearing in the valley before Ai under the command of the Greater Joshua, Christ Jesus, whose forces are invincible. With the invisible forces of Almighty God to our right and the already trembling forces of Satan before us we are certain that the beginning of the Battle of Armageddon is very near; therefore let us this day renew our courage and determination to advance in every department of kingdom service, thus having our assigned part of drawing the forces of Satan out into the open, an action that is certain to hasten the time of their complete exposure and final destruction, vindicating the name of the Most High.
6.	That we shall look neither to the left nor to the right, seeing to it that we cultivate charity for our faithful brethren as never before; that the cords of love divine shall securely bind us together, one compact fighting unit against the numerous cohorts of Satan.
7.	That, with the orders and instructions in our hands, the field of activity definitely before us, the urgent need of more back-calls, more model studies and more time in the service, let us return to our respective companies at the close of this day and lay definite plans to praise the name of Jehovah by raising the number of publishers getting in our 60 hours per month.
We, Jehovah’s witnesses of Texas Zone Number 8, assembled this 21st day of May, 1939, individually and collectively, realizing the urgent need of increased activity and that the King’s business now requires haste, do therefore move and adopt this resolution by the usual sign of saying “Aye”!
FROM FARTHEST NORTH COMPANY OF CANADA
(Peace River is 500 miles north of the International Line.) Dear Brethren:
Greetings! It is with great pleasure that the following report is submitted. There was a party of nine that left High Prairie at 9 a.m. on the 7th for Peace River and worked all the towns and hamlets along the road and arrived in Peace River at 6 p.m. We met Brother----------, who, by the way, is interested but not yet
active in the service. Yet he has a rooming place over his poolroom and he very willingly gave us free access to as many rooms as we required.
We had to go to a restaurant that night for supper and for breakfast the following morning. Then we found a lady, though not in the truth, who gave us her home free to use as a cafeteria. Brother Archibald from Belloy met us on Saturday morning, so we went to the wholesalers and got some wholesome food at cost to keep us going until Monday morning. After all the expenses were paid, the contributions exceeded the cost by $10, which was turned over to the Society through the zone servant.
Report of activities: Publishers, 22; bound books, 9; booklets, 301; subscriptions, 3; hours, 127; attendance, 190; back-calls, 12; public lecture, 39 attendants; service discussion, 38 attendants.
We put on an information march at 6: 30 p.m. Saturday, with 28 taking part, the sound-car being used to announce concerning the lecture “Fascism or Freedom” to be given on Sunday evening.
After supper we assembled in the Orange Hall for a service discussion, 38 being in attendance. Halfway through the discussion in walked two Royal Canadian Mounted Police who had been following us in our march. They stood inside the door on duty, as they were in their full regalia and did not remove their hats. Nothing was divulged while these were present that they should not know. Towards the close of the meeting I drew the attention of the audience to the following, which was chiefly for the benefit of the police: That the Bible is God’s Word of truth and no one such as doctor, preacher, lawyer, or even the police who take their oath on the Bible, can gainsay this. At this point one of the police wished to withdraw, but the other refused to do so. Then I said to the friends, “Are you all familiar with the Order of Trial?” Then attention was drawn to the fact that we are not engaged in selling books, nor are we engaged in any commercial enterprise. That we have charters in both Canada and the United States, and a special one in Quebec, where there are 4,000,000 French people, 90 percent being Roman Catholics. Then I went on to explain that if you were ever picked up by the police for selling books without a license, plead “not guilty” and get one of the friends to go your bail. Then demand a trial and get in touch with the Society for the particulars. Again one of the police wished to leave and the other refused. At the close I asked the friends to rise and thank Jehovah for the privileges we have been given. At this the police doffed their hats.
After dismissal the police came up to me, one feeling embarrassed. I said to them I was pleased to see them there. One asked, What is your name? I told him. Where are you from? I answered that also, and asked if we had been reported, and he said, No, we hadn’t. But, he said, we have been commanded to keep watch on meetings of such kind and report the same. So, he then said, we will report having attended this meeting and found everything in order. I invited them to the meeting scheduled for the following day, that is, the lecture “Fascism or Freedom”. (They did not appear.)
We had a good assembly and there were seven in all who symbolized their consecration in the Hart river at the edge of town.
This letter is being written at Brother Schamehorn’s place. It is as far north as Township 92, where there are 24 hours daylight.
Enclosed find declaration signed by all attending the assembly. Yours in the Kingdom service,
A. J. Sutton (Zone servant)
DECLARATION
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We, Jehovah’s witnesses assembled in convention this day at Peace River and brethren as far north as Township 92, declare that we are wholly devoted to Jehovah and his King, Christ Jesus, and even up here we can see the Doom of Religion (Prov. 6:15-19), and we will do our utmost to keep in harmony with Jehovah’s Theocratic arrangement in Zone No. 1, Alberta.
Signed: Alvin Peever	Sydney Kelly
Gustav Eriksson	Jin Schameiiorn
Harry Murdoch	Alex. Miller
Albert Eriksson	(50 years a Watch-
Edna Berry	tower subscriber)
Ross Archibald	Gerald Bogard
Albert Moger	Rodney V. Ketter
Sam Emerson	C. V. Johnson
Mrs. A. Clark	Sister Schameiiorn
Margaret Sutton	Helen F. Miller
Lois Sutton	D. H. Morrow
A. J. Sutton	Ida Morrow
Sister McGillivray
FIELD EXPERIENCES
THAT SIGN WITH TWO BOOKLETS ON
“We were standing on the street with sign and booklets Fascism or Freedom and Face the Facts. A police officer came and said the sign would have to go off the street. We showed him our Testimony Card and Liberty to Preach. He replied the sign was not preaching. I said: ‘Oh yes, it is. It advertises the King and the kingdom of Jehovah.’ He: ‘If you do not go I will have to call the patrol wagon and take you in.’ We said we are staying here in obedience to Jehovah’s command. So he made a notation in a notebook and went away. Later the same police came back and said: ‘I reported this to headquarters, and they are investigating it. We will give you till Monday to get off the streets.’ Monday I went back to the same spot. Two or three police passed me and said nothing. Later the same cop came and asked if I was making plenty of money. I replied: ‘Jehovah’s witnesses are not out to make money, but to preach the gospel.’ He laughed and went his way and nothing happened. Saturday we placed 45 booklets, 1 Riches, and an order for Enemies (to be delivered Monday), at the same stand. Then we placed 26 booklets and a subscription for Consolation. That sign with the two booklets on it, I placed more booklets with it than ever before.”
ANTI-DOORKNOCKING ORDINANCE
“Marceline, Mo., has an ordinance that one can walk all over a man’s porch and stomp his feet, but don’t knock on his door. A-year ago, while putting out the booklet Cure, the priest became very much offended at what it contained, and the result was that the publishers were arrested, the case still pending in the courts. Sunday three earloads of witnesses went to Marceline, to knock on the doors and tell the people of the good news. We had been working fob some time when out came the marshal and told us to stop knocking on the people’s doors. He was told this was our way of preaching the gospel, and of the Supreme Court’s ruling. He said we would have to stop knocking or he would have to arrest us. We told him to go ahead and start arresting. He saw that wouldn’t work, so he said he would call up the mayor and see what he had to say. About that time a publisher knocked on the mayor’s door and he told her of the city ordinance and if she knocked on any more doors he would call up the marshal and have her arrested. So, between the mayor’s looking for the marshal and the marshal’s looking for the mayor, we got Marceline worked.”
BETWEEN AMATEUR RADIOCASTERS
“A publisher, an amateur radio fan, was talking to a ‘friend of the air’ across the continent one day and was told that when the friend went out in the woods he felt much closer to God than when he was in church. The publisher took opportunity to witness in regard to religion and the true worship of the Creator, confiding also that he himself would perhaps be an atheist if he had not read some books and booklets on the Scriptures which had been brought to him by people known as Jehovah’s witnesses. ‘Perhaps you have seen some of these people and maybe had a chance to get some of the literature,’ he concluded. ‘Yes,’ was the reply, ‘they come around here quite often. I even take one of their magazines, and say, that reminds me, my subscription has just about run out and I’ll have to have it renewed.’ ”
DOWN TO THE SEA IN SHIPS
“Corpus Christi, Texas, has a large port, with some 150 to 200 foreign and coastwise ships coming here each month, the large Norwegian and French tankers predominating among the foreign vessels. We aim to witness on every ship that enters our port. Unusual interest has been manifested in this new field, especially by the custom officials and captains of the various ships, by hearing the message themselves and giving us ready access to work all the rest of the members of the ship. To date I have had the privilege of working on 35 ships, and have encountered difficulty only on one, a German tanker, where the first officer asked me to leave, giving me no explanation, but this after I had already made one phonograph setup in German, with a placement of one bound book and a booklet. One French captain, on hearing one of Jehovah’s witnesses was aboard, sent for me, and we had a most enjoyable talk of the Kingdom. He stated that about a month ago an American girl unable to speak French came to their apartment in Paris, introducing the message by a card, and placed Riches with his wife. His wife thought it was the most wonderful message she had ever heard of, and tried to explain some of the details of the book to him. As a result he took everything I had in French, and told me he hoped I would come aboard next trip.”
AS IT APPEARS TO THE ENEMY IN WISCONSIN
“A man quite excitedly told a woman on whom we are making back-calls: ‘You should have been downtown last night. The whole city was covered with men, women and children wearing signs inviting the people to hear Judge Rutherford in Horace White Park.’ In truth there were only 12 of us, four of whom were children; but we spread evenly over the business district during the busy hour on Saturday evening, and it gave the impression that the city was covered as with locusts.”
COMMENT ON AN APPLICATION FOR COMPANY SERVICE
“This boy’s family were the most zealous workers in the Baptist church. He was superintendent of the Sunday school and active in all the young people’s societies. Someone told them Judge Rutherford’s books were against the church. So when a pioneer called, the mother politely informed him they didn’t need any of those books; they read the Bible. However, she allowed him to play two records on the phonograph. She would not accept any literature, but after he left she felt curious, so hunted up some old books she had had for some years. She soon saw the books were the truth, and persuaded the rest of the family to read. She began taking The Watch forcer a month later. Soon the whole family pulled out of the church. The neighbors pleaded with them to return. The preacher made a special visit to pray for the ‘erring ones’. They remained steadfast and began circulating literature among their friends The whole family attended the convention in Mobile, took part in the house-to-house witnessing and information marches every day, and had the time of their lives. We discussed the service together last night, and they filled out the application blank. This morning the whole family, father, mother, three boys and two girls were immersed.’’
288
THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Buthebford, President___W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.’* - Isaiah S4:I3-
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act ail men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $100; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African aud Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British.................... 34	Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian.................40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.......... 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African .................Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon vritten application to the publishers, made once each j car, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will bo sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879.
“THEOCRACY” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The month of October begins a new service year and has been named “Theocracy” Testimony Period. The great Theocrat’s provision for field service then is the book Salvation together with the new booklet Government and Peace, first to be released for distribution beginning with October. This combination of literature is now offered on a 25c contribution or corresponding value in other English-speaking lands. This Period is world-wide and those lands not yet having translations of the above in their native language should offer a like combination of the latest book and booklet, Enemies or Iliches along with Fascism or Freedom or Face the Facts. All kingdom publishers will strive for an unstinted share in this Theocratic testimony. Your faithful report of work will help to make up an accurate world record.
“GOVERNMENT AND PEACE”
Honest hearers of the two speeches by the Society’s president to the world convention and radio audience from New York city have been anticipating this new booklet, for it contains his rousing, Convention-feature speeches “Government and Peace” and “Victory”. Millions of others of good will also will be eager to read this booklet. It is of 64 pages, and is self-covered, but the
unusual cover sets forth pictorially the circumstances of the Madison Square Garden public address. Your personal copy you may send for, remitting 5c contribution.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING
Pursuant to the provision of law and the charter of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, notice is hereby given that the annual business meeting of the said Society will be held at Pittsburgh, North Side (formerly Allegheny), Pennsylvania, at ten o’clock a.ni., Monday, October 2, 1939, at which the usual annual business will be transacted.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of November 5: “Doom of Religion” (Part 8), fl 1-16 inclusive, The Watchtower October 1, 1939.
Week of November 12: “Doom of Religion” (Part 8), fl 17-37 inclusive, The Watchtower October 1, 1939.
“SALVATION”
This new book, written by the president of the Society, was the feature release at the recent world-wide convention of Jeho-
(Continued on page 303)
JBeWffCHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX	October 1, 1939	No. 19
DOOM OF RELIGION
PART 8
“To me belongeth vengeance, and recompence; their foot shall slide in due time: for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make haste."—Deut. 32:35.
TEHOVAH will “pay off” the enemy, and of that I there is not the slightest doubt. His Paymaster J is Christ Jesus, who will administer retributive justice. For centuries the enemy has proceeded in an arrogant manner, reproaching Jehovah’s name and inflicting cruel punishment upon God’s people. The payday is at hand, and the foot of the enemy shall slip and slide, because the due time has come. There will be no delay, but, as the foregoing text says, what is coming upon the enemy will come in a hurry. It is the day of calamity upon those who reproach God’s name. Religious leaders are the ones who have brought the greatest reproach upon Jehovah’s name. They have organized and operate a system of racketeering, and in order to deceive the unsuspecting people they have labeled their hypocritical organization “the Christian religion” and have fraudulently induced the people to believe that religion and “Christianity” are one and the same thing. For centuries the Roman Catholic Hierarchy of Authority have with their mouths claimed to trust in the shed blood of Christ Jesus as the purchase price of humankind, and yet they have pursued a course in direct opposition to the spirit of Christ. They have used the name of Christ for political and commercial purposes, and they have trodden under foot the name of the Son of Jehovah God, and have counted his sacrificial blood an unholy thing. They have also persecuted the servants of God who have faithfully proclaimed the truth to the people. In their wickedness they have reached the climax, and the time for Jehovah to duly pay them off has come. The apostle Paul, who was rescued from the snare of religion and made an apostle of Jesus Christ thereafter, under the direction of God’s spirit, wrote of the enemy and of their end. He quotes the words of Jehovah uttered by Moses in the foregoing text and applies the same to these last days: “He that despised Moses’ law died without mercy under two or three witnesses : of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the
291
covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the spirit of grace? For we know him that hath said, Vengeance belongeth unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord. And again, The Lord shall judge his people.” (Heb. 10:28-30) Those who truly trust in Jehovah and Christ, and who believe and follow his Word, now see that the time for Jehovah to take action has come, and, seeing this, they greatly rejoice.
2 In the preceding issues of The Watclitozuer consideration has been given to the prophecy of Joel wherein Jehovah foretold of the wicked action of the religionists against the faithful servants of God. Then Jehovah speaks of and concerning his faithful servants who have been woefully ill-treated by the religionists and tells what he is going to do for them. “Behold, I will raise them out of the place whither ye have sold them, and will return your recompence upon your own head.” (Joel 3:7) These are words of assurance to Jehovah’s people that he will deliver them from the bondage of oppression and persecution. In A.D. 1919 Jehovah began to bring his faithful servants out of bondage. He caused them to wake up to their privileges and to see and appreciate the commission God gives to his faithful covenant people. Since then God has continued to reveal to his faithful servants his own great organization and how it is opposed by the wicked organization of Satan, and now God makes it clearly to appear that the religious leaders are the chief instruments of the Devil used to reproach his name and to afflict his people. This the Lord has done since he brought his remnant to the temple. Note this, that God has now raised his people “out of the place whither ye [the religionists] have sold them”, and he now causes his servants to announce to the enemy his words, to wit: “I . . . will return your recompence upon your own head.” The remnant and their “companions” now have the privilege and obligation of declaring God's determination to take action against the enemy, as stated in the Scriptures, to wit: “He that leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity; he that killeth
292
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
with the sword must be killed with the sword. Here is the patience and the faith of the saints.” (Rev. 13:10) "Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her works; in the cup which she hath filled, fill to her double.”— Rev. 18:6.
’ Because Armageddon is near, the time to “pay off” will take place and he sends the true followers of Christ Jesus throughout the land to declare his judgment in advance of its execution. This proclamation gives due notice to the enemy and enables the people of good will to flee from the enemy’s organization before God’s judgment is executed against the wicked.
* Further addressing his words of warning and condemnation to the religionists Jehovah says: “And I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the children of Judah, and they shall sell them to the Sabeans, to a people far off; for the Lord hath spoken it.” (Joel 3:8) The “sons” and the “daughters” of the religionists are those who have been taught to call their leaders “father”, “reverend,” and “bishop”, and such children of the religionists have been led by their so-called “fathers” into the Devil’s snare, and now all such as remain there are the seed of the Serpent. Such “sons” and “daughters” the religious leaders hold as vitally essential to themselves for their carrying out of their wicked purposes. The “fathers” or leaders depend upon such sons and daughters to do deeds of wickedness, and their daughters in particular go about to collect the money from the gullible people to finance their organization; all of which they regard as necessary for maintaining themselves and their organization. Like the chief billy-goat, the priest leads the deluded and fanatical sons and daughters into a place of a peaceable assembly of others and there incites and induces and causes such sons and daughters to commit deeds of violence, and in those wicked deeds the leaders find satisfaction and self-glory. Jehovah, through his prophet, speaks of the day when Christ Jesus comes to execute vengeance in behalf of the Most High upon the religionists, the leaders and their dupes, and by that prophet says: “Also, thou son of man, shall it not be in the day when I take from them their strength, the joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes, and that whereupon they set their minds, their sons and their daughters?” (Ezek. 24:25) It is then that God will take away from these self-exalted religious leaders their strength and the joy of their glory and the desire of their eyes.
8	Now Jehovah says to those oppressors who defame his holy name: “I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the children of Judah.” This Jehovah does by delivering over to his King, “the Lion of the tribe of Juda,” all the nations of the
earth, which nations he is now gathering to the place of battle. To Christ, the Executioner and King, Jehovah says: “Ask of me, and I will give thee the nations for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.”—Ps. 2:8,9, A.R.V.
8	Jehovah then warns the rulers of his purpose to destroy them, and this notice he gives in advance in these words: “Now therefore be wise, 0 ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve Jehovah with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the son, lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way, for his wrath will soon be kindled. Blessed are all they that take refuge in him.” (Ps. 2:10-12, A.R.V.) With extreme presumptuousness the head of the Hierarchy sets himself up as the one to receive the kisses of others, and thus he commits the presumptuous sin of assuming to be the One whom Almighty God directs the others to serve and obey. Not only is that an insult to the Lord, but it is a presumptuous sin, which is not forgivable.
7	The pope then goes farther than the Lord himself and invites these deluded subjects to kiss his toe. Jesus Christ, the great Redeemer, became the inheritor and owner of the human race by right of purchase, paying his lifeblood therefor. All the nations of the earth are under his possession and control to do with them according to the will of God. It is the will of Jehovah God, expressed in his Word, that all who take their place on the side of Christ Jesus, and who joyfully accept him as their Lord, Redeemer and King and faithfully serve him, such Christ Jesus redeems and delivers. But not so with the rebellious oppressors of Jehovah’s faithful people. Those who commit such presumptuous sins, as aforementioned, and who by their conduct count the blood of Christ a common thing, making commerce of the same, and all who follow their lead in opposition to the Theocracy the Lord declares he will destroy. For many centuries God has suffered the enemy to pursue the course of wickedness without hindrance, but now the due time has come for the pay-off. “What if God, willing to shew his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction; and that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had afore prepared unto glory.”—Rom. 9: 22, 23.
8	The “children of Judah” mentioned by the prophet Joel are all those who praise Jehovah, particularly the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Christ Jesus, and including all of bis faithful followers. Such continuously serve and praise the Most High. Such faithful ones obey God and refuse to obey man and are diligent to avoid the snare of religion. The faithful fol
October 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
293
lowers of Christ Jesus go forth to the people with the message of Jehovah, and by delivering that message they in effect “sell” the modern-day Tyre, Zidon and Philistia, that is to say, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allies of other religions. That message of truth operates to “sell” the religionists over to others who will enslave, oppress and exploit the religionists. This Jehovah’s witnesses and companions do by drawing to the attention of the people the truth of God’s Word, which shows that religion is the product and instrument of the Devil and that at the beginning of Armageddon Jehovah will deliver religion and the practitioners thereof over to their former allies, the radical ruling element, to be destroyed.
9	And what is the sale price to the faithful servants of Jehovah? And what do they get out of the transaction? It is this: All the benefit that comes out of exposing religion, which has been used to defame the name of Jehovah God. The faithful thus serving Jehovah have part in the vindication of his name, and that is a great pay to them. Tyre was used as a type of such wicked religionists, and concerning her and the antitype, the religious leaders, the Hierarchy and willing allies, it is written: “And her merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the Lord; it shall not be treasured nor laid up, for her merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently, and for durable clothing.” (Isa. 23:18) The pay that Jehovah’s faithful ones receive out of the transaction is the joy of doing Jehovah’s will and having a part in the vindication of his name.
10	Further Jehovah says of the sons and daughters of the religious leaders that “they shall sell them to the Sabeans”. According to another rendering of the text, they will sell them “to the men of Sheba” (R.V.) (1 Chron. 1: 9, 22, 32); that is to say, to the descendants of Cush, the son of Ham (Gen. 10: 6, 7); also to the descendants of Shem. (Gen. 10:21,28; Gen. 25:3) Selling them is doubtless to a mixed crowd of deluded ones. In early times those people of the type were raiders engaged in a destructive work. (Job 1:15) They were of the land of Sheba. They were also traders in different kinds of merchandise. (1 Ki. 10:1, 2,10) According to Joel’s prophecy they must have been engaged in the slave traffic. They were a cruel, heartless, wicked people, and they well picture, therefore, that extremely selfish part of humanity that have commercial or business relationships with the big religionists, such as Sheba had with Tyre, and that later turn against the religionists for the purpose of making gain out of the misfortune of those religionists. This is clearly corroborated by what came to pass upon those who marched against King Jehoshaphat. (2 Chron. 20:22,23) The dictators now permit the Roman Catholic Hierarchy to work with them, and all together they engage in rob
bing the Jews, who have been prosperous in commercial things and otherwise in obtaining money and property. When that radical and deluded element have finished with exploiting and robbing the Jews, it appears, then they will give their attention to the big religionists. It is said that Vatican City has stored up more gold and other riches than any other nation or organization. It may be expected that the various deluded radical elements will swoop down on the Vatican and Hierarchy after they have finished the Jews.
11	The land of Sheba was a country far off from Jerusalem, being many miles to the south. (Matt. 12:42) As the prophecy says: “They shall sell them . . . to a people far off.” Therefore the religious leaders will be removed afar from the domain in which they have carried on their commercial, religious activities and will be taken so far away they will never get back. Their organization will be broken up and destroyed because, as the Scriptures declare, the rulers, meaning the radical element, will burn her with fire, and the Lord will put it into the minds of such to do so. (Rev. 17:16-18) Furthermore, and to make certain what will come to pass, the prophecy of Joel says: “For the Lord hath spoken it.” It is therefore certain that all such will come to pass, because God has said, “I have purposed it, I will also do it.”—Isa. 46:11.
12	In due time Jehovah’s Messenger, Christ Jesus, appears at the temple of Jehovah. He tests the consecrated and then gathers into the temple the approved ones. Thereafter the approved must offer unto Jehovah “an offering in righteousness”; hence they are sent forth to proclaim his Word and his praises, doing service to Jehovah and Christ Jesus. (Mal. 3:3; Heb. 13:15) These faithful ones God favors by revealing to them the meaning of his prophecies, and they are sent forth by the Lord with this command: “Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles [nations (R.V.)]; Prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of war draw near; let them come up.”—Joel 3:9.
18	How wide or great shall be the proclamation mentioned in this command? It must have the same extent as Jesus commanded concerning this gospel of the kingdom, which must be proclaimed to all the world for a witness. (Matt. 24:14) That means the proclamation is to all outside of God’s “holy nation”, who compose the kingdom class. (1 Pet. 2:9,10) This message from Jehovah attracts the attention of those people of good will toward God, and hence the “great multitude” are informed of their privileges and they come from all nations to serve Jehovah and his King. At Joel 3: 2 God says: “I will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat.” In obedience to his command the
294
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
proclamation is given by his witnesses, and thus they have a part in doing God’s work toward the gathering of the nations.
14	Furthermore Jehovah’s witnesses are commanded to proclaim the words “Prepare war”. This message does not mean to make preparation for another world war amongst the nations, but it means that the opponents of the Theocracy are to ally themselves and join themselves together in a world-wide confederacy to oppose Jehovah’s King and kingdom. It is the Theocracy that Jehovah’s witnesses announce and proclaim. It is the proclamation to the enemy to prepare for the battle against Jehovah. The Hierarchy and allied religionists are called upon to justify the action they have taken over a course of years, and particularly that now being taken against Jehovah’s faithful servants. The marginal reading of this part of the text is, “Sanctify war”; (Rotherham) “hallow a war.” Such is what the Hierarchy and allies are now doing. Religionists declare it to be a “holy war’’, “a war for Christian religion.” It is called a “Christian Front” movement, which makes war against those who support Jehovah God and his King and kingdom. Only the religious element could “sanctify” such a war. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy take the lead in declaring such to be a holy war. That religious organization puts forward Jesuits to howl against Jehovah’s witnesses, one of whom recently, by radio, broadcast words to this effect: Tf the American people would stand up on their hind legs, they could destroy Jehovah’s witnesses in a very short time.’ That same Jesuit priest, who bears the label of “father” and who advertises himself as a man of great ambition, is fully supported by the pope and other high officials of the Hierarchy. He is used to induce the poor deluded ones to stir up strife and attempt to break up all peaceable assemblies of those who do not concur with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. The proclamation of God’s message of truth is seized upon by them as an excuse for the Jesuits and other religionists to make war upon Jehovah’s witnesses in particular. In doing this they hesitate not to lie to the greatest extent in order to put over their wicked designs. The Hierarchy and other religionists are clearly shown to be the ones mentioned in the prophecy that “sanctify war”; and which was foreshadowed by Jehovah’s challenge to Tyre, Edom, Mount Seir, Philistia and the Babylonians to come on and make war.
15	In the work of proclaiming the day of vengeance of our God, Jehovah’s witnesses, who are Christians, are acting strictly in obedience to Jehovah’s commandments. They are commissioned thus to do, and must perform that commission. (Isa. 61:2) They must proclaim publicly and within the hearing of all as commanded: “Wake up fstir up (R.F.); rouse
(Rotherham)') the mighty men.” Who are the “mighty men” mentioned in the prophecy? Both the Scriptures and the physical facts show they are those of the “Hierarchy of Authority”, who exalt themselves and who are exalted by conscienceless politicians and fanatical radicals. They are the ones upon whom great honor is bestowed and who are held up as examples. Therefore the prophecy is directed to such mighty men, commanding them, in substance, to wit: Rouse yourselves and go at it, Hierarchy. You have been exalting yourselves for centuries and boasting as to what you are going to do; and nowmake good your boast. Raise the issue against the witnesses of the Almighty God. You have organized your “Catholic Action” as a body politic to conquer and control the world, defame the name of Almighty God, and oppose his Idngdom; now go right on and put pressure on all public officials of this w-orld, that is, political, judicial, legislative, police, executive, and all others who hear and exalt you and who join you in oppression and in opposition to the Theocratic government. Do this, and move into action against the witnesses of the Almighty God. Raise up your giant champion, that is to say, the modern-day Goliath, the corporate, dictatorial or totalitarian state. Cement together your arbitrary rulers. Organize your secret police and use them to spy on others, and punish all who may have in possession the Word of God or any explanation thereof. Cause your “yes men” in the legislative bodies to enact laws compelling flag-waving and saluting and the hailing of men, and also enact all other manner of statutes inflicting punishment upon those who attempt to exercise freedom of speech and freedom of worship. Plant your religious hirelings in the high official places of the present world powers and encourage them, particularly the judicial officers, to sell their judicial decisions for money, and at the same time to wrongfully inflict punishment upon those who dare to tell the truth of God’s Word. Raise your false cry against Jehovah’s w-itnesses, and denounce them as “Communists” or “reds”, and thus put the label upon everyone who does not favor your religious racket. Stir up the secular press and the radio owners and induce them to join with you in making false reports and publications to the people in the hope of strengthening your wicked position. You have for long influenced the people against God and his kingdom, while you have falsely claimed the right to rule the world in the place and stead of Christ. Now go to it, you big men; get together and see what you can do. You have been longing for a day to exert your power; you have been anxious for trouble or an excuse to fight, and now you shall be accommodated.
10	Furthermore the Lord says to his opponents: “Let all the men of war draw near; let them come up.”
THE WATCHTOWER.
295
October 1, 1939
The religious leaders, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, think to frighten, browbeat, coerce and compel all others to obey and bow to their dictates, and hence the Lord says to them: 'Come on and exhibit yourselves against the witnesses of Jehovah, who proclaim his truth. Do your utmost to stop them, if you will. Boycott the owners and operators of radio stations and compel them to refuse to broadcast anything that might shock your religious susceptibilities and expose your racket. Use the newspapers to proclaim lies against Jehovah’s servants, and employ men within your power to compel all other publications to support your religiouspolitical scheme to rule contrary to God’s will. After the judicial men of your organization commit grave offenses against the law of the land, such as selling justice or judicial decisions for money, cause the publishers of the press that are subsidized by your money to remain silent against such violators of the law. And let your mighty men continue to devise ways and means to hinder the proclamation of the message of God's kingdom, and in this do your very worst. This is your last show.’
17	For many years the religious leaders, by means of their propaganda campaigns, have claimed that they would convert the world to their religion. Such has been their way of peaceable means to accomplish the purpose and gain control of the world. Now the religionists are desperate and are ready to resort to and do resort to any means to accomplish their wrongful designs. Hence Jehovah, by his prophet, says to the mighty men that oppose the Theocracy: “Beat your plowshares into swords, and your prun-inghooks into spears; let the weak say, I am strong.” —Joel 3:10.
18	Now the time has arrived when these wicked ambitious religionists think to grab control of and rule the world; and in order that they might have the full length of their rope God says to them: ‘Go right on; turn your once peacetime schemes of making proselytes into militant weapons. You did not succeed in converting and gathering all nations into your religious-political camp; now employ all manner of force to get the people under your control. Your “Catholic Action” appears to serve you well; so go forward and openly announce your alliance with Fascists and Nazis to employ force to gain control of the governments of earth.’ The Lord taunts them by telling them to do their very worst.
18	Furthermore addressing that wicked crowd Jehovah says to them, in substance: ‘Your pruning hooks, which you have employed to dress your religious vines, have not fulfilled your expectations in causing all the people to join with you and become subject to your organization. Now try to oppress men, and hence beat your pruning hooks into spears,
that is, instruments of violence, and use violence in your efforts to regiment and control the people. Become open warriors, and thus be better equipped to fight against Jehovah’s witnesses and against Jehovah’s message and therefore against the Theocracy.’
80	Compared with the host of Almighty God every nation and every organization is weak and amounts to nothing. (Isa. 40:15) But to tickle the ambition of religionists, and to taunt them and feed their vanity, Jehovah sends this message to them by his faithful witnesses: “Let the weak [one] say, I am strong.” And so the vain deluded ones think themselves very strong to fight against all who take their stand on the side of Jehovah. Compared with the small number of Jehovah’s visible witnesses on the earth, and who appear to be entirely defenseless, the religious leaders in particular, together with their fanatical deluded ones, think themselves to be very strong. Professional politicians co-operate with such religionists because they think that is the best course to take to insure further political support. The politicians say publicly, “What we need is more religion,” without having any understanding of what “religion” really means. The religionists say, “The politicians are with us, and we must crush those who call themselves ‘Jehovah’s witnesses’.” These “mighty men”, so called, think themselves to be very strong against Jehovah God. The Devil and his wicked angels inject that thought into their minds. In all the totalitarian states the united efforts of the enemy are against Jehovah’s witnesses. In the so-called “democracies” there is a growing sentiment of the radical and political element to consider themselves strong and that they should destroy everything not agreeing with them, and particularly the witnesses of the Most High. All of these embrace “the nations that forget God”, because they fail to consider that God is Almighty and that his witnesses are acting under God’s commandment and that Jehovah will defend those who love and serve him. Without full faith in Jehovah and his kingdom it would now be impossible for any man to withstand the vicious attack of the combined enemy. Jehovah is the God of comfort, and, that the hope of his people may be strong, he puts into the mouth of his faithful servants this prayer, to wit: “Arise, 0 Lord; let not man prevail; let the heathen be judged in thy sight. Put them in fear, 0 Lord; that the nations may know themselves to be but men. Selah.”—Ps. 9:19, 20.
21	Some who profess to be consecrated to the Lord are weaker in faith than others, and because of little faith they for a time become fearful. For their aid and comfort Jehovah answers the foregoing prayer of his faithful ones and causes his prophet to say to those who need more faith: “I, even I, am be that comforteth you: who art thou, that thou shouldest
296
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man which shall be made as grass.”—Isa. 51:12.
22	It is only those who trust implicitly in and who diligently serve Jehovah that can now say, ‘I am “strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might”.’ (Eph. 6:10) Such are without fear and will have boldness in this day in proclaiming God’s message of truth as commanded. (1 John 4:17,18) Within the borders of Britain and America the major portion of the witness work is now carried forward by Jehovah’s witnesses. In the outlying countries, where the number of witnesses is small, the enemy has been bolder and more arrogant in opposing the work of the Most High. The vicious opposition of the enemy is now greatly increasing in America and in Great Britain, and such of itself indicates that Armageddon is near. It is now very apparent that the demons have taken possession of the minds of those who are against God and against his King. Satan knows his time is short, and hence he puts forth all his power to control those who know not Jehovah God. The recent disturbance at Madison Square Garden, New York, clearly demonstrated that the deluded opponents or radicals are under the complete control of Satan and his demons, the wicked angels. The demons are seizing control of the radical element in every part of the earth, and thus that wicked one, the Devil, moves his forces in rapid preparation for the final showdown. Hence Jehovah says to all nations: “Assemble yourselves, and come, all ye heathen [nations], and gather yourselves together round about: thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, 0 Lord.”—Joel 3:11.
23	The first part of this verse is addressed to the nations, all of whom are against God, except God’s “holy nation”. The latter part of this verse is a prayer of Jehovah’s “faithful servant” class, the “holy nation”. To the enemy forces under the immediate command of Gog, who is the first in command of Satan’s forces, Jehovah now says, according to the Revised Version: “Haste ye, and come, all ye nations round about." The time for the assembly and the beginning of the fight is short, and therefore action must be speeded up. Satan knows that his time is short, and he hastens to do the very thing that God commands to be done. (Rev. 12:12) The haste with which preparation is made for the battle is indicated by the prophet of God in these words: “The chariots [of war] shall rage in the streets [ways of the enemy organization], they shall justle one against another in the broad ways; they shall seem like torches, they shall run like the lightnings.”—Nahum 2:4.
24	Now “Catholic Action” is speeding up in every part of the earth. The political dictators, with whom the Hierarchy is allied, are making speedy movements to increase their own strength and to extend
their power to the point of completely preventing freedom of speech, of press, and of assembly, and freedom of worship. So frenzied are those of the more radical and deluded type that they move not according to the laws of dictators even, but act without the least semblance of legal authority, in their endeavor to prevent freedom of assembly and freedom of speech. All the physical facts now coming to pass clearly show that “the great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of [Jehovah]”. And what shall follow? “The mighty man [the enemy] shall cry there bitterly.”— Zeph. 1:14.
25	It is Jehovah’s day of vindication, and not only is he ready for the fight, but he welcomes it and invites the enemy to line up, saying to them: “Come, all ye [nations], and gather yourselves together round about.” Get ready for the fight; you have been boasting what you are going to do; now do it! Jehovah’s time is here for the vindication of his name, and so he invites the enemy to advance; and this he does by causing his witnesses, the remnant and their companions, to go out amongst the people and fearlessly proclaim his judgments that are written. Those who truly trust Jehovah delight to obey this command, and they with boldness proclaim the Theocracy; and the effect upon the religionists is to plague them even as locusts plagued the people in Egypt, and this incites the vicious to resentment, and “Catholic Action” increases. Jehovah, in substance, says to the enemy: ‘Surround them completely. Encircle my faithful witnesses now on the earth, and do your worst to hem them in by your vicious and cruel laws. Take away all liberty that your national laws once guaranteed to the people.’
20	In 1914 there began a “war in heaven” and the Lord Jesus and his angels fought against Satan and his forces, and Satan and his wicked crowd were cast down to the vicinity of the earth. (Rev. 12:7-9) Now the scene of final conflict is in the earth, and it appears that the following words of the foregoing prophecy of Joel are a prayer of the faithful to Jehovah : “Thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, 0 Lord.” (Joel 3:11) In support of this, it is written in another part of God’s prophecy: “I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty ones for mine anger, even them that rejoice in my highness. The noise of a multitude in the mountains, like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered together; the Lord of hosts mustereth the host of the battle.”— Isa. 13: 3,4.
27	The end of Satan and his horde of wicked ones is at hand, and that includes both the visible and the invisible part of his organization, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, that now vainly attempts
October 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
297
to ride on the top of every nation. Therefore Jehovah says to them, and he commands his witnesses to continue to repeat his declaration, to wit: “Let the heathen be wakened [Let the nations bestir themselves (B.F.)], and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat; for there will I sit to judge all the heathen round about.”—Joel 3:12.
28	Therefore Jehovah’s witnesses, in obedience to God’s command, must proclaim and do proclaim the message, to Wit: “For it is the day of the Lord’s vengeance, and the year of recompences for the controversy of Zion.” (Isa. 34: 8) The faithful servants of God will now have in mind their commission and will perform the same by declaring the day of the vengeance of our God. (Isa. 61:2) For centuries Jehovah has permitted the enemy to operate without let or hindrance, but now he will settle the account with the enemy for all time. Therefore Jehovah maneuvers the enemy into position and stirs them up and causes his faithful witnesses to have part in this work by declaring the day of his vengeance against all wickedness.
29	To all the nations that have allied themselves with the Devil Jehovah now says: “Come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat”; that is to say, the place of judgment and battle. Jehovah maneuvers the enemy right to that place or condition. He not only selects the battlefield, but draws out the enemy and all the people who support the leaders therein and compels them to show on whose side they are lined up. He forces them to show themselves to be against the Theocracy. The division is now rapidly taking place, and the people of the nations are dividing themselves into the two classes, one designated “the goats”; and the other, who are of good will toward God, are known as the “other sheep” of the Lord. It is a thrilling time, and the sound of the marching forces in preparation for battle thrills the heart of every one who loves righteousness and hates iniquity. Long have God’s people waited for this time, and they rejoice that it is here, because they know the Righteous One, the Mighty God, and his King shall gain complete victory. Jehovah leaves no excuse for the enemy to ever say they had not sufficient notice of his purpose against them. The host of Satan gathers from all parts of the earth against the Lord. That wicked horde is under the immediate command of Gog, the first in command under Satan. To that wicked crowd the Lord addresses his speech, to wit: “Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I am against thee, 0 Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal; and I will turn thee back, and put hooks into thy jaws, and I will bring thee forth, and all thine army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed with all sorts of armour, even a great company, with bucklers and shields, all of them handling swords.”—Ezek. 38: 3, 4.
80	In 1919 Jehovah brought back his faithful people from the power of the enemy’s restraint, and his promise to them is that thereafter they shall dwell safely under his protection and care. (Ezek. 38:8) Having given his word to protect his own now, his remnant know that the enemy “shall not prevail against thee”.—Jer. 1:19.
81	The words of Jesus addressed to his faithful servants show the enemy Satan gathering the nations to the battle of the great day of God Almighty. (Rev. 16:13-16) The faithful on earth now see the fulfillment of this prophecy of Revelation. At the “valley of Jehoshaphat”, or final judgment place, Jehovah causes them to assemble, and says: “For there will I sit to judge all the nations round about.” (R.F.) No part of Satan’s organization will be omitted from that assembly for judgment and execution. As the mighty Judge and Commander-in-Chief of all the host of righteousness Jehovah sits there to command and direct the execution of his judgment, which execution is done by Christ Jesus, his Executive Officer and Vindicator. That will be no kind of trial, such as is held in earthly courts. There will be no briefs filed and no arguments heard. It will be the time of execution. God has given Christ Jesus the “authority to execute judgment”. (John 5:27) The Lord Jesus Christ will there be pitted against the forces of Satan, and Jehovah sits, as it were, to umpire the fight and make known the result, and thereafter every mouth shall be for ever stopped that utters opposition to Almighty God. Righteousness shall triumph. This full assurance now gives great joy to those on the side of the Theocratic government and thrills their hearts with unspeakable courage and gladness.
82	At this point of the prophecy it appears that Jehovah addresses his beloved Son, who is always faithfully obedient in carrying out the will of his Father. For many centuries Christ Jesus has waited for this hour, that he might vindicate his Father’s name, and which will constitute his fullness of joy. It is a time of great joy to his heart when he hears Jehovah say to him, and to his heavenly host acting under the command of Christ, the great Field Marshal: “Put ye in the sickle; for the harvest [of the grape-vine of Satan] is ripe; come, get you down; for the press is full, the fats overflow; for their wickedness is great.” (Joel 3:13) Now the time has arrived when the knife must be thrust into Satan’s vineyard. “And another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven, he also having a sharp sickle. And another angel came out from the altar, which had power over fire; and cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth; for her grapes are fully ripe.”—Rev. 14:17,18.
298
THE WATCHTOWER
Bhooklyn, N. Y.
88	The purpose of thrusting in the sickle is to cut Satan’s vine loose from its moorings, which are deep in the earth. The vine is to be cast into God’s winepress and there trodden and destroyed. In connection with the putting in of the sickle is also included the gathering of the nations to the place of final conflict, and in this part of the work Jehovah’s witnesses have some part by declaring the purpose of Jehovah. According to another translation this part of the text reads: “Thrust ye in the vintage knife, for grown ripe is the vintage.” (Rotherham) Surely that means that Satan’s organization, and particularly “Christendom”, which forms the chief part of the earthly organization of the enemy, is now ripe and ready for destruction.
84	Further Jehovah says to Christ, his King and Executioner: “Come, get you down [come, tread ye (R.V.); go in, tread down (Rotherham)].” “The wine-press is full, the vats overflow.” (A.R.P.) (Rotherham) In common usage the description is this: The earth is full of wickedness and violence, and the time for completely wiping it out is at hand. When the battle of Armageddon begins, the winepress or vats will be full, because the dividing of the people will then be completed and the “goats” will be on the left hand and those of good will, the “other sheep”, on the right hand of Christ Jesus, the Judge. Everything will be ready for the clash of power. That "wine-press” will be a tremendous one, with capacity to hold all the nations that are against Jehovah God. (Rev. 14:19,20) The fruits of the enemy organization are now ripe. Those fruits of wickedness are ready for gathering. They are ripening or culminating in ever-increasing malicious slander, libel and assaults upon Jehovah’s servants. The Hierarchy have directed these assaults and declare the same to be a “holy war”, and hence they have ‘sanctified’ that war, declaring their determination to crush the truth, to the end that the Hierarchy may satisfy their vaulting ambition. Concerning this Jehovah, by his prophet, says: “For their wickedness is great.” Of necessity this refers to the “last days” or “perilous times”. (2 Tim. 3:1) It is the time when religionists have reached the superlative degree of hypocrisy, demonstrating clearly to all sane persons that such religionists, who claim to serve God but are hypocrites, ‘have a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof.’ (2 Tim. 3:5) It is the final fulfillment of the prophecy quoted by the Lord Jesus and directed to the same class of religionists, when he said: “Ye hypocrites, well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying, This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.”—Matt. 15: 7-9.
35	It is the time when religion has completely headed up and gone to seed. Their acts of wickedness Jehovah particularly refers to in Joel 3: 2-6, which wickedness religionists have done and committed against the faithful servants of Almighty God. By their cruel and wicked deeds committed the religionists have challenged Jehovah and Christ Jesus to prevent them from carrying on behind their breastwork of lies: “Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us; for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves.” (Isa. 28:15) Those hypocritical religious leaders have desperately tried and continue to try to destroy the temple company of the Lord, and Jehovah declares that he will destroy the hypocrites.— 1 Cor. 3:17.
30	Surely Almighty God Jehovah has caused his sacred record, the Bible, to be written in such manner and set forth in such order that it can be understood and appreciated only by those who love him and who therefore desire to be guided in the right way. (Ps. 25:9) Every part of his Word is harmonious. This is to be expected, and now we know it is true. Some parts of his prophecy were written centuries ago by his faithful servants, the prophets. Long years thereafter other parts of his prophecy were delivered by Christ Jesus, the great Prophet, and caused to be recorded by his faithful servant John. (Revelation 1:1, 2) By his prophet Joel Jehovah declares his command to Christ Jesus, his glorious Vindicator, to march forward to the battle of Armageddon. At The Revelation is recorded the act of Christ Jesus in joyful and full obedience to the command of his Father. A great thrill that will be for every creature that is privileged to see the forward march of the mighty Vindicator, which John describes in these words, to wit: “And I saw heaven opened, and behold, a white horse; and he that sat upon him was called Faithful and True, and in righteousness he doth judge and make war. His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns; and he had a name written, that no man knew but he himself. And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood; and his name is called The Word of God. And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean.” “And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.”—Rev. 19:11-14,16.
31	It is the “time of war”! It is to be the final war. All the hosts of heaven will with the most intense interest behold it. The faithful on the earth will discern it and have full assurance in advance of what
October 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
299
shall be the result. The zero hour has struck, and the Mighty Warrior, leading his invincible host, is marching to the attack. The deluge was the climax of the first world of wickedness and violence, and that foreshadowed the climax of the “present world" of
wickedness and violence. Let those who love Jehovah and his Kingdom now note the onward march of the heavenly host and with eagerness await the result as foretold in the prophecies.
(To be continued)
SIXTH TRUMPET
(( A NT> the sixth angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four horns of the golden altar which is x before God, saying to the sixth angel which had the trumpet, Loose the four angels which are bound in the great river Euphrates/’—Rev. 9:13,14.
The ancient city of Babylon was the greatest city ever built upon the river Euphrates. By the commerce carried on that river the city was supported and maintained. It was built on both sides of the river and had suspended gates that swung out over the river, and these furnished a means of military protection and defense. The commercial and political element ruled the city, but did so through the power and influence of the religionists. Babylon is one of the names the Scriptures give to the Devil’s organization, and particularly when the religion of Satan is in the saddle and controls. “Organized Christianity,” so called, is a part of Satan’s organization, since he has gotten control thereof; and it is supported by the people, pictured by the great river Euphrates.
In ancient Babylon the men of influence were the religionists and exercised power by and with the aid of the commercial and political allies. Today the clergy of so-called “organized Christianity” exercise their power of control by and through the commercial giants, who control Big Business, and by the dictators and politicians, who make and enforce the laws and carry on the governments. All the elements of Satan’s organization, and particularly the clergy part of it, oppose the message of truth concerning God’s kingdom and persecute those who proclaim it. They induce their allies, Big Business and the political clement, to persecute God’s anointed witnesses on earth. Had it not been for their evil influence so exercised today there would be millions of people praising God and hailing Christ as earth’s rightful King, and doubtless the battle of Armageddon would be unnecessary. It is the evil influence of these rulers of Babylon that holds its prisoners in restraint.
Note that at the sound of the “sixth angel” a voice is heard from among the four horns of the golden altar in God’s holy temple. It must therefore be a voice of one of Jehovah’s organization, to wit, Christ Jesus, the great Priest of the Most High, that gives that “voice”, because it comes from all parts of the altar, the place of sacrifice, and Christ is the one great sacrifice for all. The command given is: “Loose the four angels that are bound at the great river Euphrates.” (A.Ii.P.) In this connection mark another prophecy from Jehovah (Isaiah 45:1,13): “Thus saith the-Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; and the gates shall not be shut. I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his ways: he shall build
my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for price nor reward, saith the Lord of hosts.” By this prophecy Jehovah pictures Christ his beloved, the great antitypical Cyrus, acting as his chief officer, swinging back the two leaved gates of Babylon that the imprisoned ones may be loosed. In this work the Lord uses his angels invisible to men.
The word “angels”, however, does not always apply to creatures having a spirit organism, but often means a commissioned messenger with a message from Jehovah God. Matthew 25:31 states that spirit creatures with spirit bodies accompany Christ Jesus as his servants when he comes and serve at God’s temple. At Revelation 9:14 Christ Jesus at the temple, as the great High Priest of Jehovah, is shown giving direction to the sixth angel that had the trumpet, saying: “Loose the four angels [that is, commissioned messengers] that are bound [ (Diaglott) who have been bound] at the great river Euphrates.” (A.Il.V.) The number “four” here used signifies the organization of Jehovah’s witnesses in the four quarters of the earth, in a strong working body, doing the service of Jesus Christ under commandment from Christ Jesus and Jehovah. The fact that the command is given to loose them shows that up to a time certain they have been bound. The “four angels” or commissioned messengers are all of Jehovah’s witnesses anointed and commissioned and commanded by him to bear the testimony of Jesus Christ to the nations of the earth. The language used clearly implies that these witnesses must first be loosed from restraint and then be prepared and equipped for the work assigned to them.
During the World War period the “faithful servant” class were in prison or restraint by Satan’s organization. The release of the faithful remnant of Jehovah’s servants took place in March, 1919, and on the 27th day of March, 1919, efforts were begun to organize and carry forward the witness work concerning Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ. At that time there was no organization prepared for the work. It was then that God, according to the prophetic picture of Revelation 12:14, ‘took his woman into the wilderness,’ that is to say, took the people of his organization into the condition which he had prepared for them. This preparatory work progressed and reached a climax in July, 1927, at the international convention of Jehovah’s witnesses at Toronto, Ontario, when the proclamation was sent forth “To the Peoples of Christendom”, and supported by a public address, which proclamation and address were shortly thereafter issued in a publication under the title “Freedom for the People”, and millions of copies of which were distributed throughout “Christendom”.
The Lord sent his angel invisible to sound the. sixth trumpet, and at the same time the command is given to loose the bound ones. Such message by his angel must of
300
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
necessity be a “woe” to Satan’s organization that rules the earth. (Rev. 8:13; 9:12) The Lord caused his people to assemble in general convention in Toronto, Canada, that July, 1927. The Lord had so arranged conditions that the broadcasting combine was put in a position that its radio facilities must be used to the glory of the Lord. Unwittingly Satan’s agents fell into the Lord’s trap, and this increased the torment for Satan’s organization. Before a visible audience of 15,000 people, and within the hearing of an unseen audience of millions by radio, an address entitled “Freedom for the People” was delivered at this Toronto assembly, and the resolution entitled “To the Peoples of Christendom” was read, and the visible and the invisible audience by vote adopted the resolution. Fifty-three radio stations were linked together, a record hookup for then, extending from the Atlantic to the Pacific coast, and these, together with shortwave broadcasting apparatus, heralded the truth through the United States and Canada and to the lands across the sea. The spirit and substance of that message was: “Loose those who are bound in Satan’s organization and let them go free.” The Lord sent his angel to direct this message, and caused it to be given, and used his witnesses on earth in connection therewith, and it was heard by millions; and then later more than fifty million printed copies were put in the hands of the people; which message follows:
“resolution
“To the Peoples of ‘Christendom’:
“The International Bible Students in general convention assembled send greetings:
“As Christians and witnesses to the name of Jehovah God we deem it our privilege and duty to call your attention to the following vital facts:
“First: That God made of one blood all peoples and nations of men to dwell on the earth, and granted to all peoples equal rights. There is therefore no just cause or excuse for one nation to make war against another nation.
“Second: That the foremost nations of the earth claim to be Christian nations and, taken collectively, they constitute ‘Christendom’ or ‘organized Christianity’, so called; that the men chiefly responsible for the claim that these are Christian nations are the clergymen of the various religious denominations who call themselves by the name of Christ but who in fact have denied him; that their purpose of claiming that these nations are Christian is to induce the peoples to believe that said nations, although military and cruel, are the representatives of God and his Christ on earth; that such claim is fraudulent and false and has turned the minds of millions of honest people away from the true God and from his Christ; that the invisible ruler of the nations of ‘Christendom’, or ‘organized Christianity’, so called, is Satan the Devil, who has fathered the scheme of forming ‘organized Christianity’ to deceive the people and to keep them in subjection to himself and his agencies.
“That the masses of the peoples of. the nations are entitled to self-government exercised by the people for the general welfare of all; but instead of enjoying such rights a small minority rules; that the money power of the world has been concentrated into the hands of a few men called high financiers, and these in turn have corrupted the men who make and execute the laws of the nations, and the
faithless clergy have voluntarily joined forces with the high financiers and professional politicians and that said unholy alliance constitutes the governing powers that rule the peoples; that the masses of the peoples, acting under a misapprehension of the true facts, have borne up, carried, supported and maintained ‘organized Christianity’; and that without the support of the common people the unholy alliance constituting ‘organized Christianity’ could not long exist.
“Third: That for centuries the privileges enjoyed by men have been wholly unequal and unfair. The multitudes have produced the wealth of the world, but have been unjustly deprived of the fruits of their labors. That the leaders of ‘Christendom’, instead of teaching the children of men the doctrines of Christ, whom they claim to follow, teach them to murder their fellow creatures; and that now the rulers are amalgamating the common people with the military, in order to make all the peoples a part of and subject to their great war machine; that by unjust laws the common people, contrary to their own wishes, have been compelled to go to war against each other, resulting in great sorrow and suffering, multitudes of broken hearts and millions of untimely graves; that ‘organized Christianity’ has turned a deaf ear to the petitions and entreaties of the people for relief, and now the cries of the oppressed people have entered into the ears of Jehovah God, and his time is at hand to give the peoples deliverance and freedom.
“Fourth: That Jehovah is the only true God, the Friend and Benefactor of the peoples. He has now set his beloved Son Christ Jesus upon his throne and bids all the peoples of earth to hear and obey him who is earth’s rightful King.
“Fifth: That the kings and rulers of the earth, to wit, those constituting the said unholy alliance, have been duly notified that God has set his King upon his throne and that his kingdom is at hand; but they refuse to understand or to take heed, and they walk on in darkness. Therefore God has decreed and declared that there shall come upon the world a time of tribulation such as never was known and that during that trouble ‘Christendom’, or ‘organized Christianity’, so called, and all of Satan’s organization shall be destroyed; and that Christ Jesus, the righteous King, will assume complete authority and control and will bless the peoples of earth.
“Sixth: That it must be now apparent to all thoughtful people that relief, comfort and blessings so much desired by them can never come from the unrighteous system of ‘Christendom’, or ‘organized Christianity’, and that there is no reason to give further support to that hypocritical and oppressive system. In this hour of perplexity Jehovah God bids the peoples to abandon and for ever forsake ‘Christendom’, or ‘organized Christianity’, and to turn completely away from it, because it is the Devil’s organization, and to give it no support whatsoever, and that the peoples give their heart’s devotion and allegiance wholly to Jehovah God and to his King and kingdom and receive full freedom and the blessings God has in store for them.
“Seventh: For four thousand years the cherished desire of Jews has been God’s Messianic kingdom. For nineteen centuries that kingdom has been the hope of real Christians. It is now at hand. True to his promise God by and through the reign of Christ will lift the burdens of the peo-
October 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER.
301
pies, free them from war, fraud and oppression, from sickness, suffering and death, and give to them a righteous government and the blessings of everlasting peace, prosperity, life and happiness.”
Returning now to Revelation 9: In response to the commandment to unloose those bound at the Euphrates river it is written: “And the four angels were loosed, that had been prepared for the hour and day and month and year, that they should kill the third part of men.” (Verse 15, A.R.V.) That loosing, which began in A. D. 1919 and which reached a climax in the forward movement in 1927, was done by the Greater Cypis, Christ Jesus. He commanded that his angel, who held the sixth trumpet, should give the signal to go. Everything was prepared, and the onward march began with great zeal. (Ps. 146: 7; Isa. 45:1,13) It
was then that Jehovah’s witnesses were turned loose upon “Christendom” to do the work which God has provided for them to do. That convention at Toronto had been announced in The Watchtower as “a service convention” ; which indeed it was. It was there that God’s people by the Resolution adopted introduced themselves to the people of “Christendom” as “witnesses to the name of Jehovah God”, marking them as the people whom God has taken out for his name. “The four angels,” that is to say, Jehovah’s anointed witnesses, scattered to the four corners of the earth, were now better prepared than they had previously been to carry the message of God and his kingdom to the people. That marked the beginning of a campaign calling upon the people to break away from the bondage of Satan’s organization and declare themselves for Jehovah and his kingdom.
OBEDIENCE INSTEAD OF RELIGION
TEHOVAH’S sanctuary class must first learn obedience I before having a part in the vindication of his great J name. God provides his covenant people with his Word and gives them an understanding thereof in due time, that they may be instructed, and then they must do his will. To those who are in the covenant with him he says: “Be thou instructed, 0 Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee; lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited.” (Jer. 6:8) These words of Jeremiah apply to those now on earth who are in a covenant to do God’s will. The wise man is one who diligently seeks to know the will of God, as stated in His Word, and who then hastens to do that will. To merely hear with the ears what his Word says is not sufficient: “Thou seest that faith wrought with [Abraham’s] works, and by works was faith made perfect.” (Jas. 2:22, R.V.) This shows that those are in a state of delusion who take the letter of the Word and not the spirit of it, and who fail to do what God tells them. Mere formalism in service of the letter of the Word is displeasing to Jehovah because it is mockery, and, says Galatians 6:7, “God is not mocked.”
When Christ Jesus appeared for judgment in A.D. 1918 and to take the approved ones into the temple of God, the facts and the Scriptures show, there were two classes before him, one that indulged in formalism, such as the pious, sanctimonious in appearance, those who loved to engage in public prayer and fasting that they might appear good to others, as having developed themselves to such a state that they were fit and necessary for the kingdom of heaven; and another and different class, namely, the ones who are meek or teachable, faithful in the performance of what they learned to be the will of God, and doing that will with joy, never looking to their own powers or attainments. The first class mentioned is the disobedient, and the other mentioned, the obedient class. These two classes must be separated, that the approved ones may be prepared for the work in the temple and for the vindication of Jehovah’s name in connection with the battle of the great day. Those of both classes stand before the judgment seat, having sacrificed their right to live as human creatures. But now something more important has arisen. They must obey. “Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as
in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry.” (1 Sam. 15:22, 23) The prophecy of Zechariah delivered in connection with the building of the temple at Jerusalem shows both the disobedient and the obedient class. The separation of the two classes takes place, and the obedient ones are prepared and received into the spiritual temple of God, and have a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
The opening of the seventh chapter of Zechariah’s prophecy discloses certain men of the Israelites being sent from the city of Bethel to pray and make speech before the temple builders. This occurred more than two years before the temple was completed, which proves that these men were not sent to pray at the temple; and therefore the Authorized Version is a poor rendering of the text of verses one and two. The correct rendering (the A.R.V.) is: “And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Darius, that the word of Jehovah came unto Zechariah in the fourth day of the ninth month, even in Chislev. Now they of Bethel had sent Sharezer and Regcm-melech, and their men, to entreat the favor of Jehovah.” In the Hebrew text, the expression “house of God” as found in the Authorized Version is Bethel. The meaning of this text here is that these men were sent from the city of Bethel to Jerusalem. Those people had returned with the Jewish remnant from captivity in Babylon and now occupied Bethel. (Ezra 2:28; Neh. 7:32; 11:31) The two men Sharezer and Regem-melech were proceeding under names or titles of foreign derivation, although now living in the holy land, and this suggests that they were not entirely in line with Jehovah’s arrangement to carry forward his work. Those men therefore fitly represent that class of professed followers of Christ who heard the truth and who took part in the work, the “Elijah work” of God’s people, and who have made much ado about their being a part of the house of God, that is, “Bethel.”
About 1918 and thereafter certain companies of dreamers have been in evidence, claiming to be in “present truth” and in line for the kingdom. The two men coming from Bethel, as above named, showed by their course of action
302
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
that they were “old-timers” who had not kept up to date with the Lord’s truth and service. Likewise the class they foreshadowed prove to be “old-timers” belonging to and holding to old forms set up by men, such as observing dates and months, times and seasons. (Gal. 4:10) They have not entirely broken away from Satan’s organization, but still think they should be subject to the political powers that rule the land, and they refuse to tell the truth about these as being a part of Satan’s organization lest they cause someone to turn away from what they call “the truth”. These come to “pacify the face of JehoVah” (Rotherham) ; and this suggests a class of persons who indulge chiefly in so-called “devotional exercise”, delighting to sing hymns and tell of their own virtues and of their devotion to some hero of faith, but they show no real zeal and devotion to the service of the Lord God as he has commanded. They even call the hypocritical clergy, who form a part of the Devil’s organization, “our Christian brethren.” Since they are not a part of God’s organization, probably this is not out of the way for them to call the hypocrites “Christian brethren”. It is no wonder they desire the soft pedal to be put on when Satan’s organization is mentioned. “Birds of a feather flock together.”
Joshua the high priest and Zechariah and Haggai the prophets were at work at the temple when these men who appeared to be very devout came there to show themselves. Doubtless they wore long, well-greased beards and had a very solemn and sanctimonious air and spoke with great gravity and sanctimonious solemnity to the priests at the temple, and, while speaking, shed a few crocodile tears. Verse three says they came “to speak unto the priests which were in the house of the Lord of hosts, and to the prophets, saying, Should I weep in the fifth month, separating myself, as I have done these so many years ?” When they were in Babylon they had sat down and wept, and ever since had been great sticklers for formalities, and they had continued to indulge in shedding tears, even when they had been favored by being brought back to their homeland. They did not appreciate God’s goodness, but thought they must continue to weep and to appear to be good men. For sixteen years they had seen the temple lie in waste and nothing being done, and yet they continued to shed great tears at regular intervals that others might say: ‘Behold these devout men.’ Had they been really sincere and devoted to God they would have risen up long before, ceased their weeping, bravely and fervently faced the enemy, and joyfully entered into the work of building the temple at God’s commandment.
Since 1916, which marked the death of a prominent servant of the Lord, it is even so with the class above mentioned, and particularly after 1918. There are those who were brought out of Babylon, or Satan’s organization, and given the truth that was published prior to that date, and because one man, their earthly leader, was taken away from them, they said: ‘There is no more truth, and we will sit together and talk about the past and weep over what we have lost.’ The Lord has very marvelously foreshadowed all these minute things that are now being enacted, and this he has done for the very purpose of aiding the faithful ones to discern between the hypocrites and the zealous servants of God in order that the faithful might be greatly
strengthened and prepared to press forward in the battle of the great day.
The men appearing at Jerusalem inquired of the priests and the prophets, asking if they should weep in the fifth and seventh months and separate themselves as they had been doing for many years. The seventh day of the fifth month was the day that Babylon had destroyed Jerusalem and the temple. (2 Ki. 25:8,9) They now saw faithful men rebuilding the temple; and not seeing these faithful men weeping, but working with joy, these pious hypocrites evidently thought to rebuke the builders in some measure by thus inquiring and at the same time showing themselves to be very, extremely good men. The Lord shows it was no longer proper to fast and to weep, but that the ‘fast of the fifth month shall be joy and gladness’.—Zech. 8:19.
Since the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple of Jehovah, and the gathering of the faithful together, it has been a time of joy; but those ‘dreamers’, the “old-timers” who hold to the traditions of men, continue to fast and weep, and verily they have their reward, which is their approval amongst themselves. (Matt. 6:16) The present-day weeping ones do not see that the Lord Jesus is at the temple. In fact, that is one great truth that they vehemently deny, and they use strong language against Jehovah’s witnesses because they declare that the Lord is at his holy temple. This shows that the temple docs not exist for them, that they do not see the temple, and arc not of it, and hence are not born of God’s organization Zion, and are not taught of him. (Isa. 54:13) If they had been gathered unto the Lord and anointed they would see the great and wonderful truths which the Lord now reveals to his faithful ones. They would cease all outward formalities of fasting and weeping. ‘All of the temple show forth the glory of the Lord,’ and ‘the joy of the Lord is their strength’.—Ps. 29:9; Nch. 8:10.
Jehovah then gave his prophet a message to be delivered to these “old-time” weepers. Zechariah 7: 4 says: “Then came the word of the Lord of hosts unto me.” The giving of the word to Zechariah finds a parallel in the increased light that comes to the faithful after A.D. 1922. Note now with joy some of the wonderful things the Lord has brought to the temple class since that date. It has pleased the Lord to use The Watchtower as a means of conveying his message to his covenant people; and in the year 1923 the Lord began to bring the message of joy to his hungry ones and they learned for the first time the meaning of the text, Nehemiah 8:10, “The joy of Jehovah is your strength.” (A.fi.F.) Then in February of the same year the Lord revealed to his people that the cup of wine at the Memorial pictures good cheer resulting from the coming of the King and the kingdom. (The Watchtower 1923, page 56) Then came for the first time the correct understanding of the parable of the talents and of the pounds, which also involve the joy of the Lord. (The Watchtower 1923, pages 35,71) Then the parable of the virgins, showing that the oil in their vessels pictures joy and that the joy is in them because of God’s favor. (The Watchtower 1923, page 296) Since then Jehovah has continued to cause his lightnings to flash upon the temple, and the temple class has continued to rejoice and put forth increased zeal and energy in his service.
October 1, 1939
fEe WATCHTOWER.
303
Knowing that the Lord Jesus is at the temple all of the temple rejoice. It would be entirely inappropriate for them to weep, and it would therefore be displeasing to the Lord. Hence the Lord commanded Zechariah to speak to these “old-time weepers” and say: “When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me, even to me?” (7:5) The divine message of advice and instruction was and is for all of God’s covenant people, that is to say, the ones holding responsible positions as well as all others, including the older Mordecai-Naomi class of the remnant, and the Esther and Ruth class that came to a knowledge of the truth later. This part of the prophecy shows that all of these had indulged to some measure in things which were no longer proper. They had mourned and wept in the past; but, now that the Lord is at the temple, they must no longer fast and weep, because it is a time of joy.
The very language of the fifth verse of the prophecy shows that fasting “in the fifth and seventh month” must have been a self-imposed fast in commemoration of the destruction of Jerusalem. (2 Ki. 25:25,26) There is no evidence that Jehovah by his prophets during the seventy years’ captivity enjoined these fasts upon the exiles. They had instituted these fasts at the instance of men. Likewise the many formalities that have been indulged in by the covenant people of God have been and are the institutions of men, and concerning such the words of the apostle are
here very fitting, to wit: “If you died with Christ from the elements of the world, why, as living in the world, do you subject yourselves to ordinances: (‘Eat not,’ ‘taste not,’ ‘handle not’; all which things are consumed in the using;) according to the commandments and teachings of men? which ordinances, having a wordy show of wisdom in selfdevised worship and humility, by a non-indulgcnce of the body, not in any honor, are only for a gratification of the flesh.”—Col. 2: 20-23, Diag.
These modern dreamers and fasters were following the instructions of men, such as “character development”, which is pleasing to their own flesh and to other persons; and they think to do so to make themselves fit subjects for heaven, and that they may appear in the sight of others as approved ones. They abstain from things that are not forbidden by Jehovah, while at the same time they indulge in things that are forbidden by him. Their fasts, therefore, are not set by Jehovah. The unnatural life of self-affliction is not pleasing to God, but it pleases God for one to be active and positive in bearing the ‘fruits of his kingdom’ as he has commanded and to do so with zeal and joy. (Matt. 21:43) One who indulges in a “form of godliness’’, and has his heart affections on himself or on some other creature, could not be pleasing to God. Outward show of righteousness is moekcry, and to such the Lord is not blind.
LETTERS
DETERMINED TO CARRY OUT THE SUGGESTION
Dear Brother Rutherford:
In January, 1939, the Society suggested that more time might be occupied in the witness work, and suggested that sixty hours per month per publisher is not unreasonable.
Although somewhat advanced in years, I determined that by the Lord’s grace I would carry out the suggestion. During the cold winter months I did not reach this quota. But when the weather got warm and the days longer I was able to put in more time in the field.
Today, July 31, 1939, I am 81 years of age; and, in making out a report of my kingdom activities for the month of July, I find the following: Hours in service, 81; booklets placed, 308; bound books placed, 17.
As we approach the full establishment of the Kingdom, the Lord is placing on his table more nourishing food for his people. And now we have the book Salvation, “a text-book for the Jonadabs.”
I look forward with joy to the “Divine Mandate” Testimony Period during the month of August, during which time we will place Salvation with the people of good will.
It is very gratifying to note the number of good will people we find while out in field service. Surely the Lord is gathering in the “great multitude”.
With much Christian love,
Your fellow witness
B. H. Busby.
HAPPY TO KNOW THE OUTCOME
Dear Brother Rutherford:
The company of Paris, assembled for the first time in the new hall, sends you cordial greetings. We assure you of our profound sympathy for your courageous fight against the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and the whole Satanic organization. We thank you for
your example and encouragement that you give us, so that we may be faithful to the Theocratic government of Jehovah. The publishers of Paris are engaged with boldness in the same fight, especially as we see’the Catholic Hierarchy getting the upper hand in France. We are happy to know, by the grace of Jehovah, the outcome of the defamatory work of that cruel, diabolic organization. For this reason we arc determined to continue our activity for the King and his kingdom.
Your sojourn in Paris at the time of the Paris convention, August, 1937, we still remember, and we now extend to you a new invitation to come to Paris.
Our best wishes are with you at the occasion of the New York convention, end of June, especially for the public lecture at this occasion. We rejoice in advance that we know the message and that the language is getting stronger, more precise and more actual.
We are persuaded that our new and bigger hall in Paris will be an efficient means in the organization and the accomplishment of the “strange work” of Jehovah, and especially in the interest of the Jonadabs, as we now already have more than three-fourths Jonadabs.
We ask Jehovah his benediction upon your work. Association of Jehovah’s witnesses in Paris, France.
(Continued from page 290)
vah’s witnesses with its hub at New York City. The author of this book for the times describes it as “A text-book for the Jonadabs”. But a study of its 384 pages of contents will prove to you it is meat in due season and a joy to all anointed Christians as well. The author’s edition is still available, containing a facsimile of a letter to the reader in the author’s own hand and which you will much appreciate. This edition being limited, and the initial costs being heavy, a contribution of 50c is asked per copy. Early translation of Salvation in other languages is assured.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
NATIONAL DIRECTOR, AMERICAN JEWISH ALLIANCE, WRITES:
“Mr. Joseph F. Rutherford. Dear Sir: I have noticed in your open letter to Mayor La Guardia published in Kingdom News, Vol. 1, No. 4, that you take the occasion to protest to the mayor of New York the attacks made by Cough-linites on peaceful Jewish citizens of the City of New York. Permit me to thank you heartily for the expression of sympathy on your part to our people and the words of sympathy in our behalf. It is indeed the sympathy of men like you that give us in these dark days that sustenance in faith in humanity and in the brotherhood of man. We are fully convinced that the good sense of the American people will reject the bigotry and intolerance preached by men like Coughlin and will sweep clean their influence in the American community. I extend a hand of warm thanks to you.”
AT WETTINGEN (AARGAU), SWITZERLAND
“Sunday, June 25, between 9 and 10 p.m., we heard Judge Rutherford’s lecture over shortwave 16:85 meters, in our own room, after our Watchtower study. We could hear almost every word as distinctly as if we were personally in the Madison Square Garden. A brother wrote down parts of the talk in shorthand and afterwards translated it for us. At times the message came in thunderously. It must have been a powerful witness. But sometimes we could also hear a fairly loud howling and whistling in the background ; but it was drowned out by Judge Rutherford’s voice. Was that the Catholic Action? It was a wonderful sensation to be there in spirit, though, with exception of a few words, we could not understand the language. We also heard tremendous applause, and we could not help but also clap our hands. We are looking forward with rejoicing and great expectancy to receive this message in printed form.” (Dated June 26, 1939)
BUS DRIVER, ON DAY OFF, TAKEN FOR A RIDE
“An automobile drove up and the driver (he was alone) asked me whether I had any of Rutherford's books. lie said his mother wanted some, and if I would get in the ear he would take me to his mother’s house. As I thought he resembled a man whom I had witnessed to a short time before, I didn’t hesitate to get in the car. He immediately drove out of the territory I was working, so I asked him where his mother lived. He said: ‘Just forget about that. I’m just taking you in the car to inform you to ecase working and quit peddling that “crap”. And that means all of you Jehovah’s witnesses here in town. The quicker you people quit this work, the better off it will be for all of you.’ While he had been saying this I had been sizing him up and noticed he had on no collar, but a ring around his neck indicated that he had worn a collar as if he might have been a priest. I said, ‘I think that you are a priest, and I believe I can identify you if I see you again.’ With these words he turned very red in the face. I-said: ‘You know what this work is all about and also what will happen to you for opposing it.’ Thereupon he slowed down at the curb and asked me where I lived. I told him about two blocks from there. He then said: ‘I’ll let you out here, but don’t go back into the territory.’ I immediately went back and worked for two more hours, but wasn’t bothered any more that day. He did not have any license plates on his car. My experience
304
taught me that witnesses should be careful about entering cars with strangers unless the people appear to be or you are sure they are persons of good will.”
IN THE PANAMA CANAL ZONE
“Across the street was a Catholic ‘church’. My son and I, armed with ‘sling and stone’, tackled an imposing building with 116 rooms, three floors. Some were empty and others closed. We worked it in three evenings, using such discs as ‘Peace Messengers’, ‘A Cleansed World,’ and ‘Enemies’, placing 20 bound books and 16 booklets of both languages. In some homes the people endeared themselves to us from that day till now—just as sheep—after listening to the recordings. A lady coming home from work invited us to visit her on a day appointed. When we went, she was so glad to hear the message that she acted as though we were strangers from another planet. Another Spanish lady, a student of the Eseolar Nacional and her young husband were discussing Purgatorio the night before, and the next day (Sunday) we were at her door with the very thing they were discussing. He said to her: ‘Didn’t I tell you that the priests are robbing you. Dios [God] sent this man to us to prove what we were talking about is true. He is an angel.’ She fondled and kissed him and patted him on the back and loaded her shelf with every Spanish book I had then. Since then we are real amigos [friends].”
AMONG GERMANS OF SASKATCHEWAN, CANADA
“While witnessing to a German Catholic I was advised that God could do nothing for the people, but our only hope was Hitler and the pope. I understand from real good authority that the swastika emblem is being worn by school children in this district. For further particulars write Dion Kopperud, Lannigan, Sask. Further, some of the Catholic genus have said: ‘Get out of the district; we don’t want to have to use a shotgun on you.’ Reply was: ‘Then the priest has told you to use a shotgun?’ To which no answer. ‘We are not afraid of the priest, nor his shotgun, nor are we afraid of his father, the Devil.’ There are honest Catholics who must get this message, and we are staying till the work is done. The party finally consented to hear the record and listened while both sides were played, admitting that it was true and asking the witness to call again. At a door a wife said: ‘My husband no want, get mad at you.’ Witness: ‘Where is your husband?’ ‘At the barn.’ ‘All right, I will talk with him.’ After a short talk he consented to hear both sides of the German record. Family listened intelligently. All he had was a dime and a three-cent stamp, but he took four German booklets and invited the witness to call on him again. The Haman class [Esther chapters 3-7] are surely getting their head into the halter. These people generally are kindly disposed, but awfully afraid of the priests.”
THE TALK OF THE SOUTH DAKOTA RURALS
“I witnessed in rurals around Mitehell Tuesday and Wednesday and found farmers 25 miles out of the city talking about the information marches they had seen in Mitchell. They asked us if wc had a part in this business. Information marches, especially Saturday afternoon and early evenings, certainly give a great witness to many people in these communities.”
nr
Semimonthly
No. 20
OCTOBER 15, 1939
4
3
is
Discontinue Information Marches ...306
306
©WTB. & TS.
raw/wam
307 308
309 310
311 312
313 314
316 317
319 320
306 306
I1 C.1.1 eit “Ezekiel 35:15
WATCHTQWfj?
ihf'i' i .1.? Hi Mr h nr
mil . s 0 M
Announcing	y
Jehovah’s KngdomO^
Vol. LX
CONTENTS
Doom of Religion (Part 9)..
The Charge ................
Slaughter .................
Refuge ....................
Blessings..................
Increasing Blessings ......
Satan’s Organization ......
Victory ...................
Information................
Who Interprets the Bible!...
Letters ...................
Field Experiences..........
“Theocracy” Testimony Period “Government and Peace”.....
ff k

“Watchtower” Studies

THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President____W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - haiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act Is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction In the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Forbton, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, Os. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Ilemittanccs from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ............................. 34	Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian..........................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian................. 7 Beresford Hoad, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African ................................ Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adiersity are unable to pay the subsciiption price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to tbo publishets, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, wheu requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T., under the Act of March S, ISIS.
“THEOCRACY” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The month of October has begun a new service year and has been named “Theocracy” Testimony Period. The great Theocrat’s provision for field service now is the book Salvation together with the new booklet Government and Peace, first released for distribution beginning with this month. This combination of literature is now offered on a 25e contribution or corresponding value in other English-speaking lands. This Period is world-wide and those lands not yet having translations of the above in their native language should offer a like combination of the latest book and booklet, Enemies or Riches along with Fascism or Freedom or Face the Facts. All kingdom publishers will strive for an unstinted share in this Theocratic testimony. Your faithful report of work will help to make up an accurate world record.
read this booklet. It is of 64 pages, and is self-covered, but the unusual cover sets forth pictorially the circumstances of the Madison Square Garden public address. Your personal copy you may send for, remitting 5c contribution.
DISCONTINUE INFORMATION MARCHES
Information marches throughout the country have given a good witness. But the witnesses will discontinue information marches for the present time. After October no more information marches arc to be held by any of the companies until further advised by the Society.
The material you have for information marches can be stored until further notice.
“GOVERNMENT AND PEACE”
Honest hearers of the two speeches by the Society’s president to the world convention and radio audience from New York city have been anticipating this new booklet, for it contains his rousing, Convention-feature speeches “Government and Peace” and “Victory”. Millions of others of good will also will be eager to
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of November 19: “Doom of Religion” (Part 9), |[ 1-28 inclusive, The Watchtower October 15, 1939.
Week of November 26: “Doom of Religion” (Part 9), |[ 29-52 inclusive, The Watchtower October 15,1939.
WWCHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX	October 15, 1939	No. 20
DOOM OF RELIGION
PART 9
"And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood; and his name is called The Word of God.”—Rev. 19:13.
JEHOVAH OF HOSTS, that is His name. He is the Almighty God, “the King of Eternity,” the God of battle, who always gains the victory. His name has been reproached for centuries. His name shall be vindicated for ever. Centuries ago Jehovah ‘went to Egypt to redeem unto himself a people and to make him a name’. (2 Sam. 7:23) He then delivered his people and destroyed the armies of the enemy. Egypt was a type of Satan’s entire organization. Now Jehovah, the almighty God of battle, goes to Armageddon to deliver those who love him and to for ever vindicate his name. “Armageddon” is the “assembly of his troops”, which the enemy attempts to destroy. God has gathered all nations to the scene or place of that great battle, and all the warriors of heaven are there. Jehovah himself sits as Supreme Commander and the final Arbiter. It is the day for the vindication of his name. This scene is thrilling to every one of his faithful creatures, yea, thrilling beyond description! Each one awaits with great anxiety the clash of the final conflict.
2 Let all creatures that love the Almighty God Jehovah now get a mental vision of the battle array. Jehovah’s prophet Joel records the vision: “Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision; for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision.” (Joel 3:14) Every nation is included. By his prophet Jeremiah (25:15-2G) Jehovah makes known that no nation shall be omitted. Note that the prophecy reads: “Multitudes, multitudes.” For this reason the “vats” are pictured as full of fruit of “the vine of the earth” ready to be crushed. This shows what a tremendous number the Devil has on his side. The entire herd of “goats” of all nations that have forgotten God and turned against Jehovah and his government are gathered there. Following the time when Satan was cast out of heaven and down to the earth he has been marching his hordes to the battle-site. (Rev. 16:13-16) The nations decided to throw in their lot with Satan, and this they did when they started marching to the valley of decision. The facts show that all nations today are opposing Jehovah’s faithful people. It is now the day of Jehovah. Hence
“multitudes, multitudes” of the enemy must be gathered to the valley where God must deal with them according to his judgments already written. On the other side are gathered all those who are devoted to God, including the “remnant”, their “companions”, and the hosts of heaven.
8 “The valley” is a symbolic expression of the condition or position of the enemy drawn together for battle with Jehovah’s force, as seen immediately preceding the great conflict at Armageddon. It is the place of execution. According to the marginal reading of the text, it is “the valley of concision”, or “threshing”, or “destruction”. (R.V., margin) “Concision” or “threshing” means to completely cut to pieces as a threshing machine tears or cuts to pieces that which is thrown in amongst the knives of the machine. Thus is indicated the great and terrible slaughter which shall take place at Armageddon. The same valley is referred to by the Lord through another prophet, who tells of the result to the enemy, and particularly to the field marshal of the enemy and his forces. “And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will give unto Gog a place there of graves in Israel, the valley of the passengers on the east of the sea; and it shall stop the noses of the passengers; and there shall they bury Gog, and all his multitude; and they shall call it, The valley of Hamon-gog.” (Ezek. 39:11) The stench of that crowd is beyond description.
* “Jehovah’s day” is from the coming of Christ Jesus and the beginning of his reign, but this part of the prophecy refers to a specific time within that day: “The day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision”; that is to say, the time within Jehovah’s day when he will literally destroy the enemy. The conditions that prevail immediately before and during Armageddon are a time of darkness for all of those who are against the Theocracy. “The sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their shining.” (Joel 3:15) This statement parallels the prophecy of Joel 2:31: “The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and the terrible day of the Lord
307
308
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
come.” That condition is now clearly seen by the people of Jehovah everywhere. There is no light for the religionists or any of the enemy. “Light is sown for the righteous.”—Ps. 97:11.
• To the religionists everything is dark, and not only are they in darkness, but the enemies are vicious against those who have the light of God’s Word. Religious leaders are particularly vindictive, viperlike and vicious because they are entirely separated from the light of God. Those who were once enlightened and who have made themselves of the “evil servant” are also in “outer darkness”. They have become offended at Jehovah and his Theocracy. There is no light for them, and they hate those who have the light. (Matt. 24:48-51; 25:30) As Jehovah’s witnesses declare the judgments of the Lord, which are written, the religionists, including the “evil servant” class, increase in bitterness against the servants of Jehovah God. The kingdom message brings no light of comfort to the enemy, but, on the contrary, that message causes them to murmur and complain and speak evil against and fight against the anointed of Jehovah, and the judgment against the enemy discloses that for them there is nothing but dismal and complete darkness.—Jude 6-13.
8	During the battle of Armageddon the enemy will be in complete darkness and without hope. The “remnant” and their “companions” have the light of Jehovah’s Word and are guided by that light. They have the spirit of their Lord and Redeemer. They go on in their work amidst great opposition, while the foe in complete darkness continue to gnash their teeth and attempt to destroy the servants of the Most High. God’s light to his servants gives them great courage and full assurance, and they know that if they hold fast to the end they shall share in the certain victory of the Lord.
T From the Scriptures and the physical facts now well known the remnant and their companions clearly see that the day of vengeance of our God is here and that within a short time the great battle will be fought. They appreciate the vision recorded by the prophet of Jehovah. God gives to the enemy full and complete notice of the coming battle, and the Lord causes his faithful witnesses to serve this notice upon the enemy. “The Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth shall shake; but the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the children of [spiritual] Israel.”—Joel 3:16.
8	Jehovah’s official residence or capital organization is Zion, from which place his commandments are given. (Rs. 132:13,14) This shows that those of his anointed on the earth must and will proclaim Jehovah’s roaring message now. They must make a lot of noise, like the roar of a lion, not by incoherent
yelling, but by bold and fearless proclamation of the kingdom message, which Jesus pictured as being sounded from the housetops. (Prov. 28:1; Matt. 10: 27, 28) The roar shows that Jehovah is after his enemy and is going to get them. (Zeph. 3:8) The message of Jehovah proclaimed at his command by his witnesses is a terror to the enemy and drives them mad. The voice of Jehovah is not to the enemy “a still small voice”, but it is a war cry against the enemy. The time for the battle has come, and it is the “voice of the Lord that rendereth recompense to his enemies”. (Isa. 66:6) The Devil fills his cohorts with the spirit of wickedness and makes them drunk with his wine that they may be rushed into battle. Jehovah now ‘utters his voice from both Zion and Jerusalem’ ; meaning that by using his anointed ones and their “companions”, who compose the “great multitude”, he proclaims his message. Today the remnant and their companions are sounding forth the message of Jehovah at his command, declaring his vengeance against the enemy, and thus they give utterance to “his voice”. (Joel 2:11) The present-day effect of that message of Jehovah now shakes Satan’s heavenly or invisible force and all of the visible part of his organization. Such is the final shaking just preceding the great battle. (Hag. 2:6,7) But at Armageddon Jehovah will literally shake the “heavens” and the “earth” to pieces and completely remove everything that is in opposition to the Theocracy.—Heb. 12: 26,27; 2 Pet. 3:10.
THE CHARGE
9	It may properly be said that all the nations are now at the valley of Jehoshaphat, the valley of judgment and concision. Jehovah the Almighty, gives the command to his great Vindicator, Christ Jesus, who moves forward on his war mount to engage the enemy in battle, and his heavenly host follow after him. It is the army of righteousness, led by the righteous Ruler, who goes forth to cut the enemy into shreds. “And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almightv God.”—Rev. 19:15.	*
10	The mighty King of kings charges the enemy and hurls them back. The terrible result of that charge made by that righteously indignant Warrior is indicated by the words of Jehovah’s prophet, to wit: “Therefore prophesy thou against them all these words, and say unto them, The Lord shall roar from on high, and utter his voice from his holy habitation; he shall mightily roar upon his habitation; he shall give a shout, as they that tread the grapes, against all the inhabitants of the earth.”—Jer. 25: 30.
11	The battle! the battle! No time for anything now but the battle of the great day of God Almighty! The
October 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER,
309
"vine of the earth” must now be crushed! Christ Jesus, the mighty Warrior, now carries into execution his Father’s command, and “the winepress was trodden without the city [of Zion], and blood came out of the winepress, even unto the horse bridles [of Jehovah’s horsemen or heavenly warriors that follow the command of Christ Jesus], by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.”—Rev. 14: 20.
12	It is the hour of God’s indignation expressed against those who have so foully defamed his holy name, and all the enemy shall be paid a just recompense : "For the indignation of the Lord is upon all nations, and his fury upon all their armies; he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter. Their slain also shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up out of their carcases, and the mountains shall be melted with their blood. And all the host of heaven [that is, the high places in which Satan’s crowd have perched themselves] shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll; and all their host shall fall down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from the fig tree. For my sword shall be bathed in heaven [that is, the high places in which Satan’s crowd have perched themselves]: behold, it shall come down upon Idumea [religionists and allies in high places], and upon the people of my curse, to judgment. The sword of the Lord is filled with blood; it is made fat with fatness, and with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams; for the Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah [Edom, religious persecutors], and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea. And the unicorns shall come down with them, and the bullocks with the bulls; and their land shall be soaked with blood, and their dust made fat with fatness. For it is the day of the Lord’s vengeance, and the year of recompences for the controversy of Zion.”—Isa. 34:2-8.
SLAUGHTER
13	That will be the most terrible slaughter that has ever come to pass, and there will never be another like it. “And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth; they shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground.” (Jer. 25:33) “The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath. He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead bodies; he shall wound the heads over many countries.”—Ps. 110: 5,6.
14	Today the combined enemy under the direct command of Satan’s field marshal, Gog, wickedly persecute Jehovah’s faithful people, who announce his kingdom and the day of his vengeance. Now the enemy appear to have their own way in doing violence to the servants of the Most High who go about
proclaiming God’s message. With apparent impunity they attempt to break up peaceable assemblies of people that have assembled to hear the Word of God, and thus they demonstrate their viciousness and viper disposition. They employ every known possible wicked means to accomplish their purpose, and they resort to all manner of lies and perjury in an attempt to cover up their wickedness. But Jehovah now says to the enemy: ‘You just wait, and you will get what is your due.’ “Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey; for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger; for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.”— Zeph. 3:8.
13	Jehovah’s people on earth are small in number and of no strength in themselves. They are the constant objects of assault by the enemy, led by the big religionists who use the rabble to do their dirty work. Each day the wicked deeds of the religionists and allies against Jehovah’s people increase in viciousness and intensity. Who will be able to withstand those vicious assaults? Only those who have a vision of the Kingdom and who trust wholly and implicitly in the great Theocrat and his King. “According to your faith be it unto you.” (Matt. 9: 29) “But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.”—Matt. 24:13.
18	Only those who are diligent in studying God’s revealed Word, and who keep in mind God’s message, particularly relating to the kingdom, will be able to hold fast and withstand the assault of the enemy. Those who for any excuse or reason turn to the things of this world are certain to lose everything. Those who put their trust wholly in Jehovah and his King, and who with diligence press on in. the fight in obedience to his Word, will continue to behold what is God’s purpose and what shall be the result. They discern that the day of battle is here, and by faith clearly see what will be the result. They hear the doom of religion and the complete overthrow of all of Satan’s forces. They behold Christ Jesus, the victorious Warrior, crowned with victory and glory, leading his forces to complete victory to the vindication of Jehovah’s name. They see the work finished. They hear a colloquy in which Christ Jesus, the great Vindicator, is the principal speaker. To him the questions are propounded, and Christ Jesus gives the answers: “Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of his strength? [Answer] I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save. [Question] Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the winefat? [Answer] I have trodden
310
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the winepress alone; and of the people there was none with me; for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come.”— Isa. 63:1-4.
17	Mark this: that in the fight against the enemy none give support to the righteous King; that is, none of the world: only those do who have taken their stand on the side of God and Christ and have become a part of or under his organization before Armageddon and who are therefore his and are with him. “And I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none to uphold; therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me; and my fury, it upheld me.”—Isa. 63: 5.
REFUGE
18	Let all who are now on the side of Jehovah and his King hold fast with rejoicing, faithfully enduring unto the end. To such Jehovah speaks through his prophet: “The Lord will be the hope of his people, and [a stronghold (R.V.) ].” Armageddon will be too terrible to find description in human words. Of that great conflict and what shall come to pass the faithful need not fear. Jehovah will put his hand over the faithful, shield and protect them, and be a complete refuge to them: “The name of the Lord is a strong tower; the righteous runneth into it, and is safe.” —Prov. 18:10.
19	Today the enemy, and particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, have, as God foretold, ‘made lies their refuge.’ (Isa. 28:15) They falsely claim to be on the side of freedom and right and yet are exactly the opposite thereto, always resorting to wickedness. But let not those who have devoted themselves to Jehovah and his King be dismayed or discouraged by reason of their deeds of wickedness. God will sweep away that refuge of lies. Jeremiah the prophet was a picture of God’s faithful people now on earth, and as he prayed so now the faithful pray: “Be not a terror unto me; thou art my hope in the day of evil. Let them [the enemy] be confounded that persecute me, but let not me be confounded; let them be dismayed, but let not me be dismayed; bring upon them the day of evil, and destroy them with double destruction.”—Jer. 17:17,18.
20	The strength of Jehovah’s people is in the joy and joyful service of God and his King. As Nehemiah budded the walls of Jerusalem amidst great trouble, so now the faithful of the Lord promote the kingdom interests amidst great tribulation, and now they truly say: “The joy of the Lord is [our] strength.” (Neh. 8:10) “The Lord is my strength and my shield; my heart trusted in him, and I am helped; therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth, and with my
song will I praise him. The Lord is their strength, and he is the saving strength of his anointed. Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance; feed them also, and lift them up for ever.” (Ps. 28:7-9) “The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble; and he knoweth them that trust in him.”—Nah. 1:7.
21	Religionists put their hope in the totalitarian ruling powers, the antitypical Egypt, the Devil’s organization, and their strength shall utterly fail them. The spiritual Israelites, God’s faithful people, put their hope and find their strength wholly in the great Theocrat and his King. The “great multitude” are those now coming from all nations, kingdoms, peoples and tongues (Rev. 7: 9-17), and they are putting themselves under the King of Jehovah, thereby becoming “companions” of the remnant, the announcers of the Kingdom. Together these share the blessings of the Lord and say: “0 Lord, my strength, and my fortress, and my refuge in the day of affliction.” Those who are of good will, the “other sheep” (John 10:16), are now seeking the way to God’s organization, Zion, and truly say of their religious fathers: “Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no profit.” (Jer. 16:19; Ps. 91:2; 2 Sam. 22:2-4) So saying, they forsake the religious organizations and flee to God’s organization of which Christ Jesus is the Head. Religion is doomed, and they see it. The adverse judgment against religion is written and is soon to be executed. Religion shall perish, but the kingdom of Christ shall stand forever.
22	When Armageddon ends, the survivors shall know that Christ is the King of righteousness and Jehovah is supreme Ruler thereof: “So shall ye know that I ami the Lord your God dwelling in Zion, my holy mountain; then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers pass through her any more.” —Joel 3:17.
23	Already those who have devoted themselves to the great Theocrat and his King know that the Almighty is Jehovah. Armageddon will make such conviction and knowledge complete to all those who survive, and they shall know, as it is written, that “I am Jehovah”. (A.R.F.) Uis name Jehovah means his purpose, and Armageddon shall reveal to all that he is the Almighty One, whose name is worthy of and entitled to all honor and praise. Jehovah does not identify himself with seven hills, such as of Rome, but with his own chosen capital organization, of which Christ Jesus, his “Faithful and True Witness”, is the chief One and next to Jehovah.
24	The visible part of God’s revealed organization has been repeatedly defiled by unconsecrated and wicked persecutors who once claimed to be of God’s organization. But since the coining of Christ Jesus to the temple he has not permitted the unrighteous
October 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
311
to remain with his faithful servants, but has gathered them out and continues to gather out those who become offended at him and his organization and who work unrighteousness against the Lord and against his anointed. (Matt. 13:41,42; Rev. 21:27) No “stranger” who is opposed to God’s kingdom or who persecutes his people shall remain in his organization, says the Lord. (Joel 3:17) When Armageddon is done all in God’s organization shall be holy unto Jehovah. “In that day shall there be upon the bells [bridles] of the horses, HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD; and the pots in the Lord’s house shall be like the bowls before the altar. Yea, every pot in Jerusalem, and in Judah, shall be holiness unto the Lord of hosts; and all they that sacrifice shall come and take of them, and seethe therein; and in that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of hosts.”—Zech. 14: 20, 21.
25	Concerning the religionists and their temples of religion Jehovah says: “And I will give it into the hands of the strangers for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil; and they shall pollute it.” (Ezek. 7:21) This is further corroborative evidence that the wicked rabble element, who are now incited by the religionists to commit acts of violence against God’s anointed, are certain to turn against and rend the religionists and their organization.—Ezek. 11:9; Rev. 17:16,17.
28	As to Jehovah’s organization, says the scripture: “There shall no strangers [(Hebrew) zarim; the wicked oppressors] pass through her any more.” (Joel 3:17) The wicked deeds of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their dupes shall never come again upon God’s people as they did in 1918 and since. During 1918 in particular the Hierarchy took the lead in persecuting God’s people. “In the day that thou [the Hierarchy and other religionists] stoodest on the other side, in the day that the strangers [(Hebrew) zarim] carried away captive his forces, and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them.”—Obad. 11.
2r	With the judgment of the doom of religion fully executed the faithful men for ever rejoice, knowing that the enemy has perished and will never be permitted to again arise. (Nah. 1: 9) Even now by faith the faithful experience that joy and hope, hearing the words of comfort from Jehovah to them: “Awake, awake; put on thy strength, 0 Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, 0 Jerusalem, the holy city; for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.”—Isa. 52:1.
28	It is certain that after Armageddon no violence or assaults will be committed against God’s people, because the wicked will all be gone. J ust at this time the hypocritical pretenders are permitted to work against God’s faithful witnesses, and those “goats”
known as the “evil servant” class join with the Hierarchy, all forming the “son of perdition” (2 Thess. 2:3); but shortly God will bring about the complete destruction of all such. This knowledge gives great comfort to those who are permitted to be on the Lord’s side.
BLESSINGS
29	The “day of Jehovah” began in 1914, when Christ Jesus was enthroned; but, with reference to the anointed, more particularly from 1918 (when the Lord Jesus came to the temple) and since, “the day of the Lord Jesus Christ” begins to overlap the day of Jehovah. (1 Cor. 1:8; 5:5; Phil. 1:6,10; 2 Cor. 1:14) In that “day” and at the end of Armageddon there shall come the time of perpetual blessings and endless joy. "And it shall come to pass in that day, that the mountains shall drop down new wine, and the hills shall flow with milk, and all the rivers of Judah shall flow with waters, and a fountain shall come forth of the house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of Shittim.”—Joel 3:18.
80	The “joy of the Lord” is the great privilege that is given to Christ Jesus to vindicate his Father’s name. With the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple and foflowing 1918 he invites his faithful servants to enter into his joy. (Matt. 25:21,23) From that time onward the “faithful servant”, the Lord’s anointed, are in the “holy land”, that is, God’s organization, which is wholly and completely devoted to him. Therefore the prophecy refers to such time in these words: “It shall come to pass in that day that the mountains shall drip sweet wine.” (Roth.) The heights of God’s universal organization and of his capital organization are likened unto mountains, because their earthly prototypes were builded upon mountains. Therefore from and after 1922 God speaks to his faithful remnant by his prophet in these words: “But ye, 0 mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches, and yield your fruit to my people of Israel; for they are at hand to come. For, behold, I am for you, and I will turn unto you, and ye shall be tilled and sown. And I will multiply men upon you, all the house of Israel, even all of it; and the cities shall be inhabited, and the wastes shall be builded: and I will multiply upon you man and beast; and they shall increase and bring fruit; and I will settle you after your old estates, and will do better unto you than at your beginnings; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.”—Ezek. 36: 8-11.
81	Since then Jehovah lias fulfilled this prophecy to his faithful spiritual Israelites. From then onward “the mountains shall drip sweet wine”, and they have done so; that is, his organization universal and his organization capital, as if full to overflowing, have dropped down upon his faithful ones great blessings and joy. This undoubtedly refers to the fresh King
312	THE WATCHTOWER	Brooklyn, N. Y,
dom joys, which have provided jobs of service unto Jehovah for his witnesses, working towards and looking to the vindication of his name. Such is the day mentioned by Jesus to his disciples: “That day when I drink it new with you in my Father’s kingdom.” (Matt. 26:29) This new and sweet joy, pictured by the wine, drops down from God’s kingdom through Christ Jesus upon his faithful anointed. It is kingdom wine. The religionists, including the “evil servant” class, have no access to this new wine of joy. They are denied all such blessings, because they are drunk with Satan’s wine. To these opposers of God’s kingdom Jehovah says: “Awake, ye drunkards, and weep; and howl, all ye drinkers of wine, because of the new wine; for it is cut off from your mouth.” —Joel 1:5.
•* This new joy comes from “the hills”, that is, the high places of God’s holy organization; “my holy hill of Zion,” his capital organization. There are also other heights for those who are under the kingdom protection, that is, the Jonadabs, not of the capital organization but who find protection under the organization and share in its goodness and blessings. Note this prophecy, which applies after the coming of the Lord to the temple: “Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that the plowman shall overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that soweth seed; and the mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt. And I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel, and they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; they shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them.” —Amos 9:13,14.
INCREASING BLESSINGS
” Following the approval of those taken into the temple Jehovah’s blessings began to increase upon the approved ones, and this the prophecy shows. Jehovah’s promise is that the earthly state of his “land”, or condition of his faithful ones, shall be “a land flowing with milk and honey”: “And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey; unto the place of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites.”—Ex. 3: 8.
** This promise, which applied upon typical or natural Israel, applies with greater force upon the antitypical Israel, the spiritual Israelites, from and after 1918. In full accord with this the prophecy of Joel says: “The hills shall flow with milk.” Since 1922, particularly, such part of the prophecy has been in course of fulfillment upon the remnant. Concerning the “Lion of the Tribe of Juda” the prophecy (Gen. 49: 9-12) says: “Binding his foal unto the vine,
and his ass’s colt unto the choice vine [before riding into Jerusalem]; he washed his garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes: his eyes shall be red [flashing] with wine, and his teeth white with milk.” To his “bride”, the church, which he receives at the temple, Christ Jesus, the Bridegroom, says: “I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse; ... I have drunk my wine with my milk; eat, 0 friends; drink, yea, drink abundantly, 0 beloved.” —Song of Solomon 5:1.
85	Following the thirsty experiences of God’s people in 1917 and 1918 the Lord says to the remnant: “Ho, every one that [is thirsty], . . . come, buy wine and milk without money, and without price. . . . and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of [unto] David.” (Isa. 55:1-3) Taken into the everlasting covenant for the kingdom, these faithful ones continue to receive everincreasing blessings at the hand of the Lord.
86	Furthermore the prophecy says: “The rivers of Judah shall flow with waters”; that is, all the channels of the land, the earthly state of the remnant, are of “Judah”, “Praise to Jehovah.” Such are meant to supply those who inhabit that “land” or earthly state after God’s remnant are brought out of captivity to Babylon, that is, freed from association with the Devil’s religion and organization. The channels here mentioned pictured the means by which Jehovah conveys the things that he has in reservation for his restored faithful remnant whom he loves, and which channels are, to wit, the Bible now made clear to them, together with books, magazines, phonographs, records, and other means carried on by his service organization. The facts show that since 1922 these blessings have continuously increased upon his people. Says the prophecy concerning these channels, they “shall flow with waters”, that is to say, with truth. With God’s faithful people there is now no “thirst for water”, for the hearing of the Word of God. (Amos 8:11) No condition such as named by Joel 1:19, 20, describing the devastated condition of “Christendom”, now afflicts God’s faithful people. God’s channels of waters of truth are running full and fully supply the needs of the spiritual Judeans, and by such these are enabled to supply the needs of the people of good will by carrying to them the message of truth. God’s servant, the Society, supplies the literature in such quantities and with such small cost that the same is within the reach of all who diligently seek the Lord, and, together with the means of transmitting such truths to the people of good will, they too drink the truth to their full satisfaction.
87	The kingdom message of truth is not kept in the confines of the temple class, but the truth flows out to others, as the prophecy of Joel says: “And a fountain shall come forth of the house of the Lord.” This
THE WATCHTOWER
313
October 15, 1939
prophecy foretold that Jehovah’s temple would be builded up at the coming of the King, Christ Jesus. “Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation.” (Isa. 12:3) The fountains, as here described, could not start to flow until after the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple in 1918. In this connection note that it is written concerning the temple (Ezek. 47:1-12): “Afterward he brought me again unto the door of the house; and, behold, waters issued out [of the walls] from under the threshold of the house eastward; for the forefront of the house stood toward the east, and the waters came down from under, from the right side [of the outer eastern gate] of the house, at the south side of the altar. Then brought he me out of the way of the gate northward, and led me about the way without unto the utter gate by the way that looketh eastward; and, behold, there ran out waters on the right side. . . . Afterward he measured a thousand; and it was a river that I could not pass over; for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed over. ...” (Ezek. 47:1-12) These great fountains of truth flow now, not only to refresh the “remnant”, but to sustain the “great multitude”. Thus the promise is that the blessings continue to increase, and the facts now fully show the fulfillment of the prophecy. This is also in harmony with The Revelation: “And he shewed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb.” Then the temple class, under the command of Christ Jesus, join with him in notifying those of good will to come and drink: “And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come; and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.”—Rev. 22:1,17.
88	Furthermore, Joel’s prophecy says concerning the waters: “And shall water the valley [torrent valley] of Shittim.” The waters go in the same direction as Ezekiel described them at Ezekiel 47: 8-12. Before entering Canaan the Israelites encamped at Shittim, where many of them were seduced into idolatrous religion and fell away. The name “Shittim” indicates scourging because of the long thorns or spines of these Acacia trees. This seems to refer to the condition of God’s people in 1917 and 1918, when they were undergoing much scourging and persecution. The river of Jehovah’s truth reached them and quenched their thirst and revived them and made them again active in the service of the Lord. The same waters now supply the needs of the Jonathan or “great multitude” class.
SATAN’S ORGANIZATION
89	Mark now the contrast. While the blessings are bestowed upon those who serve God, and continue to increase, a desolate condition comes upon the com
mercial, political and military part of Satan’s organization pictured by Egypt, and has continued to increase since the World War. “Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall be a desolate wilderness, for the violence against the children of Judah, because they have shed innocent blood in their land.”— Joel 3:19.
40	Antitypical Egypt’s river Nile fails to water the land and to make it productive. On the contrary, its commercialism appears to be death-dealing, and this is proved by the conditions existing throughout the earth, and this in spite of the constant “pump-priming” or reckless spending of money, which is done in this nation by individuals who try to keep business afloat. A similar course is followed in other parts of the earth. From bad to worse grows the condition of antitypical Egypt, and at Armageddon all parts of it will go down. “The burden of Egypt. Behold, the Lord rideth upon a swift [war] cloud, and shall come into Egypt; and the idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it. And I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians; and they shall fight every one against his brother, and every one against his neighbour; city against city, and kingdom against kingdom. And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof; and I will destroy the counsel thereof; and they shall seek to the idols, and to the charmers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and to the wizards. And the Egyptians will I give over into the hand of a cruel lord; and a fierce king shall rule over them, saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts. And the waters shall fail from the sea, and the river shall be wasted and dried up.”—Isa. 19:1-5.
41	The prophecy of Joel then specifically refers to religion, headed by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, when the prophecy says: “And Edom shall be a desolate wilderness for the violence against [(R.F.) done to] the children of Judah [against those who praise and serve Jehovah], because they [the religionists] have shed innocent blood in their land.” The indisputable facts that have come to pass, particularly since 1917 up to now, show that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy have been causing much suffering and bloodshed upon God’s people. Their wicked deeds against Jehovah’s witnesses have continued to increase, and while these lines are now being prepared there is an abundant evidence coming to light showing that the Hierarchy is conspiring and consorting with their radical, wicked tools, to bring about the destruction of Jehovah’s witnesses. Let no one who loves God be at all discouraged by the everincreasing wickedness of the religious element, because the doom of that wicked system is written and soon those workers of iniquity shall perish. Those cruel persecutors have willfully violated “the ever
314
THE WATCHTOWER,
lasting covenant”, and they have Jehovah’s promise to render unto them a full recompense. Keep in mind that the pictures which Jehovah caused to be made and recorded in times of old are now being fulfilled. Edom, typical of the religious element, took its stand against Judah and Jerusalem and aided Babylon in the persecution of God’s temple people. (Obad. 11-14) This definitely identifies the modern-day Edomites (the religionists) as a part of Satan’s organization; and particularly the “woman”, the old “harlot”, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and concerning which it is written: “And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus; and when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration.” (Rev. 17:6) “And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.” (Rev. 18:24) “Also in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the poor innocents; I have not found it by secret search, but upon all these.”—Jer. 2: 34.
42	The judgment of Jehovah written against those breakers of his covenant concerning the sanctity of life is written: “Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord God, I will prepare thee unto blood, and blood shall pursue thee: sith [since] thou hast not hated blood, even blood shall pursue thee. Thus will I make mount Seir most desolate, and cut off from it him that passeth out, and him that returneth. And I will fill his mountains with his slain men; in thy hills, and in thy valleys, and in all thy rivers, shall they fall that are slain with the sword.”—Ezek. 35: 6-8.
43	The Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the modern Edomites, have repeatedly invaded the land of Judah (that is, of Jehovah’s witnesses and their “companions”, who praise Jehovah), and for this Jehovah will “pay off” fully those wicked ones. This part of the prophecy is now made known to his people by the Lord that they may have increased comfort and hope during this time of wickedness against them. —Rom. 15:4.
VICTORY
44	Under inspiration of the holy spirit the apostle wrote: “But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.” (1 Cor. 15:57) Now Jehovah furnishes to his people an abundance of evidence proving that soon he will gain complete victory through Christ Jesus over the enemy and in behalf of all who love him. This knowledge must give his people increased courage and great joy. “Judah,” in the prophecy, represents those who praise Jehovah, and specifically those who compose God’s “holy nation”; while “Jerusalem” anti-typically includes all who are of Jehovah and under his organization. This part of the prophecy is applied to those who love God. “But Judah shall dwell
Brooklyn, N. Y.
for ever, and Jerusalem from generation to generation.”—Joel 3:20.
45	This is in striking contrast with the doom and destruction of religion and all of Satan’s crowd. The enemy have conspired together and tried to “cut off” the faithful of God from being a nation. (Ps. 83:1-8) The religionists have tried to silence all who praise and serve Jehovah. The promise of God here given to his faithful ones is that they “shall abide for ever”. (KV.) That promise is that they shall survive the battle of Armageddon and be on the earth after it is over, at which time all of their persecutors will have been completely wiped out. In further support of this promise another prophet of God says: “And I will plant them upon their land, and they shall no more be pulled up out of their land which I have given them, saith the Lord thy God.”—Amos 9:15.
48	Jehovah’s universal organization will persist after Satan’s organization has gone down to complete destruction. The staying on the earth of the remnant after Armageddon is but temporary; but as to their companions, the “other sheep”, who form the “great multitude” and who come up to “Jerusalem” to worship Jehovah, they shall abide on earth forever. “Thus saith the Lord of hosts, It shall yet come to pass, that there shall come people, and the inhabitants of many cities: and the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts; I will go also. Yea, many people and strong nations shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, In those days it shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold, out of all languages of the nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you; for we have heard that God is with you.” (Zech. 8:20-23) “And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left of all the nations which came against Jerusalem, shall even go up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles. And it shall be, that whoso will not come up of all the families of the earth unto Jerusalem to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, even upon them shall be no rain. And if the family of Egypt go not up, and come not, that have no rain, there shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite the heathen that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles. This shall be the punishment of Egypt, and the punishment of all nations that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.” (Zech. 14:16-19) Those survivors of Armageddon will be blessed with the great privilege of carrying out the divine mandate to be fruitful and fill the earth with perfect human creatures. This they will do under the immediate direction and ministration of Christ Jesus, the King
October 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER.
315
of the great Theocracy. Only those who devote themselves to God and his organization prior to Armageddon will survive.—Joel 2: 32.
” Jehovah will square the books of account: “For I will cleanse their blood that I have not cleansed; for the Lord dwelleth in Zion.” (Joel 3: 21) He will clear the account of blood shed, which the enemy has shed, and the wicked deeds done against his faithful servants: “Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall be a desolate wilderness, for the violence against the children of Judah, because they have shed innocent blood in their land.” (Joel 3:19) God will not permit the enemy to go down to the grave in peace, but, as the typical King David said concerning the enemy, He will “bring . . . down to the grave with blood”. (1 Ki. 2:9) God will not leave such blood, shed by the enemy, unrequired or unpunished. His law must be fully met: “At the hand of every man’s brother will I require the life of man.” (Gen. 9:5) The blood of Jehovah’s witnesses shed by the enemy shall receive a full recompense. Jehovah’s witnesses are not guilty of blood in violation of the everlasting covenant. The blood of those slain at Armageddon will rest upon their own heads. That blood will be shed by the just and righteous Executioner of Jehovah. Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions have obediently and zealously sounded the trumpet of warning, and hence are not guilty, and no blood will be required of them. But the enemy, the religionists and their allies, have repeatedly shed blood of the innocents, and for that they shall be fully paid by the Executioner of Jehovah.
48	Armageddon is God’s appointed time to settle the account and require the lifeblood of those who have deliberately violated the everlasting covenant. The manner of dealing with those wicked blood-shedders Jesus states in these words: “'Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes; and some of them ye shall kill and crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute them from city to city; that upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar.”—Matt. 23:34, 35.
40	This part of Joel’s prophecy is emphasized by the rendering of the text according to the Syriac and the Sejituagint: “I will avenge the blood of them I had not avenged.” Jehovah’s name shall be fully and completely vindicated. He has come to his capital organization to execute final judgment in vindication of his name, and this he will do by Christ Jesus. Hence he will not let the bloodshedders go without due attention and without balancing of the account.
80	Let all people who love and serve God and Christ now be of good courage and rejoice. Everything of the world is darkness, but there is bright light shining from the Lord’s throne upon his people. God has opened the windows of heaven and poured out his blessings upon his people. He has revealed and continues to reveal to his people the meaning of his prophecies, and by reason thereof the faithful have a clear understanding and appreciation of their relationship to God and to his kingdom by Christ Jesus. Now Jehovah has made it clearly to appear to his people that from the beginning religion has been the subtle means by which the Devil has ensnared the many. Since the time arrived for God’s people to flee from Babylon, the Lord has brought them out of that bondage and they have learned that their garments were soiled and that religion and association with religionists were the cause of the soiling of their garments. At the temple judgment they were put to the fiery test that they might be clean, and then to the approved ones the Lord said: “Take away the filthy garments from him [Joshua; those now united with Christ Jesus, the Great Joshua]. And unto him he said, Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with a change of raiment.” (Zech. 3:4) These cleansed and approved ones were then sent forth as witnesses for Jehovah to “offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness”. (Mal. 3:1-3; Heb. 13:15) They must now be faithful servants of the Lord and keep themselves completely separated from Satan’s organization. Commissioned to proclaim the kingdom message, they must do so and continue to announce the day of the vengeance of our God. From that day of cleansing unto this Jehovah has continued to reveal to his people through Christ Jesus the meaning of the many prophetic pictures or dramas long ago made and recorded for their aid and comfort, and which disclose his purpose towards them. It is the bounden duty of these witnesses to now inform the people that religion is a snare of the Devil, and the means by which unrighteous men carry on a racket. These faithful witnesses go forth to the work, and God likens them unto a swarm of locusts that cannot be stopped in their onward march. He also calls them “My great army”, because Jehovah through Christ Jesus is backing up and using these witnesses to declare his message. The faithful witnesses, knowing this fact, march forward with full confidence and courage. As they go their persecution at the hands of the enemy increases. They are fully advised in advance of such, and, knowing this, they are determined, by the Lord’s grace, that nothing shall deter them in their forward march. Now Jehovah clearly reveals to them that religion is doomed to early destruction and that they must declare this
316
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
fact to the world in order that persons of good will toward God will flee out of Satan’s organization and find protection under the Lord and ultimately gain life everlasting. Those who perform their commission faithfully will have a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and, in doing that work in obedience to the Lord’s commandment, they have entered into the joy of Christ Jesus, their Lord and Head.
M Never before were creatures granted such a privilege. Never again will creatures have a like privilege. Before them they see the kingdom, the Theocracy that shall forever rule in righteousness. They are blind to everything else, because the kingdom, to them, is everything. The remnant know that they must die as humans in order to enter fully into God’s spiritual house. They are therefore fully determined to spend and be spent wholly in the service of Jehovah and his King. They are now joyful, and their joy will be complete when they have seen the Lord’s victory at Armageddon.
82	Seeing and appreciating their relationship with the Most High, surely the faithful remnant will permit nothing to deter them in their continuous service
to Jehovah. They will go on in faith and with everincreasing courage unto the end. Now they know the meaning of the scripture, to wit, “Jehovah dwelleth in Zion.” (Joel 3:21, A.R.V.; Ps. 132:13,14) Now the remnant have raised the song of joy, which will never end. To them the Lord says: “Sing and rejoice, 0 daughter of Zion; for, lo, I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the Lord. And many nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be my people: and I will dwell in the midst of thee; and thou shalt know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto thee. And the Lord shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again. Be silent, 0 all flesh, before the Lord; for he is raised up out of his holy habitation.” (Zech. 2:10-13) “Behold, I, and the children whom the Lord hath given me, are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of hosts, which dwelleth in mount Zion.” (Isa. 8:18) The end of religion is in sight. The victory and vindication of Jehovah is near. The joy of the remnant and their companions increases, and they continue to sing the praises of the Most High.
Praise ye Jehovah. . . . The works of Jehovah are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. His work is honor and majesty; and his righteousness endureth for ever. He hath made his wonderful works to be remembered: . . . He hath showed his people the power of his works, in giving them the heritage of the nations. The works of his hands are truth and justice; all his precepts are sure. . . . Holy and reverend is his name. The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom; a good understanding have all they that do his commandments: his praise endureth for ever.
—Psalm 111:1-10, A.R.V.
INFORMATION
BEING reminded that this is the time when God is removing from his organization everything that can be shaken, “that those things which cannot be shaken may remain” (Heb. 12:26,27), the members of the board of directors of the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society, for the information and protection of those who are devoted to God’s organization, request that The Watchtower publish what follows:
On the 21st of July, 1939, a paper writing in the form of a letter, signed by 0. R. Moyle, was left at the desk in the lobby of the Bethel home addressed to the president of the Society. Because that paper involved the entire family at Bethel, it was properly brought before the board and before the family. The letter, being filled with false, slanderous and libelous statements, was vigorously condemned by the board, and by all the members of the Bethel family. The board unanimously adopted the following Resolution, which was also approved by the family:
“At a joint meeting of the boards of directors of the Pennsylvania corporation and the New York corporation of the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society held at the office of the Society at Brooklyn, N.Y., this 8th day of August, 1939, at which other members of the family were
present, there was read to said boards and in the presence of 0. R. Moyle a letter dated July 21, 1939, written by said Moyle and addressed to the president of the Society.
“For four years past the writer of that letter has been entrusted with the confidential matters of the Society. It now appears that the writer of that letter, without excuse, libels the family of God at Bethel, and identifies himself as one who speaks evil against the Lord’s organization, and who is a murmurer and complainer, even as the Scriptures have foretold. (Jude 4-1G; 1 Cor. 4:3; Rom. 14: 4)
“The members of the board of directors hereby resent the unjust criticism appearing in that letter, disapprove of the writer and his actions, and recommend that the president of the Society immediately terminate the relationship of 0. R. Moyle to the Society as legal counsel and as a member of the Bethel family.”
Aside from the introductory paragraph announcing the writer’s purpose to leave Bethel at a fixed time, every paragraph of that letter is false, filled with lies, and is a wicked slander and libel not only against the president but against the entire family, and for that reason the letter has not been published by the Society. lie requested Consolation to publish his letter, and Moyle, being refused, now causes his
October 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
317
libelous paper to be published and circulated among certain companies of the consecrated, causing the same to be publicly read, and then by his own words, which may be called ‘fair speech’, he pretends to be in harmony with the Society, and thus further deceives the unsuspecting ones. His only possible purpose in further publishing his letter is to justify himself and to ‘cause division among the brethren’, both of which are condemned by the Word of God. (Luke 16:15; Rom. 16:17,18) For this reason the brethren should be warned. “The afore-mentioned letter” being filled with lies leveled against the brethren, the same is hated by Jehovah: “Six things doth the Lord hate; yea, seven are an abomination unto him: ... a false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren.”—Prov. 6:16-19.
By inducing others to join with him in the circulation and publication of his slanderous letter among the consecrated he makes others party to his wrong. The slanderous paper, being in opposition and against the interest of the Theocratic government, is pleasing only to the Devil and his earthly agents.
For four years Moyle was entrusted with the confidential matters of the Society, and then, without excuse, he assaults and maligns those who trusted him. Judas was entrusted by Christ Jesus with confidential matters, and Judas proved his unfaithfulness by furnishing to the enemy that which
they could use and did use against the Lord. He who maligns the brethren of the Lord maligns the Lord himself, and the end of such the Scriptures plainly point out. Having been warned, each one must choose to join the “evil servant” and take the consequences (Matt. 24:48-51) or remain faithful to Jehovah and his government by Christ Jesus. Choose whom you will serve.
WHO INTERPRETS THE BIBLE?
MAN has a natural tendency to keep a record of events for his benefit and that of succeeding generations. This is proof that the Creator purposed it thus to be. God planted this faculty in man. Man is the highest of God’s earthly creation; and since man has a tendency to keep a record of events, it is only reasonable that his Maker would provide a means for man to keep a record of the most important things concerning himself. If Jehovah God had to do with the keeping of such a record, then be it known that that record is correct and contains the truth.
The Bible is a history of God’s creation of things earthly, and also gives such information concerning his heavenly creation as relates to man and man’s home. The Bible is God’s revelation of himself to his intelligent earthly creatures. It is his expressed will, and therefore is the statement of his law for the government of his intelligent earthly creatures. Most of the Bible is a record of things which have taken place, but which foreshadow greater things to come. As the inspired Bible writer states it, at 1 Corinthians 10: 6,11: “Now these things were our examples, . . . Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.” That part of the Bible which we call prophecy is the foretelling and recording of events that must come to pass, before they actually do come to pass. Prophecy is therefore the history of man written in advance. For this reason prophecy cannot be understood by man until it is in the course of fulfillment or has been fulfilled.
The writers of the Bible God chose to do the writing because of their faith in him and their faithfulness to him. As his unlimited power operated to create the things of the earth, so that power or spirit operated to direct and influ
ence the mind of Moses and other holy men to make record of God’s will concerning man. King David was one of these faithful men devoted to the Lord, and concerning that part of the Bible which he wrote he said: “The spirit of the Lord spake by me, and his word was in my tongue.” (2 Sam. 23:2) These faithful men of old are called “prophets”, and they wrote prophecy. The apostle Peter, who was chosen by Jesus as one of his apostles, under inspiration wrote, at 2 Peter 1:19-21: “We have also a more sure word of prophecy ; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts: knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the holy [spirit].”
Jehovah reveals himself and his purpose to his people in his own due time. His prophecy, therefore, cannot be understood until it is God’s due time for understanding it. This was plainly stated to the prophet Daniel, who writes: “And I heard [the prophecy by the angel], but I understood not; then said I, 0 my Lord, what shall be the end of these things? And he said, Go thy way, Daniel; for the words are closed up and scaled till the time of the end.” “But thou, 0 Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time of the end; many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.” (Dan. 12:8,9,4) For a long while students of prophecy have limited the fulfillment of these words last quoted to travel by man up and down through the earth by means of rapid transit machines, such as locomotives, steamships, automobiles, airplanes, and other like means; and also to the great increase of knowledge relating
318
THE WATCHTOWER,
to things of scientific investigation, as radio, etc., and which times itself with the development of rapid transit in the earth. But he it noted that it has not been God's people that have been particularly connected with scientific development or the invention of machines. In the text the words “run to and fro” are used, but manifestly they do not indicate any rapid travel from one place to another or even in a hurried search. The words plainly indicate diligence (and not speed) in searching for something satisfying; and those who search something other than the Lord’s Word find it not. The German translation of Daniel 12: 4, according to the Elberfeld edition, reads: “Viele werden es durch-forschen, und die Erkenntnis wird sich mehren.” This, being translated into English, reads: “Many will make thorough study [or examination, search] of it, and knowledge shall be increased.” The Scandinavian Bible translation also renders this text in the same way.
The words of Daniel (12:4) indicate an earnest and careful study of the Word of God at “the time of the end” by those who are devoted to the Lord God, because the time has come for the opening of the words of the prophet to God’s servant class. Since the Word of God was written for his covenant people, and not for unbelievers (Rom. 15: 4), we should expect that the increase of knowledge mentioned would be had by those who are God’s anointed people together with the people of good will, rather than that it would be an increase of knowledge by worldly persons. The deeper meaning of Daniel’s words seems to be this: At the stated and fixed time, to wit, “the time of the end,” God’s anointed people shall exercise diligence in searching the Word of God, then and there to be opened because God’s due time has come for them to understand and his flashes of enlightenment like lightning will illuminate his Word and reveal his purpose. Thereby there is a corresponding increase of knowledge by and on the part of his anointed people. This exactly corresponds with the fact that those devoted to the Lord have in this “time of the end” received a clearer vision of prophecy.
Prior to God’s due time any attempted interpretation is merely a guess. Without doubt it has been pleasing to the Lord for those consecrated to him to seek an understanding even before the due time to understand. “Prophecy; wherc-unto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shincth in a dark place, until the day dawn.” (2 Pct. 1:19) Their very attitude of searching for the truth has kept them in harmony with the Lord. “The prophets have enquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you: searching what, or what manner of time the spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the things, which are now reported unto you by them that have preached the gospel unto you with the holy [spirit] sent down from heaven; which things the angels desire to look into.” (1 Pet. 1:10-12) The holy angels of heaven sought an understanding; and while the Lord did not reveal his purpose to them, he did not rebuke them. Thus he shows he is not displeased with those who search for the truth.
It will be found also that the understanding of the prophecies of God increases as the fulfillment thereof unfolds. Therefore one may see some part of prophecy now,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and later see it more clearly. “The path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day.” (Prov. 4:18) It will be found that prophecy has a small or miniature fulfillment, to wit, upon those to whom the prophecy was originally directed, and later a much larger and complete fulfillment, to wit, upon those living in the “time of the end”.
Who, then, interprets the Bible? The Paulist Press refers to the Bible as “the voiceless Volume”, and, after declaring boldly that “the pope is infallible!” it goes on to say: “By the consent of all antiquity the Bishops of Rome are the successors of St. Peter. Denial of the supremacy of Peter’s successors is a denial of the Gospel. A denial of all history and tradition. A denial of the Reason and Intelligence of God. ‘To place a Bible abounding in difficulties and apparent contradictions in the hands of all to draw a thousand different, conflicting meanings out of it would be to challenge God’s wisdom. But when beside the voiceless Volume is placed a living voice [meaning the pope] to interpret it, protecting from error in this duty, then, and only then, the system is complete, and worthy of Divine authorship.’” And the late James Cardinal Gibbons, in his book The Faith of Our Fathers, Chapter XI, entitled “Infallibility of the Popes”, page 133, asks: “If God could make man the organ of His revealed Word, is it impossible for Him to make man [meaning the pope] its infallible guardian and interpreter ? For, surely, greater is the Apostle who gives us the inspired Word than the Pope who preserves it from error.”
Many students have made this grievous mistake of thinking that God has inspired men to interpret prophecy. The holy prophets of the “Old Testament” were inspired by Jehovah to write as his power moved upon them. The writers of the “New Testament” were clothed with certain power and authority to write as the Lord directed them. However, since the days of the apostles no man on earth has been inspired to write prophecy, nor has any man been inspired to interpret prophecy. The apostle Peter emphatically says: “Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation.” (2 Pet. 1:20) The interpretation comes from the Lord in his own due time. When his due time arrives to bring about the physical facts of history by which facts those devoted to him can see that these facts are in fulfillment of prophecy, then the prophecy can be understood. We apply the physical facts (well known to be true) to the texts of the Bible, and thereby readily sec whether the same agree or not; and if they agree, they are true. The truth does not belong to any man or any other creature. God’s Word is truth. (John 17:17) In his due time he makes it clear to those devoted to him, and not before.
To his faithful apostles Jesus said: “And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another helper, that he may be with you to the age; the spirit of truth, which the world cannot receive, because it beholds it not, nor knows it; but you know it; because it abides with you, and will be in you.” “But when he may come, the spirit of truth, he will lead you into all the truth; for he will not speak from himself; he will speak whatever he may hear; and declare to you the coming things.” (John 14:16,17 ; 16:13, Emphatic Diaglott translation) The spirit of God was given to these disciples at Pentecost after Jesus’ resurrection and ascension to
October 15, 1939
WATCHTOWER.
319
heaven, and thereafter they spoke or wrote under the supervision of the spirit of God. (Acts 2: 4) The Lord did show them things to come, and some of them uttered words of prophecy. There is no Scriptural proof, however, that the apostles had successors, and therefore we must conclude that they had a special mission from the Lord to understand and speak according to his will. Without doubt some of them at least had a better understanding than they were permitted to disclose to others. Paul the apostle speaks of himself as receiving a vision from the Lord and of hearing words which it was not lawful for him to utter. (2 Cor. 12:4) The apostle Peter writes also: “Even as our beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, hath written unto you; as also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these things; in which are some things hard to be understood.” (2 Pet. 3:15,16) And Paul writes: “But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed. . . . But when I saw that they walked not uprightly, according to the truth of the gospel, I said unto Peter before them all, If thou, being a Jew [by birth; but now a Christian], livest after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why eompellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews?” (Gal. 2:11-14) So far as the Bible discloses, there is no other man since the days of the apostles who has had any vision that was not lawful for him to utter. From the words of Jesus we must understand that even his disciples would be permitted to understand God’s purpose only in his due time.
To illustrate: A dispute having arisen in the early church, “the apostles and elders came together [at Jerusalem], for to consider of this matter. And when there had been much disputing, Peter rose up, and said unto them, Men and brethren, . . . through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved, even as they. Then all the multitude kept silence, and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul, declaring what miracles and wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles by them. And after they had held their peace, James [evidently the chairman of the meeting] answered, saying, Men and brethren, hearken unto me: Simeon [the original name of Peter] hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for
his name. And to this agree the words of the prophets; as it is written, After this I will return, and will build again the tabernacle of David, which is fallen down; and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I w’ill set it up: that the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom my name is called, saith the Lord, who doeth all these things. Known unto God are all his works, from the beginning of the world. Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them, which from among the Gentiles are turned to God.” (Acts 15:6-19) Who interpreted the Bible here? Did Peter? No. Peter merely stated some physical facts, as did also Paul and Barnabas, and the apostle James applied those facts, comparing them with Bible prophecy; and thus Jehovah God, who both caused the prophecy to be written and caused the physical facts to come in fulfillment of the prophecy, gave the interpretation. There was no “private interpretation”.
A prophecy is usually in course of fulfillment before the followers of Christ discern it, and often such followers are used by the Lord to perform a certain part in fulfillment of the prophecy without their being aware that they are so used. Then, after progress in the fulfillment, God makes it known to them. By faith the true Christian goes on doing what he can in harmony with God’s will, and then the Lord shows him how he has been used by the Lord. Evidently the Lord does this for the purpose of encouraging the Christian and increasing his faith.
Interpretation of prophecy has been written time and again by men, and many have believed such interpretation to be true. Afterward, when they found out that the interpretation was not true, many have become discouraged and have turned away from the study of God’s Word. This is a great mistake. If we always keep in mind that the truth is God’s, and not man’s, and that no man can interpret prophecy, but that the time follower of the Lord can see it after it is fulfilled, then the student of God’s Word will be less liable to become discouraged. He will then be giving all honor and glory to Jehovah and not to any man. Jehovah never makes any mistakes. Where the student relies upon man, he is certain to be led into difficulties. When he relies upon the Lord, he will be kept in perfect peace.—Isa. 26: 3.
LETTERS
DECLARATION
September 14, 1939.
We, the Horicon, Wisconsin, company, Zone Number 2, of Jehovah’s witnesses, including the pioneer workers, declare that we are wholly devoted to Jehovah’s Theocracy under Christ, that we absolutely refuse to consider the malicious letters which some of the “evil servant” class have been circulating amongst the. brethren, seeking self-justification and sympathy. We will not co-operate with a class known as such who oppose Jehovah’s Theocratic government under Christ.
IL W. Hackbarth
Anna Roberts
Delmar Fennema
Robert B. Martin
Carl Otto
Melvin Hackbarth
Harold Hackbarth
Clara Hackbarth
GRATITUDE TO JEHOVAH
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Just a few lines to express my gratitude to Jehovah for the privilege I had of listening to your public lecture in Madison Square Garden last night. Although I did not succeed in excluding other stations from interfering, your voice came through in such volume that I was able to follow your address right through.
I am very much impressed with the courageous stand you have taken—Joshua moving down into the valley with his troops before the very gates of Ai, was the thought that went through my mind—and I joined wholeheartedly in supporting the Resolution passed.
May Jehovah use you, dear Brother Rutherford, still further for the task of meting out “meat in due season” for the instruction, encouragement and admonishing of His people. This is the fervent prayer of
Your brother in Jehovah’s Theocratic Government,
Jos. Bick, Switzerland.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
SOUND-CAR EXPLOITS IN ONTARIO
"At Capreol I went to see the chief of police for permission to use the sound-car. He took the book Enemies, Face the Facts, and Fascism or Freedom, and gave me the usual contribution and told me to go ahead with the sound-car. We played records at seven different places. The chief with his family in his car followed us up at every setup and heard the lectures. Next day a publisher called at their home with the phonograph. The chief’s wife brought her in and expressed herself as having enjoyed the lectures over the sound-car very much: ‘This is a good work you arc doing. God bless you.’ And she stated she would subscribe for The Watchtower later. I left her a sample copy. The same Sunday we were passing through a small village, solid French Roman Catholic. The priest noticed our car with the sign ‘Jehovah’s witnesses’. That afternoon he preached that the people should not take us in. However, when we went there witnessing we got in almost every home and played records in French on the subjects ‘Purgatory’ and ‘Resurrection’. Most of them were glad to hear these. Many told us that this is the truth, but the priest told them that if they took our books he would throw them out of town. Anyway, we placed some literature at least among them.”
“MY NEXT-DOOR NEIGHBOR”
“Is it my duty to give her a witness, or should I see to it that someone else did it? I had gathered the idea that she was all wrapped up in the Methodist church. Today I went over with the intention of telling her the truth, but just how and when I did not plan. She began to tell me how disgusted she was with the churches. It gave me a splendid opportunity. Instead of spending ten or fifteen minutes with her, I stayed two hours. I found out she has several of the Watchtower books, but could not understand them. Now, with the Lord’s help, I’m going to help her see the light.”
CANNOT ALWAYS GO BY REPORTS (VIRGINIA)
“I was warned emphatically not to call at a certain farm down the road, as Mrs. R. had told all her neighbors that any Jehovah’s witnesses calling at her house would receive a 'warm’ reception: she would set her dogs on them and chase them off the place, etc. A publisher who worked the territory before had been chased off by her dogs. Mrs. R. was ‘crazy’, and I would practically be taking my life in my own hands by calling on her. Rather undecided, when we came to the drive going into the R. home, I drove through two gates, came to a third gate right close to the house, and there, remembering a past experience with a vicious dog, I got cold feet, turned around and drove back to the main road. Three weeks later (yesterday) we passed the R. driveway, and a pioneer in the car stated she thought the R. place should be called on and that she was not afraid of the dogs and would witness to the R’s herself. So we turned in again. Mrs. R. met her at the door, smilingly invited her in, listened attentively to the record played, and took the book Salvation. When the pioneer started to leave, the whole family followed her outside and cordially invited her to call again. Meanwhile the ‘vicious’ dogs romped harmlessly in a pen some distance from the house. I drove away shamefacedly, realizing that the Lord had made provision for Mrs. R. to hear the message, in spite of the fact that I was ‘too scared’ to witness to her.”
HEARD MADISON SQUARE GARDEN SPEECH OVER RADIO
“He said: ‘Oh! Mother is interested in Judge Rutherford’s writings. She is visiting me from the East. Would you please call and see her ?’ I called the same day. Her son had married a girl of the Catholic faith since he was in California and had also gone to her church. She gave him a witness and asked her daughter-in-law if she would read some of the books, and after doing so she became very much upset and said some things!! I told the old lady about the June 25 lecture, and she said she would tune in. As she was only visiting, she asked her daughter-in-law if there was any objection if she turned on the lecture to hear Judge Rutherford. The daughter-in-law said: ‘Certainly you can hear the speech,’ and tuned in. She got quite nervous during the lecture as the heat was turned on, but said nothing. The next Sunday the old lady asked the young folks if they were going to chureh. The daughter-in-law spoke up immediately and said: ‘Mother, we have come out of the church!’ The old lady was overjoyed.”
THEY MUST HAVE ADVERTISED HIS CALLING BACK
“The pioneer made arrangements to come back the next afternoon for a back-call. When he came, to his surprise he found a house full, where more than twenty persons were assembled and awaiting him. Now a regular study is being conducted, a few are Watchtower subscribers, some have been immersed, and a company will soon be theocratically organized for service. It may be interesting to know that this is taking place among Ukrainian Catholics.”
“YOU CAN’T DO THAT!”
“After the Saturday afternoon information march a police officer visited one of the marchers who was well known in town. He said: ‘Are you one of those Russellites?’ ‘No, I am one of Jehovah’s witnesses.’ ‘But you were in that parade this afternoon, were you not?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Well, you can’t do any more of that.’ All were marching out of hall at 7: 30 p.m., in two groups, the zone servant ahead of one, and another witness leading the other. He had gone but a short distance, when a cop says: ‘You can’t do that; we won’t have that here.’ ‘Am I under arrest?’ ‘No! but----.’
The march goes on. About a block farther the chief stops the march and says: ‘Now be a good boy and go see why the mayor is making such a fuss about you people. No, you are not under arrest, but he would like to know more about what all this marching is.’ The march goes on. Mr. Mayor was pretty hot; one could not reason with him: ‘You can’t do that: it will cause mob violence. I’ll stop you people if I must use force.’ ‘O.K., Mayor, but we must do our duty.’ On we march, and not another yelp out of any of the bluffers. In Tiffin the chief of police stopped the march, saying: ‘You can’t do that on this street.’ This interference came as the publishers were finishing their route. The zone servant investigated. The mayor said: ‘You can’t do that in this town. I’ll not have seven or eight ministers down here on my neck about you people, and if any of you do any more of that kind of advertising, I’ll throw your rear ends in the jail.’ That evening the publishers turned out for the march, and march we did, by the Lord’s grace, and not a sound from any of the dogs did we hear.”
820
$



pswwywf"
■’’’I
*
i
J’
-
..fe-’V,,
io -
n

X’JI

i?
:•»
r


?

i i
-
if

■	' 7»'



ii
i!SWM
j^jjgjjgggi

hj>;

is

w

^4^


?&


•.	. ■:	Wi//> L;i nWKrfcifl

* r
&
J
iX'fiTioirur’?^

■W;
mW
z-*'
**v«5*.


■ s&i
Mfr-r&i
W

Th^y shall know that lam Jehovah’’
-Ezekiel 35:15.
■■
.r



!?.
Sv


Vol. LX
Semimonthly
No. 21
»
W.A
;4f5:
£
NOVEMBER 1, 1939
CONTENTS

£4r*r.- - L


Lt T.
■
f.
‘fl
?■*£»
|lp
w’ T:
i**rx Vtr2*^
££3
'?* '•. 1»* -
/ w .i ''£'$ i ill f
if;
P'
Neutrality....................
Entirely Neutral............
The Theocracy...............
Neutrality Foreshadowed ....
Israel’s Wars ..............
"Christendom” Not Theocratic Self-Defense ................
Dividing the People ........
Conscription ...............
Christian’s Position .......
Religious Harlotry............
Letters ......................
Field Experiences..............
.... 823 .... 323 .... 324 .... 325 .... 327 ._. 329
.... 329 .... 330 .... 331 .... 332 .... 333 ... 335 ... 336
a^G O Ct
"ri'
“War op Vindication” Testimony Period 322
“Government and Peace” “Kingdom News” No. 5.
“Watchtower” Studies ...
322
322
322
'-’	-A|^<T:W-| -‘..X,.
•CZ- •
Lt


4 ’ ji $ I
id
<


‘-7
©W.TB,:sT.^
l
1
gMHWWJaffiI


JTHE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street «	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President____W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13-
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent In the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling tho people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge In controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch olilces. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British..................„... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian.................  40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian........... 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African ...............   Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal sub-sciiption will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, 1879.
“WAR OF VINDICATION” TESTIMONY PERIOD
December marks the “War of Vindication” Testimony Period. Like the daily march around Jericho over a complete period, the testimony for Jehovah’s name and against the foes of Theocracy will continue despite the season of the year. All Theocratic publishers will offer to the public first a three-booklet combination on a 10c contribution, including Government and Peace if available. If this offer is not accepted, Government and Peace will be offered on a 5c contribution, or any contribution possible to the obtainer. This will insure a wide distribution of this most timely booklet. Portable phonographs will not be left in idleness, but should be used from house to house to run the latest recording, and the publications announced thereon will then be offered to the listeners. The war is on, and you will prepare to do your part therein, reporting at the end of the month’s campaign the effectiveness of your intensive activities.
"GOVERNMENT AND PEACE”
Honest hearers of the two speeches by the Society’s president to the world convention and radio audience from New York city have been anticipating this now booklet, for it contains his rousing, Convention-feature speeches “Government and Peace” and “Victory”. Millions of others of good will also will be eager to
read this booklet. It is of 64 pages, and is self-covered, but the unusual cover sets forth pictorially the circumstances of the Madison Square Garden public address. Your personal copy you may send for, remitting 5c contribution.
“KINGDOM NEWS” NO. 5
Now released! Excellent for general distribution from house to house, in conjunction with your regular house-to-house testimony work or otherwise. This new issue publishes the feature “Ensnared”, by the president of the Society, warning the people against the move to entrap all people to their destruction, under the guise of religion. Companies of Jehovah’s witnesses desiring to engage in a distribution of Kingdom News No. 5 should order them through their respective company servants. $1.00 per 1,000 copies on small orders.
"WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of December 3: “Neutrality,”
fl 1-21 inclusive, The Watchtower November 1, 1939.
Week of December 10: “Neutrality,”
fl 22-38 inclusive, The Watchtower November 1,1939.
Week of December 17: “Neutrality,”
fl 39-58 inclusive, The Watchtower November 1, 1939.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX	November 1, 1939	No. 21
NEUTRALITY
“They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world."—John 17:16.
JEHOVAH is the God of peace: “The God of peace be with you all.” (Rom. 15:33) “And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly.” (1 Thess. 5:23) Jehovah is not a pacifist, as that word is generally defined. In his own due time Jehovah makes war against those who blaspheme his name and defy Him and who oppose The Theocracy. “The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.” (Rom. 16:20) Jehovah God is always neutral in a controversy or war between nations or peoples who are on the side of Satan and a part of Satan’s world.
2 Christ Jesus is “the Prince of Peace”, and when his kingdom is fully in operation there will be no end to peace. (Isa. 9:6,7; Heb. 7:1,2) But Christ Jesus is not a pacifist. In God’s due time and at God’s command he makes war upon Satan and all of his organization and will completely destroy all the wicked. (Rev. 19:11; Ps. 110:2-4) When there is a controversy or war between those who are of Satan’s organization Christ Jesus is always neutral as to the contending sides.
8 “Neutrality” means to decline or refuse to engage in a controversy or war which is between others, and particularly when such warring nations are unfriendly to the neutral one. In such controversies or wars the neutral one does not take the part of either side, but refuses to take up the fight of one as against the other; and this is particularly true where the neutral one has no just cause to interfere.
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
* The position of Jehovah’s witnesses should be clearly and definitely defined, and that position must be fully supported by the Scriptures. Jehovah’s witnesses are Christians, who follow the lead of Christ Jesus their Head in obeying the commandments of the Almighty God, and who are therefore wholly and entirely devoted to the kingdom of God, which is The Theocracy. The mere fact that one claims to be a Christian does not mean that he is in fact a Christian. His course of action must prove his claim. A Christian is one who has fully covenanted to do the will of Almighty God and therefore to be obedient
to God’s commandments even as Christ Jesus, the beloved and exalted Son of God, obeys Jehovah’s commandments. As Christ Jesus is, so are his followers, Jehovah’s witnesses, in this world.—1 John 4:17.
5	There is now war among some of the nations of earth. Some of the nations not actually at war have declared their neutrality. It will be difficult for the officials of the nations to clearly understand the real neutrality of Jehovah’s witnesses, but their position must be so clearly stated that there may be no occasion to have any doubt as to where they stand and no doubt as to the correctness of the position they take or have taken.
ENTIRELY NEUTRAL
6	The true followers of Christ Jesus must follow where Christ Jesus leads, because they are called to take that exact course and they must be diligent to obey his and Jehovah's commandments. (1 Pet. 2:21) Wherever there is a conflict between the laws of the nations and the laws of Almighty God the Christian must always obey God’s law in preference to man’s law. All laws of men or nations in harmony with God’s law the Christian obeys. The words of Jesus, spoken to his disciples, apply to all persons who have made a covenant to be obedient to Almighty God. Concerning such Jesus says: “They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.” (John 17:16) That Jesus intended this rule to apply to everyone who becomes a real Christian is proved by his words, as follows: “Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word.” (John 17: 20) Jesus is sanctified or set aside entirely to the work of his Father, Jehovah, and concerning those who agree to follow in his steps Jesus says: “As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world. And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth.”—John 17:18,19.
7	The world mentioned by Jesus consists of the nations of earth under the supervision of the invisible overlord, Satan. (2 Cor. 4:4; John 12:31; .John 14: 30) The world of Satan, therefore, consists
324
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of the invisible, called “heavens”, and the visible, called “earth”; and which world, in God’s due time, will be completely destroyed. (2 Pet. 3:7) Jehovah’s witnesses are set aside and commissioned by Jehovah God to be the representatives on the earth of the Most High, the Great Theocrat. Jehovah’s witnesses are not a political or religious organization, and they have no part in the political affairs of this world, not even of the nations wherein they have their domicile. The authority for this position is clearly stated by Jesus, to wit: “I have given them thy word; and the world hath hated them [like aliens and strangers], because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.”—John 17:14.
8	Further addressing his true followers, the Lord Jesus says: “If ye were of the world [that is, a part of any of the nations participating in war with other nations], the world [that is, the rulers and supporters] would love his own; but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you [the followers of Christ Jesus] out of the world, therefore the world hateth you.”—John 15:19.
* The fact that the true followers of Christ Jesus, real Christians, are hated by the nations of earth is conclusive proof that such Christians must be neutral and not enter into any alliance with nations that are engaged at war with other nations. Some of the nations of earth, such as the United States, are now neutral toward other nations, but the United States or other neutral nations are not hated because of that neutrality. They are a part of the world and continue to have commercial dealings with the nations that are at war. The position of Jehovah’s witnesses is entirely different from that of the nations of earth. Jehovah’s witnesses are entirely neutral for Jehovah’s name’s sake, and because thereof they are hated, as Jesus stated, “for my name’s sake,” and the sake of his Father’s name. Jehovah’s witnesses are entirely for the Theocratic Government of the Almighty God by Christ Jesus the King. The uninterrupted rule of Satan has ended, and therefore great woes have come upon the nations of the earth. (Rev. 12:12) Concerning the end of Satan’s world the Lord Jesus says: “Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom”; and in this connection Jesus, further speaking concerning the Christian, says: “And ye [the followers of Christ Jesus] shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.” (Matt. 24: 7-9) This alone proves that Jehovah’s witnesses are entirely separate and apart from the nations of this world.
THE THEOCRACY
10	Many centuries ago Jehovah, the Almighty God, declared his purpose to set up the Theocratic Government, which is his kingdom by Christ Jesus, and
which kingdom shall rule the earth in righteousness. In the year 29 (A.D.) Christ Jesus was anointed and commissioned as King of the Theocratic Government or Kingdom, which he declared would be set up at his second coming. Christ Jesus was entirely neutral toward nations when he was on earth. He did not instruct his followers to take sides with any government or any nations of earth in their controversies, but he emphatically instructed all his true followers to devote themselves entirely to God’s kingdom, The Theocracy. He urged upon them the necessity of always praying for the coming and full operation of The Theocracy: “Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.”— Matt. 6:10.
11	He told his followers that the nations of this world seek entirely after material or selfish things, and then to his followers he said: “But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness [that is, seek The Theocracy, and not democracy, totalitarianism, Fascism, or any other political government] ; and all these things shall be added unto you.” (Matt. 6: 33) The Christian, that is to say, the true follower of Christ Jesus, who is for the government of Jehovah, could not take sides for or against any political government now on earth. Great religious organizations and the Fascists say, “We expect to rule the earth”; while the democracies say, “We will rule the earth”; and all of these are against Jehovah God’s kingdom by Christ Jesus. That his followers might have no reason to take a wrongful course Jesus instructs them to give no concern to the affairs of this world, and then adds: “For all these things do the nations of the world seek after; and your Father knoweth that ye have need of these things. But rather seek ye the kingdom of God; and all these things shall be added unto you. Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom.” (Luke 12: 30-32) Here is the positive and emphatic instruction that those who will have a part in the Theocratic Government, that is, in God’s heavenly kingdom, must be entirely neutral with reference to earthly nations.
12	Every nation on the earth, including those that are at war and those that are not now at war, endorses and practices religion, and religion and politics operate together, and not one of such nations is for the Theocratic Government of Jehovah, but all are against it. The nations of the earth pursue the selfish course for commercial and political gain. Some of these nations call themselves “Christian” nations, but they are all opposed to the kingdom of God by Christ Jesus. Every religious institution under the sun has some part in the affairs of this world, and therefore constitutes a part of this world; and that explains why the rulers of the nations of this world
November 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER.
325
do not hate the religious systems, as Jesus stated his followers are hated for his name’s sake. That proves that these religious systems are not for the name of Jehovah God nor for the name of Christ Jesus, but against God and his kingdom. The instructions given to those who are for the Theocratic government are that their citizenship is in heaven and their duty is to be entirely loyal and faithful to the heavenly government by Christ Jesus. Concerning this it is written: “(For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ; whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things [commercial, political and religious things].) For our citizenship is in heaven [A.R.V.]; from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ.” (Phil. 3:18-20) Mark this strong contrast pointed out between those who are Christians and those religionists, that is, who are of this world.
18 Does the Lord instruct his people to indulge in war for one nation against another nation? No; but, on the contrary, the emphatic instruction to the Christian is stated in these words: “Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this [world]; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier.”—2 Tim. 2: 3, 4.
14 One could not be a soldier of Jesus Christ and at the same time a soldier of the nation that is under the supervision of God’s enemy, the Devil. Hence the Christian does not entangle himself with the affairs of this world: “For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh: (for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds;) casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God [the great Theocratic Government], and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ [the King of The Theocracy].” (2 Cor. 10:3-5) Then the Christian is specifically instructed as to the warfare to which he is subjected: “For ours is not a conflict with . . . flesh and blood, but with the despotisms, the empires, the forces that control and govern this dark world—the spiritual hosts of evil arrayed against us in the heavenly warfare.”—Eph. 6:12, Weymouth.
15 The war of one nation against another nation of the earth is not the fight of the followers of Christ Jesus. If the nations of this world desire to fight, that is their affair entirely, and it is not at all the affair of one who has made a covenant to be faithful to Almighty God and his King and Kingdom. The Christian must not interfere in the least manner with the war between the nations. The Christian is not to
interfere with the drafting of men of either nation that goes to war. That is the affair of the nations of this world. The Christian must be entirely neutral, and this without regard to his place of birth or nationality. It is the privilege of each Christian to make his own position and relationship to the Lord clearly to be understood, that he is separate and apart from any of the nations of this world. Jehovah’s witnesses have separated themselves entirely from this world by covenanting to be faithful to God’s kingdom, and they have received the commission from Jehovah God to aid and comfort the peoples of the earth who seek righteousness, and that without regard to what nation such people may be subject to. They bring comfort to those who are seeking the right way, by declaring to them the name and the kingdom of Almighty God by Christ Jesus, calling their attention to the emphatic word of Cod that his kingdom is the only hope for mankind. (Isa. 61:1,2; Matt. 12:18-21) To those who have covenanted to do God’s will as followers of Christ Jesus he says: “Ye are my witnesses . . . that I am God”; that is, the Supreme One, and who gives peace and salvation to those who do his will. (Isa. 43:10,12; Ps. 3:8) Officials of the nations of this world and who have to do with the selecting of the army cannot have a proper appreciation of the scriptures hereinbefore mentioned, for the reason that they are of the world and have not devoted themselves to Almighty God. Concerning this It is written: “But the natural man [the man devoted to the things of Satan’s world] receiveth not the things of the spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the spirit of God.”—1 Cor. 2:14,11.
10 The fact that worldly men and officials do not understand and appreciate the clear distinction between the nations of this world and the great Theocratic Government of Jehovah God by Christ Jesus is no excuse for a Christian to yield to the demands of worldly nations. The Christian has made a covenant to be faithful to God and to his kingdom; and for the Christian to willingly break that covenant means his everlasting destruction. The position here announced of the Christian is nothing new, but was clearly set forth in the Scriptures long centuries ago for the guidance of the man of righteousness who has agreed to be faithful to Almighty God.
neutrality foreshadowed
” Jehovah used the Israelites to set up a typical theocracy, which foreshadowed his real and great Theocracy, his kingdom by Christ Jesus. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were faithful representatives of Je
326
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
hovah God, and they were always neutral in the wars of other nations. Abraham had nothing to do with the fight between the rulers of Sodom and Gomorrah and their enemies. The invaders overran the land of Sodom and Gomorrah, and a great conflict raged between them. Abraham and Lot, his nephew, were there, but they took no part whatsoever in that war. (Gen. 14:1-3) After that war between the contending nations was all over and one side seized Lot and his property and fled with the same, Abraham did pursue the invaders, not because he was an ally of the defeated ones, but because one of the enemy had seized and carried away Lot, the “righteous man”. (2 Pet. 2: 7, 8) Then Abraham pursued the invaders and recovered Lot, his nephew, and not because he was his nephew, but because Lot was a faithful servant of Almighty God. Thus the divine rule is established that one of God’s devoted servants is justified in acting in behalf of his fellow servants, the servants of God. The rescue of Lot accomplished by the armed forces of Abraham was fully approved by Jehovah, as shown by the following scriptures: “And Melchiz-edek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine; and he was the priest of the most high God. And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth; and blessed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And he gave him tithes of all.” —Gen. 14:18-20.
18 Abraham’s neutrality and the fact that he was not in any alliance with either of the warring factions are further proved by his refusal to accept any reward whatsoever or any part of the spoils taken from the enemy. (Gen. 14:21-24) This proves that Abraham was not the servant of any earthly king, but that he was the servant and representative of Jehovah God, the great THEOCRAT. Abraham’s neutrality was due to the fact that he was wholly devoted to the Theocratic Government, and therefore God addressed him as his “friend”. This is further proved by what is written concerning Abraham, to wit: “By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise; for he looked for a city [government] which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God.”—Heb. 11:9,10.
18 This scripture proves that he was a stranger and did not act as a native nationalist, putting the state above Almighty God. He dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob, and thus showed himself separate and apart from the others and that he was a noncombatant. He was a sheep herder, engaged in a peaceful business, and had no part in the affairs of the government in the land where he resided. lie had his mind and heart set upon God’s kingdom, the
Great Theocracy ; and further it is written concerning him: “Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by the sea shore innumerable. These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced [saluted] them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth.”—Heb. 11: 12,13. (See Diaglott, Rotherham’s, and Young’s translation.)
20 He "saluted” and thus attributed salvation to Almighty God, and hence he did not salute the flag of those worldly governments and attribute salvation and protection to them. He did not look for protection or salvation from any earthly government, and therefore it is written concerning him: “For they that say such things declare plainly that they seek a country. And truly if they had been mindful of that country from whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned.”—Heb. 11:14,15.
81 He could have returned to those governments whence he came by saluting their flag, and thus denying Jehovah God. And why did he not do so? The Scriptures answer: “But now they desire a better country, that is, an heavenly [that is, The Theocratic Government of Jehovah by Christ Jesus]: wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God; for he hath prepared for them a city.”—Vs. 16.
TYPICAL
82 Abraham’s neutrality was typical, and furnishes the true and correct guide for the Christians, who form a part of God’s “holy nation”; and concerning which it is written: “But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him [Jehovah, the Great Theocrat, by faithfully representing him and his government, and not by showing forth the praises of men] who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light.”—1 Pet. 2: 9.
88 Further showing that the true followers of Christ Jesus are separate and distinct from the nations of this earth, the scripture continues: “Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrim* [that is, not native nationalists or any part of Satan’s world], . . . having your conversation [behavior, course of action] honest among the Gentiles [nations] ; that, whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works [of faithfully representing Jehovah’s theocratic government by always bearing testimony to his name and kingdom by the course of action you take], which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation [that is, the coming of distress and trouble upon
November 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER,
327
the nations of the earth at Armageddon].”—1 Pet. 2:11,12.
** The only reason for any of the true followers of Christ Jesus to now be upon the earth is that they might bear witness to the name of Jehovah God and proclaim his kingdom. By remaining absolutely and entirely neutral in the controversies and wars between the nations, these Christians stand forth for the witness of the Most High and thus fulfill their commission, maintain their integrity, and prove their faithfulness to Almighty God and his King.
28 There was a time when those who are now Jehovah’s witnesses were a part of this world, but, having made a solemn covenant to do the will of Almighty God and having become the true followers of Christ Jesus, such are no longer any part of the world. “That at that time [as citizens of the world and hence a part of earthly governments] ye were without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world; but now, in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God; and are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone.”—Eph. 2:12,13,19, 20.
20 Being in Christ Jesus, one can no longer take sides in the controversies and wars between the peoples and nations, all of which nations are against Jehovah’s kingdom: “If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.”—Col. 3:1-4.
27 The truly covenant people of Almighty God now on earth are not pro-“foreign power”, nor hyphenated nationalists, with a divided human allegiance; they are not propagandists for either side of the warring factions. They are separate and distinct from all such and are solely the witnesses of Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government, and hence they must stand aloof from every nation of this world. They must declare the kingdom of God, and without doing so they cannot be faithful to God and receive his approval and-salvation to life. To them obedience to the world means everlasting destruction; obedience to Almighty God means everlasting life. What, then, must they do? They must be witnesses for the Lord and obey his commandments by pointing the people to his King and his Kingdom. —Matt. 24:7,14.
ISRAEL’S WARS
28 It has been claimed that the wars of the nation of Israel against other nations is proof that wars between nations may be properly indulged in and hence that Christians should join with other nations in making war. Such reasoning finds no support whatsoever in the Scriptures. The nation of Israel was not organized by any political ruler or dictator or usurper. That was God’s typical nation, formed and organized by the great Theocrat for the purpose of picturing the real Theocracy that shall rule the world by Christ Jesus. Israel had no man-made laws and no political parties and no religious advisers to direct the political affairs. This was true as long as that nation remained faithful to God. God chose the earthly location for his typical theocratic nation, as it is written: “A land which the Lord thy God careth for; the eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of the year even unto the end of the year.” (Deut. 11:12) “When the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel.” (Deut. 32:8) Jehovah God, the great Theocrat, was the ruler of that typical nation Israel, and his will the only law of the nation.
29 The land assigned to Israel was held in possession previously by the Canaanites and others who were devoted to devil-worship, and who therefore were against Jehovah God. That land God had given to Abraham and to his seed after him. (Gen. 13:14-17; 15:18-21; Ps. 105:8-12) The Canaanites, who were against God, refused to surrender possession to God’s chosen people and refused to come over on the side of the great Theocrat, and therefore they must be ousted. The only exception was the people of Gibeon, who voluntarily put themselves on the side of Jehovah and who therefore received protection and deliverance at the hand of God’s chosen servant, Joshua. Israel’s wars against the Canaanites were carried on by the direction of Jehovah God. —Deut. 7:1; Ex. 34: 24.
80 Joshua, whose name is the same as Jesus and who foreshadowed Christ Jesus, carried on such wars by the direct command of the Almighty God. and Joshua gained the victory for that reason.— Joshua chapters 9 and 10; Joshua 11: 20-23.
31 Israel was the only nation of earth to which God ever assigned any territory and authorized them to take possession of it by force. Hence the wars of Israel for gaining possession of what belonged to them by the gift of Almighty God foreshadowed Christ Jesus’ taking possession of the entire earth, a gift to him from Jehovah God, and Christ acts under the command of the Almighty. (Ps. 2:6-12) The Israelites did not invade that which belonged to
328
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
others. They took the land that belonged to them by a gift from Jehovah. Their participation in war was by the command of the Almighty God, and their obedience to his commandment was more acceptable than sacrifice. (1 Sam. 15:20-23) Such wars were righteous; hence God heard and answered the prayers of his typical people as long as they obeyed him. Victory was not granted to them by reason of their superior military equipment, but because God exercised his almighty power in their behalf. (Joshua 10:14) King David carried out God’s command in taking possession of the entire domain which the great Theocrat had assigned to His typical people. (2 Samuel 8; 1 Ki. 4: 21) Thus he pictured the Greater David, Christ Jesus, taking possession of the entire earth.
88	When the Israelites violated their covenant with God he permitted them to be punished by their enemies, and they never gained the victory over their enemies under such circumstances. But when the Israelites repented and turned to God he drove out their enemy invaders and gave Israel the victory. (Judges chapters 6 and 7) All these things happened to Israel for types and were written and recorded for the advice and guidance of faithful Christians now on the earth. (I Cor. 10: 11) None of the nations of “Christendom” ever had any territory assigned to them by the great Theocrat, Jehovah. The so-called “Christian” nations have taken possession of land by what they call “the right of discovery” or by purchase or by conquest, and not by God’s will. “Christendom” is the antitype of unfaithful Israel, which unfaithful people lost the whole land by reason of their unfaithfulness to God. “Christendom,” that is, the so-called “Christian” nations, are without any authority whatsoever from Almighty God to engage in war and with his approval and blessing. Hence the wars between the nations of the earth, even defensive wars, find no support or justification in the wars that Israel engaged in. There is nothing, therefore, that would justify the true Christian in obeying the political and religious rulers in taking up arms for aggressive war or even for defensive war of one worldly nation against another worldly nation. If the nations of “Christendom” or any other nations of earth desire to engage in war and do so, that is their affair, and it is the duty of God’s covenant people to remain entirely neutral as to such wars. Religious leaders, forming a part of this evil world, insist that Christians should engage in war between nations, citing the experiences of Israel as authority. The most powerful religious organization on earth now attempts to justify war, that is, war now raging between the nations, and hence the Roman Catholic Hierarchy of Authority urges the religionists of the various nations to take sides and go to war. Evi
dently they have overlooked their own previously announced conclusions upon this point. Some conscientious member of the Hierarchy at one time wrote and published the correct position in this matter, to wit: “Here, also, it is to be noted that nations cannot draw a parallel from the Old-Testament titles. The Israelites lived under a theocracy; God, as Supreme Lord of all the earth, in specific instances, by the exercise of His supreme dominion, transferred the ownership of alien lands to the Israelites ; by His command they waged war to obtain possession of it, and their title to war was the ownership (thus given them) of the land for which they fought. The privation thus wrought upon its prior owners and actual possessors had, moreover, the character of punishment visited upon them by God's order for offences committed against Him. No state can find such title existing for itself under the natural law.”—The Catholic Encyclopedia, Volume 15, under the heading “War”, and subtitle IV, page 548, column 2.
83	Contrary to their once announced correct doctrine, the Catholic clergy in various nations now advise the “Catholic population” to participate in a war, evidently reasoning that their failure to do so would cause the Hierarchy to lose much financial support. It is therefore apparent that they are willing to repudiate their former and once correct position and sacrifice human lives in order to maintain their own present position with the parts of this wicked world.
81	The Scriptures furnish no precedent or authority for a Christian to engage in war for one nation as against another, for the manifest reason that all such nations are against the great Theocratic Government and hence the fight between the nations is not the fight of one who is in a covenant to do the will of the Almighty God. The Israelites’ wars, which Jehovah approved, were for the purpose of taking possession of their own land. Outside of their own territory assigned to them by the Lord they were not authorized to extend their warfare to any more territory at any time.—See Deuteronomy 2:1-9, 19, 37.
85	When the holy land was invaded by other nations the Israelites were authorized to fight in a defensive war against such invaders. Specific examples are found in the Scriptures in reference to invasion by Egypt, Ethiopia, Syria and Assyria, and in which Jehovah not only approved the action of his typical people but came to their defense and fought their battles for them. (2 Ki. 18:9-37; 19:1-36; 2 Chron. 14: 9-15) When the internal enemy who was against God and his people rose up against them in war they were authorized to fight in self-defense and to subdue the anti-theocratic uprising. Such was the rule
November 1, 1939
3THE WATCHTOWER.
329
that God gave to the Israelites.—See Judges, chapters 3 to 16.
88	In the wars that raged between the nations in the outside world beyond the boundaries of the Theocratic territory of Israel the Israelites were commanded to remain neutral, and did remain neutral as long as faithful to Jehovah. When they violated that neutrality they suffered defeat and did not have God’s help. (2 Ki. 23:29-35; 2 Chron. 35:20-24) This rule governing the typical theocracy fixes the rule by which those who are of the real Theocracy must be guided.
“CHRISTENDOM” NOT THEOCRATIC
” There is no so-called “Christian nation” of so-called “Christendom” that is a theocracy, or any part thereof, because not one of such nations even claims Almighty God as the Ruler. All these nations are ruled according to man’s law. If such nations had Jehovah God for ruler the political power could not enforce conscription laws. The law of the political governments is not theocratic. Since God commands all of his covenant people to keep themselves aloof from the world and thereby devote themselves entirely and wholly to his kingdom, no person in a covenant to do the will of God is under obligation to take up arms for one political government as against another political government. The interest of the state and the interest of God’s theocratic government are not common. The ordinances or laws of the state do not express the will of Almighty God, because God has not authorized any political nation to act for him in declaring and making war on another nation. Exactly the opposite is the Scriptural rule: “Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world [of which ‘Christendom’ is a part]; if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now is my kingdom not from hence [not from the source of ‘Christendom’].” (John 18: 36) Again says the Word of the great Theocrat: “Blessed is the nation whose God is Jehovah, the people whom he hath chosen for his own inheritance.” (Ps. 33:12, A.R.V.) Not one nation within the realm of so-called “Christendom” has Jehovah for its God and Ruler, but all such nations hate Jehovah God and his government by Christ Jesus and hate those who bear testimony to his name and his government. (Matt. 24:9) In Germany there are some Christians that are truly and fully the covenant people of God. Why should they fight for Hitler and his gangsters that defy the Almighty God and persecute those who serve Jehovah God and Christ Jesusl Some of these faithful Christians have recently been, as the press announces, executed, that is, put to death, because they would not bear arms at the command of Hitler. Thus
the executed one proved his integrity and faithfulness to the great Theocratic Government and is guaranteed resurrection and life everlasting; which no gangster such as Hitler will ever get.—Rev. 2:10.
THEOCRACY
88	The Theocracy is the heavenly, invisible government of Jehovah God by Christ Jesus, the King, who is invisible to human eyes. (Isa. 9:6,7) That government is not allied with or represented by any religious, political, judicial government on the earth. If the church-state governments were a part of God’s Theocracy, then there would be only one government, under one Leader, Christ Jesus. Hence there could be no war between them. There would be no international division, and no rivalry, and hence no bloody conflict between the peoples of those nations. Neither would the clergy of one of such nations pray to some reputed “god” to favor one of such countries at war as against another nation at war. Christ is not divided. The Theocracy is one inseparable, righteous government, always righteous. (1 Cor. 1:10-13; 3:1-4) It follows, therefore, that Jehovah must be neutral, and hence his ear is deaf to the prayers of the clergy of all sides of the war between the nations. Jehovah God hears only the prayers of those who are for his Theocratic Government. (1 Pet. 3:12) A religious state is anti-Theocracy, and to such state God shows no favors over another like svtle or nation. Jehovah God is neutral, and his covenant people who have vowed to serve him and his Theocracy must therefore remain neutral, depending wholly and entirely upon God for protection and salvation.—2 Cor. 10: 3,4.
SELF-DEFENSE
89	A “pacifist” may properly be defined as one who refuses to fight under any and all circumstances. The covenant people of God are not pacifists, even as God and Christ are not pacifists. God’s covenant people are authorized to defend themselves against those who fight against the Theocratic Government. Nehemiah of Judah was in times of peace the official of the Persian government. He did not engage in building up military defenses for Persia. Because he remained neutral he was falsely accused as a sedi-tionist. (Neh. 1:11; 2:1-20) Nehemiah devoted himself to building up and strengthening the interest of Jehovah’s typical covenant people as against the anti-God forces. (Neh. 4:7-23) His opponents conspired together to fight against Jerusalem and to prevent God’s covenant people from carrying out the commandments of the Almighty. Therefore Nehemiah armed the servants of God, who worked with him, and commanded them to “fight for your brethren”.—Neh. 4:1,14.
330
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
40	Likewise Zerubbabel, who was commanded by Jehovah to rebuild the temple at Jerusalem. (Ezra 1:1-11; 2:1,2; 3:1-13) He did not devote himself to the building up of military defenses of Medo-Persia; and because he remained neutral as to the political state Zerubbabel was accused of sedition, which charge was false. (Ezra 4: G-24) But Jehovah God protected and blessed Zerubbabel in his work in behalf of the covenant people of God. (Ezra 5:1-17; G: 1-22) Thus God’s rule is fixed. Likewise Jehovah’s witnesses today, in caring for the interest of The Theocracy by arranging for and holding public meetings and there proclaiming the name of Jehovah and his King, and by advertising the kingdom as commanded, have the right to defend themselves against the assaults of the anti-God, anti-Kingdom crowd who would hinder such work which God has commanded them to do; and in defending themselves they have the approval of the Almighty.—See The Watchtower, “Doom of Religion,” September 15, 1939, page 279.
41	Being entirely neutral as between the nations of earth Jehovah’s witnesses do not pray to God for one political ruler as against another. They do not pray, as commanded by the ruler of any earthly government, for the success of the armies of one nation against another, but they pray as Jehovah God, by Christ Jesus, has commanded them to pray, to wit: ‘Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on earth, as it is done in heaven.’ (Matt. 6:10) God’s people are now living on the earth practically under all earthly governments, and it would be entirely inconsistent for them to pray for one government as against another, and particularly in view of the fact that all of such earthly governments are against God's kingdom. Jehovah’s witnesses pray to their Father in heaven, who is eternal, and who is neutral as to all earthly governments, and who declares that in his own due time he will by the hand of Christ Jesus completely destroy all governments that are opposed to and against The Theocracy, for the reason that such opposing governments are under the hand of Satan.
42	Jehovah’s neutrality is further proved by the fact that he ordered his anointed King, following his resurrection, to take no action for or against any other nation on earth until due time for the Theocratic rule to begin. He commanded Christ Jesus to remain inactive toward all such nations until God sends hint forth to rule; which He did in 1914: “The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion; rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.” (Ps. 110:1, 2; Heb. 10:12,13) At the end of the world, that is, after the time came for Satan to be ousted, God sent
forth his King to rule. That did not mean that Jehovah was taking sides between the nations which rise up against each other in war (Matt. 24:7,8), nor did Jesus tell his faithful followers to take sides, but, on the contrary, he commanded them to go about amongst all the nations and preach the good news, giving testimony that Satan’s world had ended and that the kingdom of righteousness is at hand, which shall vindicate Jehovah’s name and bring blessings to the obedient people. (Matt. 24:14) The end of Satan’s world has come, and God by Christ Jesus takes a hand in completely ousting Satan and all of his supporters from the earth because the earth belongs to Christ Jesus as a gift from Jehovah God. —Ps. 2:8,9.
43	The rule by which Jehovah’s covenant people must now be governed is that of strict neutrality between the nations at war. It is the privilege of all nations to fight it out amongst themselves, but the Christian must not interfere, by word or act, with the governments in any action they may take with reference to the conscription of men or material for the war. The covenant people of God must keep their hands off, because it is not their fight and it would be wrong to try to induce others not to fight. Each one must determine for himself his relationship to God and his government.
44	Jehovah favors no political nation as against another like nation. In due time he expresses his wrath against all such nations, because all are against his kingdom. “Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people; let the earth hear, and all that is therein; the world, and all things that come forth of it. For the indignation of the Lord is upon all nations, and his fury upon all their armies; he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter.” (Isa. 34:1,2)—Jer. 25: 31, 32; Zeph. 3:8; Hag. 2: 22; Rev. 11:17,18.
DIVIDING THE PEOPLE
45	Jehovah assumes no responsibility for national division, that is, for one system of government of men as against another system of government. On the contrary, Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s King, is now present, judging and separating the people of all nations into two classes, that is to say, the obedient ones in one class, designated as “sheep”, and tli<‘ disobedient or opposing ones, designated as “goats". (Matt. 25: 31-46) The questions or issues upon which the individual division takes place and which all such individuals must by their course of action answer are these: Are you for the Theocratic rule by Christ Jesus the King? Do you, on the contrary, favor tiecontinuation of Satan's rule by the political and religious elements of this world? Each individual must choose for himself.
November 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
331
48 Jehovah’s covenant people stand aloof from the nations that are anti-Theocracy, and they must remain neutral as to all such nations. There is but one nation that has Jehovah’s approval, and that is his “holy nation”, composed of Christ Jesus, the Head and Ruler, and all those who fully support and are associated with Christ Jesus. (1 Pet. 2:9) These faithful followers of Christ Jesus, in order to live, must prove their integrity and remain true and faithful to Jehovah and his King. Now the nations of earth, controlled by the religious and political rulers, conspire together to cause God’s covenant people to be cut off from being a holy nation. (Pss. 83:2-18; 2:2-6) As to all such opposing nations, they are the enemies of God and of his covenant people, and therefore the covenant people must not mix up with or become a part of any of such opposing nations.
41 What shall be the end of those nations that oppose the Theocracy and that persecute the faithful witnesses and their “companions”, who obey the commandments of God by preaching this “gospel of the kingdom”? Jesus answers that question as follows: “And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?”—Luke 18: 7, 8.
48 Even if some nations of earth have heretofore declared that they are God’s nation, it is certainly true now that every nation on earth has forgotten God and now opposes his Theocratic government. Because they oppose that kingdom and those who work under the King’s supervision, all such nations are wicked and their end is fixed. “The Lord is known by the judgment which he executeth; the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands.... The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations [(Hebrew) goyim] that forget God.” (Ps. 9:16,17) Concerning such Jehovah directs his covenant people to pray: “Arise, 0 Lord; let not man prevail; let the heathen [(Hebrew) goyim; nations] be judged in thy sight. Put them in fear, 0 Lord; that the nations may know themselves to be but men.” (Ps. 9:19, 20) “0 God, the heathen [(Hebrew) goyim] are come into thine inheritance; thy holy temple have they defiled; they have laid Jerusalem on heaps.” “Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen-that have not known thee, and upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name [in spirit and in truth and without hypocrisy].” (Ps. 79:1, 6; 2 Tim. 3: 5) (Isa. 64:1, 2; Rev. 11:17,18) It would be entirely inconsistent and in disobedience to God’s commandments for any covenant child of his who supports His Theocracy to line up with and fight for one earthly nation as against another earthly nation, both of which nations are
against the Theocratic Government. Therefore the position of Jehovah’s witnesses is complete neutrality.
48 Without a question of doubt every nation of earth has violated the everlasting covenant of God concerning the sanctity of life. This they have done by wrongfully killing human and beast creation, and particularly by killing those who are devoted to God, and whom they have killed because such were faithful to Jehovah God. (Gen. 9:4-6,16,17) The only justified killing of any human creature is in selfdefense or as God’s executioner. (Ex. 22:2) No nation on earth has ever claimed that it is free from the wrongful taking of the lives of others, and which has been done in disregard of God’s law. Concerning all such it is written: “The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.”—Isa. 24:5.
UNSPOTTED
80 Those who are for the great Theocracy and who have therefore made a solemn covenant to do the will of Almighty God, the great Theocrat, must keep themselves unblemished and uncontaminated from the affairs of the nations of earth, which are against the great Theocrat ; as Jesus plainly declared: “They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. Sanctify them through thy truth; thy word is truth.” (John 17:16,17) By the truth of Jehovah’s Word they are completely set aside to his exclusive service. Therefore such are commanded to 'keep themselves unspotted from the world’. (Jas. 1:27) “Unspotted” means to be free from blemish and from mixing up with the affairs of this world. Those who worship God in spirit and in truth must do that very thing. Such constitutes the true worship of Almighty God. There has crept into the Authorized Translation of the Bible, in James 1: 27, the word “religion”, which is improperly there. The correct translation of that text is as follows: “For the worship that is pure and holy before God the Father, is this: to visit the fatherless and the widows in their affliction, and that one keep himself unspotted from the world.” —Jas. 1:27, Murdock’s Syriac.
CONSCRIPTION
01 Within the realms of warring nations there doubtless are many who have devoted themselves to Jehovah God and his kingdom by Christ Jesus. Those respective nations by law conscript the manpower and send men to war against other men. That is the affair and responsibility of each of such nations, about which true neutrals have nothing to say. Public officials who have to do with conscription and the hearing of applications for exemption from military service do not understand and appreciate the
332
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
relation of Jehovah’s witnesses and their “companions”, the “other sheep” of the Lord, to Jehovah, the great Theocrat, and Christ Jesus. In order to induce Christians to withdraw their application for exemption from military service the conscription officer propounds this question: “Would you defend your mother from attack?” Of course, the Christian would give the answer which the Lord Jesus gave, because such is the Scriptural answer, by which he is governed. It is not for one person to decide for another what answer should be given, but the Lord himself fixes the matter. Each person must decide for himself his own relationship to God and Christ. Christ’s definition of who is the mother or brother of one of the covenant people of Jehovah God furnishes the true and correct guide for all Christians. Jesus was instructing the people, and concerning those who would love him and his kingdom he said: “He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad.” — Matt. 12:30.
M Necessarily one who is against the King is not for him, and one who is for the King cannot be against him. (Mark 9:40) The two texts above referred to are in exact harmony. Stated in common phrase, the position of every person is either for the King and his kingdom or against the King and his kingdom. There is no middle ground. At that point of his discourse to the people the following took place and these words were uttered by Cinist Jesus: “While he yet talked to the people, behold, his mother and his brethren stood without, desiring to speak with him. Then one said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thee. But he answered and said unto him that told him, Who is my mother? and who are my brethren? And he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren I For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.”—Matt. 12: 46-50.
•8 Further, Jesus clearly defined the relationship of those who do the will of Jehovah God: that all who sincerely do the will of God by obeying his commandments occupy the relationship to each other as brother, sister, and mother, that is, the family relationship of the family of God. The fact that one has a brother and sister and mother after the flesh but who are against the Theocracy by Christ Jesus does not at all mean that the Christian is under any obligation whatsoever to care for or protect such opponent of the kingdom.
The Scriptural answer to the propounded question, therefore, is this: If the one who is called “my mother” is against the kingdom of Jehovah by Christ Jesus, then the only duty I have towards such is to
tell her of God’s provision for mankind. If she is really devoted to God and his kingdom, then as my real relative in Christ Jesus I will do whatsoever I can for her protection and defense; but that does not mean that I must fight against the nation or people that is fighting another nation, both of which are against God and his kingdom. As to such nations I am entirely neutral and cannot and will not fight for one as against the other. If an enemy of the great Theocracy and His King attempts to do me harm and to hinder me and my work for the kingdom and fights against me and my spiritual mother or brother, then I have the right to defend myself against such assaults, and the right to defend my brethren, and I will do so.—Neh. 4:14.
” Thus the Christian clearly defines himself as for peace and righteousness but not as a pacifist.
CHRISTIAN’S POSITION
The position of the true follower of Christ Jesus is clearly set forth in the Scriptures. Such follower of Christ Jesus cannot compromise. One is either for The Theocracy or against that righteous government. If for the Theocratic Government and His King, then he is not going to compromise in order to escape hatred or punishment at the hands of enemies. He is now in a position to prove his integrity toward God and to prove that the Devil’s challenge to Jehovah is a wicked lie. (Job 2: 5) Therefore as a follower of Christ Jesus he can be faithful and true to God, and will do so, come what may.
67	Jehovah the great Theocrat has now enthroned his King and sent him forth to rule. (Pss. 2:6; 110:2; Rev. 11:17) Christ Jesus is now at the temple of Jehovah conducting his judgment of the nations. God’s “strange work” of exposing the fallacy and the hypocrisy of religion, and pointing- the people to the fact that The Theocracy is the only hope for the peoples, is now in progress, and that work will be finished in his due time. (Isa. 28:21; Matt. 12:18-21) The Lord’s “other sheep”, the “great multitude” (Rev. 7:9-17), are now hastening to take their stand on the side of Jehovah and his King. The “strange work”, when completed, will be quickly followed by God’s act, “his strange act,” at the battle of the great day of God Almighty called “Armageddon”, and at which battle all the opponents of The Theocracy will die. Only those who have declared themselves for The Theocracy and who maintain their integrity shall live. Some of them may be killed by the enemy because of their faithfulness, but such have the promise of resurrection to life. Therefore all who receive protection and salvation from Jehovah must prove their integrity to the great Theocrat and to his King. No one who is devoted to the Theocratic Government and its King will fear what man
November 1,1939
THE WATCHTOWER
can do to him. He will fear God and obey him. (Isa. 8:13,14) Let all the faithful ones keep in mind the words of Christ Jesus spoken to them: “And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.” (Matt. 10:28) “But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.” (Matt. 24:13) It is far better to die faithful to God and because of faithfulness and receive at the hands of the Lord everlasting life than to compromise with any part of Satan’s organization and suffer everlasting destruction. Concerning the faithful it is written that those who now die faithful shall have an instantaneous resurrection from death, (1 Cor. 15:51,52) Jehovah God is the fountain of life, the everlasting Father, and the Giver of life to those who obey him, which gift he
333
makes through Christ Jesus, his beloved Son. (John 3:16; Rom. 6:23) “Salvation belongeth unto Jehovah,” and not to man nor to any organization of men. (Ps. 3:8) There is no room for compromise with the enemy. Remember that God has said to his people concerning the enemy: “And they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee.” —Jer. 1:19.
68	Those who have taken their stand on the side of the great THEOCRAT and his King will stand fast in that position, trusting in and relying solely upon God, well knowing that God will deliver them and grant unto them everlasting life. All who are on the Lord’s side will be neutral as to warring nations, and will be entirely and wholly for the great THEOCRAT and his King.
RELIGIOUS
JEHOVAH made Jerusalem to be “beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth”. (Ps. 48:2) For his own purpose he selected it when, in ancient time, this naturally favored spot of earth was held and used by a people that neither acknowledged nor obeyed him. He translated the control of the place from the polluted Canaanites and delivered it from the power of darkness into the kingdom of one with whom his everlasting covenant was made. The Most High God “chose the tribe of Jtdah, the mount Zion, which he loved”. There “he built his sanctuary like high palaces”. (Ps. 78:68,69) “For [Jehovah] hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his habitation.”—Ps. 132: 13.
At the time of Jehovah’s selecting this place for his exclusive use, strict justice could only consign it to destruction, but the mercy and loving-kindness of God exercised for and in her behalf permitted the city to stand. Of this act on his part Jehovah said: “Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold, thy time was the time of love; and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness; yea, I sware unto thee, and entered into a covenant with thee, . . . and thou becamest mine.” (Ezek. 16:8) It was a time to exercise love and mercy over it, and Jehovah did so, and it became Jehovah’s. lie covered its unsightliness by taking it from beneath the control of the first “covering cherub”, now the Devil, and placing it under the rulership of David his beloved King, that the name of the Almighty God might be there. “But I have chosen Jerusalem, that my name might be there; and have chosen David to be over my people Israel.” (2 Chron. 6: 6) “I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant. My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast with him. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David.” (Ps. 89: 3, 28, 34, 35) When Jehovah put David his king at Jerusalem he cleansed the city of its pollutions by the washing of the water of his Word, and by his kingly administration. “Then
HARLOTRY
washed I thee with water: yea, I throughly washed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee with oil.” (Ezek. 16:9) The anointing here mentioned is, in Hebrew, not the word denoting official designation, but is rather the anointing Ezekiel describes as done for a newly born and abandoned baby girl, cleansed, refreshed and made sweet. It symbolizes that God planted the city and put his name there, and that the royal city of his anointed was there. It was made ‘the city of the great King”. — Ps. 48:2; Matt. 5:35.
Ezekiel’s further figurative description appears in these words: “I [Jehovah] clothed thee, . . . and shod thee, . . . and I girded thee, . . . and I covered thee. ... I decked thee . . . and I put bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain on thy neck. And I put a jewel on thy forehead, and earrings in thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon thine head. Thus wast thou decked with gold and silver; and thy raiment was of fine linen: . . . thou didst eat, . . . and thou wast exceeding beautiful, and thou didst prosper into a kingdom.” (Ezek. 16:10-13) The psalmist says of Jerusalem that it was the “perfection of beauty”. (Ps. 50:2) Jehovah God blessed and enriched the city by his kings, David and Solomon; he made it to prosper into the grandest kingdom the world has thus far ever had. What contributed chiefly to its beauty was that it had the ark of God’s testament placed there on Mount Zion, and that later God caused Solomon to build the glorious temple within the city and on Mount Moriah.
The fame of Jerusalem spread throughout the earth. Even the queen of Sheba, hearing of the fame of Jerusalem and its king, came from the uttermost parts of the earth, and, beholding its glory, exclaimed: “The half was not told me.” In harmony with this Ezekiel prophesied: “And thy renown went forth among the heathen for thy beauty: for it was perfect through my comeliness, which I had put upon thee, saith the Lord God.” (Ezek. 16:14) God made the city famous: “And all the earth sought to Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his
334
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
heart.” (1 Ki. 10:24) “And [Jehovah] magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all Israel, and bestowed upon him such royal majesty as had not been on any king before him in Israel.” (1 Chron. 29:25) Jehovah’s name made Jerusalem famous. At the dedication of its temple Solomon’s prayer was in fact a prophecy when he said: “Moreover, concerning a stranger that is not of thy people Israel, but cometh out of a far country for thy name’s sake: (for they shall hear of thy great name, and of thy strong hand, and of thy stretched out arm;) when he shall come and pray toward this house.” (1 Ki. 8:41,42) It was God’s city, symbolical of his organization on earth. Out of this glorious eity and its people, the Israelites, so wonderfully favored of Jehovah, only a small remnant remained true and faithful unto God.—Isa. 1: 9.
Let it now be noted how God has duplicated all of this in the spiritual manner toward his true organization, his chosen “people for his name”. To earth he sent his beloved Son, whom David foreshadowed and who with his own blood purchased the right of men to live. It was Christ Jesus, God’s anointed King, that brought life and immortality to light. (2 Tim. 1:10) With Christ Jesus and his faithful apostles whom God gave to him Jehovah laid the foundation of his glorious new organization, and at Pentecost the way was opened for others to enter and the selection of the members of the kingdom began.
All these were originally “dead in trespasses and sins”, all “children of wrath [and polluted], even as others”, a people “which had not obtained mercy”, symbolized by the accursed Canaanites. Upon the intercession and mediation of Christ Jesus those who came seeking the way to life Jehovah justified. He brought them into the eovenant by sacrifice, and made them his children by begetting and adoption; and he cleaned them up ‘by the washing of the water of his Word’. (Eph. 5:26; Titus 3:5) Then he called such into his kingdom and clothed them with the insignia of service in his organization. He fed them upon “food convenient” for them, beautified their hands and feet, and made them “stewards of the mysteries of God” and “ambassadors for Christ”; and he anointed them and brought them into the covenant for the kingdom. Thus Jehovah did for those who were faithfully devoted to him ; and thus he shows forth the rule that must govern all who start to follow in the footsteps of Christ, and who shall thereafter be approved by Jehovah.
Concerning Jesus’ faithful followers Paul the apostle wrote: “For from you sounded out the word of the Lord not only in Macedonia and Aehaia, but also in every place you)1 faith to God-ward is spread abroad; so that we need not to speak any thing.” (1 Thess. 1:8) In those days the fame of the little band of faithful followers of Christ Jesus was spread throughout the land: “Your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world.” (Rom. 1:8) These faithful ones learned and boldly performed instructions Jesus had given them from his Father. God’s purpose is that his chosen people shall be witnesses to all creation, concerning his own supremacy, his glorious name and the majesty of his King and kingdom: “The gospel which ye heard, which was preached in all creation under heaven.’’ (Col. 1:23, li.V.) “For we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men.” (1 Cor. 4:9) Heathen
religionists, their beliefs and their practices, have been at all times and are now of the Devil, and an abomination in the sight of God. True and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are a sweet savor unto Jehovah: “For we are unto God a sweet savour of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish; to the one we are the savour of death unto death; and to the other the savour of life unto life. And who is sufficient for these things?”—2 Cor. 2:15,16.
Jesus instructed his apostles to let their light shine, and says to his faithful followers: “That ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world; holding forth the word of life.” (Phil. 2:15,16) “Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles; that, whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.” (1 Pet. 2:12) Such are “a peculiar people”, chosen for Jehovah’s name’s sake, “zealous of good works.” (1 Pct. 2:9; Acts 15:14; Titus 2: 14) That which makes the earthly members of God’s organization beautiful and a spectacle for men and angels is the ‘Word of life and truth held forth’ by them. The laying of the foundation of Jehovah’s capital city or organization in the days of Jesus’ service on earth marks the beginning of the greatest favor that ever came to creatures.
But what is the net result as of today?
Out of all those who have been favored with some knowledge of God’s truth, and who have been brought into the covenant by sacrifice, today there appears but a small remnant that is true and faithful to Jehovah God and to his Christ.
All that came to pass upon the Israelites foreshadowed what has come to pass and is to come to pass upon “Christendom”. One is a parallel of the other. The reason for the falling away of the Israelites, and the reason that there has been a great falling away of “organized Christianity”, and the reason for the destructive calamity that is about to come upon her, God caused Ezekiel to foretell and state in these words: “But thou didst trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the harlot because of thy renown, and pouredst out thy fornications on every one that passed by ; his it was.”—Ezek. 16:15.
The physical facts completely prove the fulfillment of this prophecy. The clergy and the “elective elders” and the principal of the flock, because of pride, have exalted themselves and boasted of their own glory, and have neglected to look to and honor God, from whom all things good proceed. When mention is made of the clergy, no individual is singled out, but reference is made to those who assume to be preachers in the church and who glorify themselves and not Jehovah God and his King Christ Jesus. As to those who seek the favor of men, and who give honor and glory to men, such are mentioned as a class. Pride and extreme ingratitude mark all such. All of God’s favors bestowed upon “Christendom” are ignored and forgotten. “And in all thine abominations and thy whoredoms thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, when thou want naked and bare, and wast polluted in thy blood.” (Ezek. 16:22) Thus it was with natural Israel, and so it is and has been with so-called “organized Christianity”.
November 1,1939
WATCHTOWER,
335
Paul, addressing the boasters and comparing them with the faithful, wrote: “For who maketh thee to differ from another? and what hast thou that thou didst not receive? Now if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it? We are fools for Christ’s sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honourable, but we are despised.” (1 Cor. 4:7,10) What is said about the clergy applies to all who profess to be on the side of God and Christ, whether mature or immature ones, who take a similar or like course, who cause strife and division, and who prostitute the truth and gain popularity with the world. Of and concerning such it is written: “From whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members? Ye lust, and have not: ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain; ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not. Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts. Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is the enemy of God. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners; and purify your hearts, ye double minded.” (Jas. 4:1-4, 8) The clergy of “Christendom” have prostituted and commercialized the Word of God in order that they might satisfy their own selfish desires. They have prostituted “Christianity” with the political powers in order to gain popularity and favor among men.
That which marks the true followers of Jesus Christ
as the people of God is symbolized by their “garments”. Claiming to be Christ’s, “organized Christianity” and all its representatives have used their garments, or means of identification, to adorn the polluted places of Satan’s organization, and this they have done in order to draw to them the support of worldly organizations. “And of thy garments thou didst take, and dcckedst thy high places with divers colours, and playedst the harlot thereupon; the like things shall not come, neither shall it be so.” (Ezek. 16:16) The ‘fair jewels of gold and silver’, picturing the truth which God gave to the followers of Christ, have been polluted and employed in the worship of images of men, and used as a means to commit spiritual fornication with Satan’s organization. “Thou hast also taken thy fair jewels of my gold and of my silver, which I had given thee, and madest to thyself images of men, and didst commit whoredom with them.” (Ezek. 16:17) The clergy and the unfaithful elders have perverted the service of Almighty God by substituting their own ceremonies, or ostentation of “character development”, or the worship of men as leaders in “Christendom” by setting up religious images to be worshiped, thereby intending to draw others after them; and thus they have committed whoredom, in the language of the scripture. The food which Jehovah has graciously provided for spiritual Israel, to wit. his Word, and the refreshing “oil” and “incense”, symbolizing their refreshment and sweet savor that comes from proper use of his Word, have been polluted by being mixed with devilish doctrines and satanic worship.—Ezek. 16:18,19.
LETTERS
JEHOVAH A GOD OF ORDER
We, Jehovah’s witnesses of Switzerland assembled with our companions at Zurich, September 3, 1939, at convention, herewith declare solemnly:
Our hearts are filled with joy in the realization of the fact that we, by Jehovah the Highest, who is a God of order, and by his Son Jesus Christ as the Good Shepherd, have been brought into a condition of complete and unshakable unity, whereby alone it was possible, and will be so in the future, as it pleases Him, to give to the nations of earth the witness as commanded by the Lord.
With this firm conviction we declare that the institution organized by Jehovah for the proclamation of the coming just rule on earth is Jehovah's visible Theocratic Government. Moreover, that Jehovah and Jesus Christ are the “higher powers” to whom the anointed and their companions on earth must render unconditional obedience and absolute confidence.
We further declare that even though persons in God’s great organization are not of importance, we recognize that the Lord has placed special responsibility upon Brother Rutherford as the president of the Watciitoweb Bible and Tract Society, and that the Lord has given to him a special measure of his spirit whereby he has been enabled to serve the people of the Lord, that is, his brethren, in an unselfish manner, and has so been able to help them to fulfill their covenant obligations to the Highest faithfully.
We, who are thus blessed by the Lord, anointed and Jonadabs, declare on this day, because of a burning desire to do so, that we will faithfully support our dear Brother Rutherford and also Brother Harbeek who, thirteen years ago, under direction of the Lord’s spirit, was appointed by Brother Rutherford as the servant
of the Central European office in Berne, and thus help to push the work of proclamation with all our might.
Finally, we declare that we will sever any connection with such as do not possess with us this spirit of loyalty and unity and who refuse to form a closely united front against the enemy Satan and his allies.
Whoever can support with his whole heart what was read, may now manifest it by rising from his seat.
Brothel- Harbeek is charged to communicate this resolution to Brother Rutherford.
RESOLUTION
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Realizing that this is a time of great peril and of great shaking and that subtle dangers beset the people of Jehovah as the Devil attempts to destroy the morale of the Lord’s people, to safeguard the kingdom interests committed to its care the Milwaukee [Wis.] company of Jehovah’s witnesses desires to go on record as follows:
We are first, last and all the time for Jehovah’s Theocracy. We wish to once more reiterate our full faith and confidence in The Watchtower as the channel of Jehovah’s truth and in you as the one to whom the Lord has intrusted the responsibility of the kingdom interests therewith.
This resolution was passed by the Milwaukee company at its regular meeting in Kingdom Hall, Sunday, October 1, 1939.
May Jehovah bless you as you seek by all means within your power to press the battle to the gate. We are with you and by the Lord's grace will permit nothing to disrupt or retard the Lord’s work in this area.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
NEXT: ORGANIZE THEM FOR STUDY, SERVICE
“The woman accepted a Bible and Enemies. Being short on funds she requested me to come back on some later date to receive the contribution. Taking an afternoon off from my regular seeular work (I am a farmer) I decided to journey over and make this call so long pending. Approximately an hour’s drive found me at my destination. I found the lady home. She was pleased to see me and was only too glad to contribute for the literature placed. I gave a short witness, my phonograph being loaned to an interested person. She appeared more interested; told me to go next door, that her sister lived there, that she wanted to see me. I went next door; found her sister in. She asked me various questions. She saw the books her sister had, was interested, and wanted a set like them. I placed with her a Bible and Salvation. Then she informed me of a friend of hers also interested. She too wanted to see me. I took the address and went immediately. I found her in. She saw the books and wanted a set. I placed a Bible and Salvation. Her married daughter came in, saw me, and saw the books her mother just got. She wanted a set. I placed a Bible and Salvation. Both asked me a lot of questions, appeared deeply interested, said they had been waiting for me to come around. Daughter said: ‘I have a friend that wants to see you. She’s interested in this. Could you go and see her?’ Did I! After a short verbal testimony I made straightway to the person mentioned. I found her in. She wanted a set. I placed a Bible and Salvation. She asked me many questions, was deeply interested, and wanted to know much about this work. All this took place within twenty minutes’ time: 4 Bibles, 4 Salvation, among four people, not including the first lady, of course. All contributed cash!”
PHOTOGRAPHIC TESTIMONY UPHELD INF. MARCHERS
“They were given traffic tickets, and it came up before the court last Thursday. There were 24 publishers who were given tickets. The police officer put in his story, and, as in most cases, the truth was not told. He informed the court that the marchers were about two feet apart and were causing a commotion, blocking the sidewalks, and told other untruths. The officer was allowed to complete his story. When he was finished, the enclosed pictures were handed to the judge. The judge looked at the pictures and could not see anything wrong and certainly not like what the officer described, and he turned to the officer and asked him what he was trying to do. By this time the officer’s face was getting redder all the time. Then all cases were dismissed and the judge told the officer he could not do this again. These pictures really settled tlie case, and it seems a good plan to have someone follow along with a camera who is not visibly identified with the marchers. In this way valuable information can be obtained and the pictures come in handy.”
LOST NO TIME WHILE PARKING
“A publisher recently, while accompanying her husband on a business trip to York, Pa., was sitting in their parked car on a downtown street. Deciding to make good use of the time she took up a number of Face the Facts booklets, got out of the car, and spoke to passers-by concerning the booklet. In a few minutes she had placed twenty-three booklets.”
BOOKMARK EFFECTIVE IN NEW YORK
“Shortly after Salvation was released and the new bookmark put into use a publisher called at a gas station. After she told the attendant of the purpose of her call, he flatly turned it down. Turning, she noticed a man near-by doing nothing, and not connected with the station. She approached him and told him about the message in Salvation and the importance of studying it. He listened carefully and then said: ‘That sounds good to me. I think I would like to read that book.’ Upon reaching into his pocket he found he had only 20c. He then persuaded the gas station attendant to lend him 5c to make the 25c contribution for Salvation, with which was left the bookmark. Several days later, with the aid of the bookmark, the man called at the Mount Vernon unit’s headquarters and stated he was not quite through reading Salvation but wanted three more, because he found it to be very interesting and that he was giving these to his friends. One week later he called again, obtained four more to distribute among his friends. A bookmark was given with each Salvation. Another publisher left a bookmark with Salvation when placing it. Two weeks later a family of three, father, mother, and young daughter, attended the Sunday night meetings, the lecture series and the Watchtower study, and stated after meeting that they have been reading Watchtower publications for some time and knew it was about time they did something else besides reading, but they never could locate any of the meetings. With the aid of the bookmark bearing the address and time of meetings they were able to get in touch with the nearest meeting. At our Sunday night 6:30 meeting, during the recorded lecture a person of good will was seen coming in with the bookmark in her hand, evidently referring to it in finding the unit headquarters.”
60-HOUR QUOTA EFFORTS IN LONDON
“Looking through the publishers’ record cards it is grand to see the efforts being made by the faithful to reach the quota of 60 hours a month. Four have passed their quota and reached 78, 72, 71 and 62; while 47 is the average of others. One Jonadab reports 65 hours for his first six weeks’ work. As an illustration of how Jehovah has provided all the necessary equipment that the great multitude may share in his strange work, I cite the instance of my little girl aged 5, who has joined with us in the service whenever possible and has become proficient in using the testimony card. In July she worked 22 J hours and placed 78 booklets, besides Watchtowers and 6 Consolation No. 516 since. Since August 1 she has been permitted to carry the Salvation book as well, and yesterday in 4 hours placed 2 Salvation books, 10 booklets and a Watchtower. Last week she asked me for a midget phonograph.”
HOW PIONEER GOT SUBSCRIPTIONS
“During the last three weeks it has been my privilege to receive seventeen subscriptions for Tice Watchtower and Consolation. This was accomplished by continually presenting before the public the contents of said magazines and the necessity of their obtaining these magazines. First, however, I endeavor to play the series ‘Face the Facts’, or ‘Fascism or Freedom’, showing them the dangerous condition existing, thus arousing the interest. Interesting them, I present the magazines. With remarkable results seen.”
33C



ft'
JS4L-,
ft.,
-VJ * W"-'5 '•'• ~" -



G
f?
fc:
?■?-

U £
ft 7$ K-J

■v
r:
y
J

3
^g.
■^w0»>WWw!
.TWgtegggw
A .’-<j xjsjsa


.4* s>S* •^:
pti*
’-*7'
.1'
<?>■
'«

,*?
a.



5 i • Wira*
— „ >a ®* • tA>	z * • r5--<7' •••?.
.; z 'r. A-'.7-"v\	*^^^5
' ■ '-
JbhdvaJi’s KtkpoW
Z^.- - e
/safe.


hiW


rw
■|
i:
3
:
^mz.
i,-*?? kJ1'-
*■•> » z« *
£<
-i j*i"
77
J??n
;>•#*£**
‘S*f

i.
.- I



■4-^;
jJZ
rtf
M"

ST:
,7
'as&4u--^^4
ry-'Z-z^Tl
■ ’ WWidtJa
i$
Religion __________
Fear ..............
Froward............
Tongue .......„...
Millions Ensnared ... Means of Escape....
The Theocracy .....
Avoids Pitfalls....
Great .............
Satan Never in Hell Letters .............
Field Experiences....
339 342 343
344 344 345
346 347
348 348
351 352
IS
If
is
I
“War of Vindication" Testimony Period 338 “Kingdom News" No. 5 ............  338
Use Renewal Subscription Blank.....338
"Watchtower” Studies ..............338
zj?
P
©wtb. & TS


THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street •>	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretory “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yeably Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South Atiican and Australasian remittances should bo made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than tho^e mentioned may bo made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ..................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, WK, England
Canadian...................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.......... 7 Beresford Road, Strathficld, N. S. W., Australia
South Aft ican _________-......Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription pilce may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We arc glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will bo sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post ojfice at Brooklyn, N. 7., under the Act of March 3, 1819.
“WAR OF VINDICATION” TESTIMONY PERIOD
December marks the “War of Vindication” Testimony Period. Like the daily march around Jericho over a complete period, the testimony for Jehovah’s name and against the foes of Theocracy will continue despite the season of the year. All Theocratic publishers will offer to the public first a three-booklet combination on a 10c contribution, including Government and Peace if available. If this offer is not accepted, Government and Peace will be offered on a 5c contribution, or any contribution possible to the obtainer. This will insure a wide distribution of this most timely booklet. Portable phonographs will not be left in idleness, but should be used from house to house to run the latest recording, and the publications announced thereon will then be offered to the listeners. The war is on, and you will prepare to do your part therein, reporting at the end of the month’s campaign the effectiveness of your intensive activities.
“KINGDOM NEWS” NO. 5
Now released! Excellent for general distribution from house to house, in conjunction with your regular house-to-house testimony work or otherwise. This new issue publishes the feature “Ensnared”, by the president of the Society, warning the people
against the move to entrap all people to their destruction, under the guise of religion. Companies of Jehovah’s witnesses desiring to engage in a distribution of Kingdom News No. 5 should order them through their respective company servants. $1.00 per 1,000 copies on small orders.
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The blank sent you one month before expiration of your Watchtower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office in the country where you reside. Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals for The Watchtower, should always use these blanks. By filling in these renewal blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the lime of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a great help if you sign your name uniformly, and note any recent change of address, on the renewal slip.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of December 24: “Snares,”
fl 1-24 inclusive, The Watchtower November 15,1939.
Week of December 31: “Snares,”
fl 25-49 inclusive, The Watchtower November 15,1939.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX	November 15, 1939	No. 22
SNARES
"Thorns and snares are in the way of the frotoard; he that doth keep his soul shall be far from them." —Prov. 22:5.
TEHOVAH duly warned his typical covenant peo-I pie concerning the snares that endangered their J lives. In the face of such warning the typical people fell into snares, and the nation was destroyed. Jehovah’s words of warning were recorded for the specific benefit of those upon whom the ends of the world are now come, meaning the end of Satan’s world and the beginning part of the world of righteousness. (1 Cor. 10:11) Such warnings were “written for our learning” (Rom. 15:4) and for the protection of the people of God, who are today in a covenant with him, to the end that they may give heed to such warnings. “See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise.” (Eph. 5:15) To “walk circumspectly” means to look carefully round about and to see to it that one is moving in harmony with the way the Scriptures point out and is doing at all times that which is strictly in harmony with and in the interest of the Theocracy.
1A snare is a noose, a net, a hook, or a trap, into which the creature is liable to fall, and especially in danger, when he is not watchful and diligent in doing the will of God. Snares are laid by Satan, the wicked one. In placing snares the Devil uses the wicked spirits and wicked men, all of whom are mortal enemies of the covenant people of God: “The wicked have laid a snare for me; yet I erred not from thy precepts.” (Ps. 119:110) “The proud have hid a snare for me, and cords; they have spread a net by the wayside; they have set gins for me. Selah.”— Ps. 140:5.
* The chief work of the wicked one, the Devil, is to destroy creatures who have made a covenant to do the will of God. This the Devil does in his endeavor to carry out his challenge to Jehovah that he, Satan, could turn all men away from God. (Job 2: 5) There are many snares or nets laid now by the Devil in his endeavor to entrap the covenant people of God, that is, both the remnant and the Jonathan class, which will form the “great multitude”. To enable God’s people to detect and to avoid such snares The Watchtower calls the attention of the covenant people of God, and of all who desire righteousness, to the scriptures which give warning of such snares, and
also to the scriptures which point to the way of the only means of escaping such snares.
RELIGION
4 A snare that stands at the head of the list of those prepared and set by Satan the Devil is religion. Any form of worship that gives adoration, praise or reverential recognition to any object, creature or thing or image is properly designated as religion; and religion is a snare. For this reason Jehovah commanded his covenant people: “Thou shalt have no other gods before [above, besides, in the place or stead of] me.” (Ex. 20; 3) Jehovah God is the source of life, and salvation belongs to him alone. (Ps. 36:9; Ps. 3:8) He grants salvation only to those who obey him. A creature that claims to serve God and who at the same time gives reverential honor, worship or praise to any creature or thing in connection with such worship, is practicing religion. Jehovah God commands all to worship Christ Jesus because Christ Jesus is the express image of his Father, Jehovah, and because he is the Executive Officer of Jehovah always carrying out Jehovah’s purpose. (Heb. 1:3-6) But any creature performing a ceremony of adoration or worship, in which reverential honor, praise, or worship is given to a man, to woman or any image or thing, is hereby ignoring God’s commandment and is practicing religion in direct violation of the command of the Most High. The setting up and use of images of anything, claiming the same to be a part of the worship of God, is wrong because in violation of God’s commandment: “Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth: thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them; for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me.” —Ex. 20: 4, 5.
' Knowing this, the Devil shortly after the flood set forward Nimrod as one before, above and in the place and stead of Jehovah God to be worshiped by the people. Nimrod was a mighty hunter and slayer of 330	"
THE WATCHTOWER
340
animals and men and always did so in violation of God’s everlasting covenant. In worshiping Nimrod the people entirely forgot the Creator, Jehovah God. Nimrod was the beginning of organized religion. The people were induced to worship Nimrod while he lived and also after his death. He was made a “god” or mighty one, whom the Devil induced the people to worship. (Gen. 10:8-10) The Devil ensnared the people of many nations by leading them to worship the various wicked spirits called “gods” or mighty ones. Religion was thus used as a trap to ensnare the people of all nations. Long thereafter God chose Israel, the descendants of “his friend” Abraham, as his people and made a covenant with them and led them out of Egypt and started them on their way to the promised land. Thereafter he used that people to make pictures foreshadowing things that would come to pass in the end of the world. To safeguard the Israelites from the Devil religion, and to thus enable them to escape the snares of religion, God gave the Israelites specific commandment concerning religion or the worship of gods, spirits, or human mighty ones. Note the specific commandment of Jehovah warning the people against such snares: “Thou shalt not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their works; but thou shalt utterly overthrow them, and quite break down their images. And ye shall serve the Lord your God, and he shall bless thy bread, and thy water; and I will take sickness away from the midst of thee.” “They shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against me; for if thou serve their gods, it will surely be a snare unto thee."—Ex. 23: 24, 25, 33.
6	The people that inhabited Canaan and the countries round about practiced the Devil religion. These included the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites and the Jebusites. In making a covenant with the people of Israel and giving them warning against religion, God said to them: “Behold, I make a covenant; before all thy people I will do marvels, such as have not been done in all the earth, nor in any nation; and all the people among which thou art shall see the work of the Lord; for it is a terrible thing that I will do with thee. Observe thou that which I command thee this day; behold, I drive out before thee the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite. Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land whither thou goest, lest it be for a snare in the midst of thee: but ye shall destroy their altars, break their images, and cut down their groves: for thou shalt worship no other god: for the Lord, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God: lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and they go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods, and one
Brooklyn, N. Y.
call thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice.” (Ex. 34:10-15) God thus gave his law to his people to safeguard them from religion, the snare of the Devil, in order that they might be as a people ready to receive Christ when he came.
T Shortly before reaching the promised land Jehovah caused Moses to deliver to the Israelites His commandment concerning their proper conduct, and in this He specifically pointed out religion as a snare of the wicked one into which the Israelites were liable to fall and which they must be diligent to shun: “And thou shalt consume all the people which the Lord thy God shall deliver thee; thine eye shall have no pity upon them; neither shalt thou serve their gods; for that will be a snare unto thee. If thou shalt say in thine heart, These nations are more than I; how can I dispossess them? Thou shalt not be afraid of them; but shalt well remember what the Lord thy God did unto Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt.” "The graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire; thou shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein; for it is an abomination to the Lord thy God.”— Deut. 7:16-18, 25.
8	Here God warns specifically against the snare of religion and also against the snare of fear: “Take heed to thyself, that thou be not snared by following them, after that they be destroyed from before thee; and that thou inquire not after their gods, saying, How did these nations serve their gods? even so will I do likewise. Thou shalt not do so unto the Lord thy God: for every abomination to the Lord, which he hateth. have they done unto their gods; for even their sons and their daughters they have burnt in the fire to their gods. What thing soever I command you, observe to do it; thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it.”—Deut. 12:30-32.
9	Joshua succeeded to the place occupied by Moses. Both Moses and Joshua were types of Christ Jesus, and their words delivered to natural Israel applied specifically as commandments given by Jehovah through Christ Jesus to those now on earth who are in a covenant to do the will of God. They both spoke God’s commandments to the people, warning them against the snare of religion. Joshua delivered to the people God’s commandment: “Take good heed therefore unto yourselves, that ye love the Lord your God.” “Know for a certainty that the Lord your God will no more drive out any of these nations from before you; but they shall be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye perish from off this good land which the Lord your God hath given you.” “When ye have transgressed the covenant of the Lord your God, which he commanded you, and have gone and served other gods, and bowed yourselves to them; then shall the
November 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
341
anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land which he hath given unto you.” (Josh. 23:11,13,16) By his angel God delivered this further message to the people of Israel: “And an angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said, I made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you unto the land which I sware unto your fathers; and I said, I will never break my covenant with you. And ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land; ye shall throw down their altars; but ye have not obeyed my voice; why have ye done this? Wherefore I also said, I will not drive them out from before you; but they shall be as thorns in your sides, and their gods shall be a snare unto you."—Judg. 2:1-3.
10	At the prosent time and for some time past men have been made mighty ones in the eyes of the people. These include the pope, the cardinals, and bishops and others of the Hierarchy; and images are used in connection with their worship, and while the people are induced to believe they are worshiping God they give honor and praise and adoration to creatures, in direct violation of God’s law, and thus they practice religion, which originated with the Devil and which constitutes a snare into which many people are caught.
11	Although duly warned of the snares which the Devil had laid for them, the Israelites forsook their covenant and practiced religion, recognizing and bowing down to the wicked spirits: “And they forsook the Lord God of their fathers, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, and followed other gods, of the gods of the people that were round about them, and bowed themselves unto them, and provoked the Lord to anger. And they forsook the Lord, and served Baal and Ashtaroth. And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and he sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they could not any longer stand before their enemies. Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the Lord was against them for evil, as the Lord had said, and as the Lord had sworn unto them; and they were greatly distressed.” “And yet they would not hearken unto their judges, but they went a whoring after other gods, and bowed themselves unto them; they turned quickly out of the way which their fathers walked in, obeying the commandments of the Lord; but they did not so.” (Judg. 2:12-15,17) "And they served their idols; which were a snare unto them. Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils.”-Ps. 106:36,37.
12	When the Lord Jesus came to the earth and went about preaching the truth to the people he found that religion had been adopted and was being practiced by that people in the place and stead of the true
worship of Almighty God. The Pharisees or other teachers who led in the practice of religion made the claim that they were serving God, even as the Papacy makes that claim today, but Jesus told them that they drew near to God with their mouths only, but their heart devotion was not to Him and therefore they were serving the Devil and had become the children of the Devil.—Matt. 15:1-9; John 8:42-44.
18	Saul of Tarsus was a Pharisee and a practitioner of religion, which religion originated with Satan and was supported by the traditions of men and taught by them, yet the claim was made that such was the worship of Almighty God. (Gal. 1:10-14) The Lord revealed to Saul the truth concerning himself and opened Saul’s understanding, and he immediately thereafter abandoned religion and worshiped God in spirit and in truth. Thereafter he was known as Paul, the apostle of Jesus Christ, and henceforth served God and Christ, proving his faithfulness and devotion to the Lord to the end. (Acts 9:1-20; 26:1-21; 2 Tim. 4: 6-8) Saul was a zealous Pharisee and persecutor of Christians and was caught in the religious snare of the Devil. Because of his honesty of heart the Lord delivered him from that snare of religion and made him the true servant of Christ Jesus. The foregoing scriptures prove beyond any question of doubt that religion is a snare of the Devil; and when religion is practiced in the name of God and Christ it is even a greater means of deception and is an abomination in the sight of God because it is fraudulent and hypocritical and subtly turns the people away from Jehovah.
14	Let it be assumed that the Papal church system was organized originally by sincere men. Early in the existence thereof the teaching of men was substituted for the true worship of Almighty God. From then till now images have been employed in connection with the religious practices of the Papal system. In that church system men are honored and praised, and to such men others bow down. Images are used and prayers are made to creatures, contrary to God’s Word. Great reverence and devotion are shown to creatures. The Papal religion is clearly and openly a violation of God’s law. It is proved to be one of the most subtle snares of the Devil. Millions of sincere persons have been caught in that snare, and the result is that millions of persons ignorantly worship creatures and images, in defiance of God’s law. Religion has become a political organization, carried on in the name of God, and by religion the men who practice it are enabled to carry on the worst racket known amongst men. It is not at all necessary to find that all who are practicing religion are dishonest. On the contrary, many sincere persons have been caught in the snare of religion, even as Paul was ensnared. Many are the victims of
342
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. .
the religious racket, and these are repeatedly robbed of their material substance by the false claims of religious leaders who take their money upon the pretext that they are getting for the people favors with God.
1S	In the present day God has revealed to the honest seeker after truth that religion is a snare of the Devil, and one who has received such knowledge from the Lord has laid upon him the obligation to tell others about that snare in order to aid others in gaining a knowledge of the truth, that they may flee from religion and fmd the true way to life. Therefore Jehovah’s witnesses and their “companions” proclaim to the people the Word of God, that “religion is a snare and a racket”. This is done not for the purpose of holding up creatures to ridicule, but for the purpose of aiding honest and sincere persons to escape from these snares of the Devil and to learn what it means to worship God in spirit and in truth, and to find the way to life. The sounding of the message of truth today is a warning to the people, and such warning should be sounded with firmness and yet with kindness, because God has commanded such warning to be given. The purpose is not to offend anyone, but to aid sincere persons to see the danger into which they have fallen and the only means of escape. It is now fatal to be caught in and remain in the religious snare. At the same time there are other snares laid by the Devil and which are closely allied to religion, and into those snares many are caught and held and which lead to their destruction. Attention is here called to some of these snares.
FEAR
18	It is written in the Word of God: “The fear of man bringeth a snare.” (Prov. 29:25) This text, of course, means that to have a dread or fear of men leads into a snare; but the fear that men may do one an injury is not the only fear included in this text. The word “fear” has a much broader meaning than merely to anticipate that you are about to receive some physical injury. The word here used means “to tremble”, means “inciting reverential adoration toward others”; hence it is seen that fear is not limited to anticipated bodily injury. It also means the fear that one may not have the approval of men or receive the plaudits of men. One who is anxious to receive the approval of men is therefore the victim of fear. To dread to be disapproved by men even for doing one’s duty is fear that leads into the Devil’s snare. If one is commanded or commissioned by the Almighty God to do and perforin a certain thing, and then fails or refuses to carry out that commission because of fear that the performance thereof would call down upon himself the disapproval of others, then he is thereby led into the snare of the
Devil. Often one is heard to say: “If I go into the witness service, going from house to house and speaking the gospel message, what will the people think of me?” It is the fear of men that leads one to such conclusion, that is, fear that human creatures will not think well of the one who goes into God’s service. God commands his covenant people to sound the doom of religion and the warning to the people of the means of escape. One who has made a covenant to do the will of God, and who then refrains from sounding the message of Jehovah against religion because he fears to receive the reproach of others for so doing, is thereby led into Satan’s snare. One who refuses to tell the truth of God’s Word by announcing that religion is a snare and a racket thereby refuses to speak the truth of and concerning the Roman Catholic Hierarchy as set forth in the Scriptures. Or if he refuses to speak the truth concerning other religious practices, or if he puts on the soft pedal concerning religion and does so because of a desire to escape adverse criticism of men, such person is the victim of fear and is thereby caught in the snare of the Devil.
17	The great issue is God’s kingdom, the Theocracy by Christ Jesus, against Satan’s organization. All of God’s covenant people are commanded to proclaim the kingdom message as his witnesses, and anyone of such covenant people who fails or refuses to proclaim that message against Satan’s organization and in favor of the Theocracy as commanded, and so fails or refuses because of fear of receiving adverse criticism of men, is thereby led straightway into the Devil’s snare. The professed Christian who desires and seeks approval of men cannot be faithful to Jehovah and to his King. The man who desires to be highly thought of amongst men, and refrains from bold service to the Lord for that reason, is ensnared by the Devil. When Paul received the truth and became the apostle of Jesus Christ he no longer sought the approval of men, but proclaimed the kingdom gospel in spite of all criticism and persecution that were heaped upon him. As the apostle of the Lord Paul wrote: “Do I seek to please men? for if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ.” (Gal. 1:10) It was because of his boldness and faithfulness in preaching the gospel concerning Jehovah and his King and Kingdom that he not only was reproached but suffered all manner of cruel persecution at the hands of men. In this he rejoiced, because, as he pointed out, such was necessary to prove faithfulness under persecution in order to have a part with Christ Jesus in his kingdom.—Col. 1: 24.
18	The man who claims to have consecrated himself to God and who then seeks to be what is generally called “a good fellow” amongst others, and craves the favor of men, proves himself thereby to be a
THE WATCHTOWER
November 15, 1939 man-pleaser, which is an abomination in the sight of God. (Eph. 6:6; Col. 3: 22) If a man claims to be consecrated to God and is a lawyer and appears in court as counsel for another consecrated person, and then conducts himself and the case on trial in such a manner that he might receive the approval of other men in the court, such lawyer is a man-pleaser and proves his unfaithfulness to God and to the kingdom. The treatment of one of God’s children is the treatment of the Lord Jesus Christ, as Jesus himself declares: “Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.” (Matt. 25:45) One who fails or refuses to look well to and defend the interest of a Christian, and does so in order that he might appear as a good fellow in the eyes of other men, is therefore the enemy of Christ. What God requires of his servants is to be wholly devoted to him and his kingdom. There can be no proper course of compromise with any part of Satan’s organization. To receive the Lord’s approval one must be wholly and entirely for the Lord. Fear of receiving the disapproval of men is due to self-pride, which is also fear, and which leads into Satan’s snare and ends in destruction. “Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall. Better it is to be of an humble [obedient] spirit with the lowly [the followers of Christ], than to divide the spoil [honor] with the proud.”—Prov. 16: 18, 19.
19	Those who practice religion seek the approval of others and thus attempt to make others believe that they are exceedingly of good character, and this they do because of fear, that is to say, fear that others may not think so well of them. In this they fail to be obedient to God’s commandment and are led into a snare. Because of his imperfection no one can develop himself to perfection that God would approve him, but he can keep his heart perfect and his devotion wholly to God, and such is required in order to receive God’s approval.
20	Reverence exhibited toward men, such as that shown toward the pope and other officials of the Hierarchy, is induced by fear and leads into the Devil’s snare. The heiling or hailing of men and praising men is induced by fear of man, is an abomination in the sight of God, and leads into the snare of the Devil and ends in destruction of such fearful ones.
FROWARD
21	Within the meaning of the Scriptures, the word “froward” means “being perverse”, and therefore means that one is disobedient to God’s appointed way, not willing to obey instructions from the Lord, but is one who seeks the approval of men and becomes a murmurer and complainer against God’s organization. The indisputable facts have shown and
343
do show that there have been many persons who claim to be in a covenant to do the will of God, and who not only have shown their unwillingness to be obedient to God’s commandments but have caused divisions amongst God’s people by evil speaking and by speaking against the manner and means through which God carries on his kingdom work. Concerning such it is written: “Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward; he that doth keep his soul shall be far from them.”—Prov. 22: 5.
22	Thus it is seen that the disobedient one, the murmurer and complainer, is led straightway into the trap of the Devil and becomes the enemy of God’s kingdom. Moses prophetically wrote concerning such as vowed to do God’s will and then took a perverse course: “And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall be; for they are a very froward generation, children in whom is no faith. They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God; they have provoked me to anger with their vanities; and I will move them to jealousy with those which are not a people; I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.”—Deut. 32: 20, 21.
23	From time to time there are some who claim to be God’s servants, and who because of fear of receiving the disapproval of men have become offended, then murmur and complain, and withdraw from God’s organization and his service and return to worldly vocations. In order to find an excuse or justification for such action such persons indulge in perverse speech concerning the Lord’s organization on earth and murmur and complain and speak wickedly against those who are endeavoring to serve the Lord. Such is a froward or perverse person within the meaning of the Scriptures, and concerning such it is written: “Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities. But these speak evil of those things which they know not; but what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves.”—Jude 8 and 10.
24	Such perverse persons seek a personal reward or gain by posing in the presence of others, hoping to be classed as approved critics of God’s organization by reason of their feigned goodness, but are hypocritical; and concerning such Jude further says: “Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Co're. These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear [of God]; clouds they are without water, carried about of winds; trees whose fruit withercth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great
344
THE WATCHTOWER
swelling words, having men’s persons in admiration because of advantage.”—Jude 11,12,16.
TONGUE
M The tongue of the evil speaker becomes a snare, of which Satan takes advantage to entrap the one who claims to be devoted to the Lord and who indulges in evil speech: “A fool’s mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soul.” (Prov. 18:7) Such persons hope to make themselves of good reputation among men by falsely accusing God’s organization and his servants, and, thus indulging in false and evil speech, they find themselves ensnared in Satan’s trap. One whom the Lord favors with a place in his organization, and which person occupies a position therein of confidence toward his organization and has in charge confidential matters, and who then assaults the organization with false and evil words, shows himself to have been ensnared by the wicked one. He discloses that he has ignored God’s Word and has been led by fear that he will not receive the approval of others unless he follows the course of evil speaking. Such a person shows that he has no fear of God, but that he does fear men, desiring their approval. He likewise shows that if he ever had a vision of the Kingdom he has entirely lost such vision. Having once started to serve the kingdom, unless that one has a vision of the Theocratic government and then wholly and completely devotes himself to and endeavors to promote the interest of the Theocracy, he is certain to be ensnared by the Devil. Being thus insincere, he indulges in evil speech against God’s organization, showing his offense against the Lord. What is the result of such ? Jesus answers: “The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity.” (Matt. 13:41) The facts show that such persons generally return to the religious organization and indulge thereafter in religious practices by reason of being completely in the snare of the enemy.
MILLIONS ENSNARED
29	There are numerous snares which the Devil has set for men, but without a doubt it is the religion snare that has caught the greatest number. Fear has led almost all of the people into that snare, who have thus been caught in the organizations. Millions have allied themselves with religious organizations, being induced to believe that they are thereby serving the Lord for self-protection. Concerning such it is written in the Word of God: “Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men.” (Isa.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
29:13) Thus it is shown that their fear is due to the teachings of men. That is exactly the condition of many religionists today; and the leaders in those religious organizations having proved their unfaithfulness to God and to their covenant, Jehovah then commits his “strange work” to his humble and obedient servants on the earth, and hence he uses them ‘to do a wonderful work’. (Isa. 29:14) Such privilege is denied religionists.
" Today the fear of men controls almost all who are a part of or under Satan’s organization. The entire world is “jittery”. The people of the world fear what men may do to them and what others may think of them, but they do not fear God, and are hence against him and his kingdom. The Lord Jesus pointed out specifically that this condition would exist at the end of the world, and all the facts prove that that prophecy is in course of fulfillment. (Luke 21:26) And what is the end of such fearful ones? The answer is found in the Scriptures, and the following are some of the texts: “I have laid a snare for thee, and thou art also taken, 0 Babylon, and thou wast not aware; thou art found, and also caught, because thou hast striven against the Lord. The Lord hath opened his armoury, and hath brought forth the weapons of his indignation; for this is the work of the Lord God of hosts in the land of the Chaldeans.” (Jer. 50:24,25) “Fear, and the pit, and the snare, shall be upon thee, 0 inhabitant of Moab, saith the Lord. He that fleeth from the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that getteth up out of the pit shall be taken in the snare; for I will bring upon it, even upon Moab, the year of their visitation, saith the Lord.” (Jer. 48:43,44) “Fear, and the pit, and the snare, are upon thee, 0 inhabitant of the earth. And it shall come to pass, that he who fleeth from the noise of the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that cometh up out of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare; for the windows from on high are open, and the foundations of the earth do shake.”—Isa. 24:17,18.
28	The ungodly and the wicked do not fear Jehovah, but they do fear men. “There is no fear of God before their eyes.” (Rom. 3:18) “But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a shadow; because he feareth not before God.”—Eccl. 8:13.
29	But what of those who have made a covenant to do the will of God and who because of fear of creatures fail or refuse to serve God faithfully?
80	Suppose one claims to be in a covenant to do the will of God and has then committed to him service of a confidential nature in God’s organization and which confidential relationship he occupies and serves in for a time, and suppose such person suddenly conceives the idea that he must forsake the service of God’s organization and return to worldly pursuits,
THE WATCHTOWER
345
November 15, 1939
and in doing so he is moved by some selfish reason, such as fear of what men might think of him, that is, what his reputation might be amongst men if he continues in his position of service with God’s organization, or because he does not like and approve someone else in the Lord’s organization. As an excuse for returning to worldly pursuits he then writes and files with the Society a paper in which he makes many accusations against others who are serving in God’s organization. Desiring to have the approval of other men as to his course of action in leaving God’s organization, he notifies men in advance of his return to worldly pursuits and that he intends to do so because of his disapproval of the Society’s methods of carrying on the Lord’s work and of his disapproval of certain servants of the Society. What is his position with the Lord? (Rom. 14:4) The moving cause for such action is a failure to fear God and having a fear of men, that is to say, fearing that he will not receive man’s approval. Such a course of action shows a lack of love for God and hence a failure to perfect love and practice perfect love. “There is no fear [of men or devils] in love; but perfect love [of Jehovah and his kingdom] casteth out fear; because fear hath torment. He that feareth [men] is not made perfect in love.”—1 John 4:18.
81	One who has “put his hand to the plow”, that is, has undertaken to serve God and the people of his organization, and who then turns back to worldly pursuits, shows a failure to fear God; and of such the Lord Jesus speaks: “And Jesus said unto him, No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.”—Luke 9: 62.
82	It is not for man to judge, but the judgment of the Lord has been written and it is man’s duty who serves the Lord to call attention to the same, in order that others may be warned of the snares and pitfalls in the way of those who are in a covenant to do God’s will. In the following text it is shown by the Lord Jesus that the fearful and unbelieving and abominable are all in the same class, and other texts of the Bible show that the fearful are those who fear they will not receive the approval of men, and concerning such the Lord Jesus says: “But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burnetii with fire and brimstone; which is the second death.” (Rev. 21:8) One who has a vision of the kingdom now, and who loves the King, fears God, and thus continuing to fear God he will never turn back to the world.
MEANS OF ESCAPE
88	How can a man escape the snares of the Devil? “The fear of man bringeth a snare; but whoso putteth
his trust in the Lord shall be safe.” (Prov. 29:25) Thus it is shown that one’s only safety is to put his trust wholly in the Lord. Fear of man leads into the Devil’s snare and into destruction. Fear of God is the way of escape from the Devil’s snare and leads to life. One who undertakes to serve God must love him, which means to be unselfishly devoted to God and to his service. That man who has unselfishly devoted himself to God’s service is pursuing a wise course: “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; and the knowledge of the holy is understanding.” (Prov. 9:10) Otherwise stated, the man does not begin to be wise until he fears God. He begins to see and to appreciate the relationship of man to Jehovah the Creator. He learns that God is the fountain of life. (Ps. 36: 9) Only those who fear God can receive the blessings of the fountain of life. “In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence; and his children shall have a place of refuge. The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death.”—Prov. 14: 26, 27.
34	The man who fears God does not give heed to what other men may say about him. The wise man is one concerned altogether about what God may think of him. He craves the approval of God because he knows that he must have God’s approval before he can obtain life. To have the disapproval of Jehovah God means destruction. As the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom on the part of man, it follows that man must ever thereafter continue to fear God and particularly to fear that he might not receive God’s approval. The only means, therefore, of escaping the snare of the Devil is the fear of God and to have no fear whatsoever of man. The approval of man by the Lord God means everything. Jehovah therefore said to his typical covenant people, and his words with far greater force now apply to his covenant people on earth, to wit: “Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. And he shall be for a sanctuary.”—Isa. 8:13,14.
35	That sanctuary is the holy place and the place of safety from the snares of the wicked one. For a Christian to manifest fear of man, even the fear that he would not receive the approval of man, is an open and direct insult to Jehovah God, and God permits him thus to be led into the Devil’s snare.
30	This is the day of evil, the time of wickedness, and wickedness has gone to seed. It is the time of peril. For a Christian to have fear of man means lack of faith in God. Therefore says the Lord: “Let [Jehovah] be your fear, and let him be your dread.” He is the God of battle, and he will destroy the enemy, and all who ally themselves with the enemy will suffer destruction. Therefore the Christian at all times craves the approval of Almighty God and
346
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
fears that he might come short of that approval. “Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.”—Heb. 4:1.
87	The Christian must devote himself wholly to God’s service and completely trust the Most High. For a Christian to fear that he might not have the approval of others is certain to result in his disapproval by the Lord God. His fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, and if he continues to be wise he will continue to fear Jehovah and particularly to fear that he might fail to receive Jehovah’s approval. “In God I will praise his word; in God I have put my trust; I will not fear what flesh can do unto me.” (Ps. 56: 4) “The Lord is on my side ; I will not fear; what can man do unto me?” (Ps. 118:6) “Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings.”— Isa. 51:7.
THE THEOCRACY
88	Jehovah’s government by Christ Jesus is The Theocracy. Set over against the Theocracy is Satan’s world, which soon shall be completely destroyed. The conflict between the Theocracy and Satan’s organization is therefore a deadly one. There can be no compromise. At the end every creature will be on the side of one or of the other. Only those who are of the Theocratic government, and those who find refuge under that Theocratic government, can hope for life. All opponents of the Theocracy are certain to be destroyed. The desire to have or seeking to have the favor of any part of Satan’s organization, or to have the approval of men of that organization or outside of it, means that such person does not have a vision of the Theocracy, or else he is deliberately and knowingly opposed to the Theocracy. In either case the result will be the same. The man who now has a vision of the kingdom with appreciation sees that everyone who is not for the kingdom is against it. “He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattered) abroad.” (Matt. 12:30) Either one must be working for the kingdom or else he is against the kingdom. If a man has a vision of the kingdom, which God has now revealed to those who love him, that man loves the kingdom and will permit nothing to turn him away from a full devotion to and service of the kingdom. He sees that the kingdom is the means of the complete vindication of Jehovah’s name and is the only means of salvation for man. He sees that the Theocracy by Christ Jesus is the hope of humankind. (Matt. 12:18-21) He sees that one who enters into and becomes a part of the kingdom, or who finds protection under the kingdom, must be wholly and en
tirely devoted to God and to his King. He sees that all who receive life and the attending blessings thereof must have the approval of Jehovah, and therefore he gives heed to the admonition: “Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed”; nor does he fear what man might say about him. ((2 Tim. 2:15) He desires to have no part in the things of this world, and therefore he does not covet anything that the world can possibly give, including the approval of men. “Let your conversation [course of action] be without covetousness; and be content with such things as ye have [temporal things included]: for he hath said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me.”—Heb. 13: 5, 6.
38	One in a covenant with the Lord may be working in His organization by the side of one who does not please him. He may think that he has cause for offense because of the action of others of the Lord’s organization who are serving; but if he has a vision of the kingdom he will not permit that dislike of others to be an excuse for separating himself from the Lord’s organization and the service thereof, which he has undertaken by the Lord’s favor. He will have in mind that God is conducting his own affairs according to his own sovereign will, and that the Lord alone chooses his own servants. (Rom. 14:4) He knows that God alone is right and righteous, and if he has a vision of the kingdom he loves God and loves his law and so he continues in peace and contentment to serve in the place where he is put, and that without offense: “Great peace have they which love thy law; and nothing shall offend them.”—Ps. 119:165.
40	Having a vision of the kingdom, which is made possible for him by reason of the love of God and his King, that person fully determines that nothing shall separate him from the love and service of God and his King: “Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us. For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”—Rom. 8:37-39.
41	The man who now has a vision of the kingdom and who loves the kingdom beholds the glorious high Throne thereof, and he knows that such is the sanctuary of all who hope for life, and that there is none other. He knows that whether he lives or dies at the hand of the enemy his hope is in that glorious Theocracy and that it is the hope of all spiritual Israel, and of the “great multitude” that shall “fill the earth”. He appreciates the prophetic words recorded
November 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER.
347
by Jeremiah and which apply to those who now trust Jehovah: “A glorious high throne from the beginning is the place of our sanctuary. 0 Lord, the Hope of Israel [God’s faithful people], all that forsake thee shall be ashamed, and they that depart from me shall be written in the earth, because they have forsaken the Lord, the fountain of living waters.”— Jer. 17:12,13.
AVOIDS PITFALLS
42	The man who has a vision of the Theocracy, and whose hope is centered therein, walks circumspectly, fearing God, lest he fail to receive God’s approval. (Heb. 4:1) Therefore he watches out for snares or pitfalls and is diligent to avoid them. He shuns religion because he knows that religion is one of the most fatal snares set by the Devil. He refuses to have anything to do with religion, but, on the contrary, is diligent to warn those who will hear that religion is an abomination in the sight of Almighty God. He knows that, once having been enlightened concerning God’s purpose and his kingdom, to then turn again to the “beggarly elements” of the world means complete disapproval of God, ending in destruction. (Gal. 4: 9) “For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them. But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire.”-2 Pet. 2:21,22.
42	To him who visualizes the kingdom the full-time service to the King and kingdom is dearest to his heart, and he fears to lose the opportunity of service, and he will not voluntarily withdraw himself from that service for any reason.
44	The man visualizing the kingdom hates flattery, because he knows that flattery is a net into which he is liable to be caught and destroyed. “A man that flattereth his neighbour spreadeth a net for his feet.” (Prov. 29:5) He yields not to flattery of one, even the one nearest to him, including his wife, because he believes, as it is written, “A flattering mouth worketh ruin.” (Prov. 26:28) He refuses to give flattery to men, knowing the danger resulting therefrom. Elihu, who pictured the faithful members of the body of Christ, with authority from God said: “Let me not, I pray you, accept any man’s person; neither let me give flattering titles unto man.” (Job 32: 21) “The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaketh proud things.” (Ps. 12:3) Therefore the man who loves God and has a vision of the Theocracy does not glory in himself or in his selfish attainments, hut glories in the Lord and in his kingdom. He does not desire or crave the approval of men, but he greatly desires and craves only the
Lord’s commendation: “But he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord. For not he that commendeth himself is approved, but whom the Lord commendeth.” —2 Cor. 10:17,18.
45	The man who now has a vision of the kingdom and who has his heart fixed upon it casts away from him all fear of men or devils. He loves God, and he serves him wholly and continuously: “And we have known and believed the love that God hath to us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him. Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment ; because as he is, so are we in this world. There is no fear in love; but perfect love easteth out fear; because fear hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect in love.”—1 John 4:16-18.
46	He who loves God does not fear that he might fail to receive the approval and commendation of men, because he knows that such fear opens before him a pit into which he is likely to fall. He does fear God, knowing that by fearing God he begins to be wise, and he desires to forever pursue a wise course, that he may receive God’s approval. Like the faithful apostle, he obeys God rather than men. (Acts 5: 29) Free from fear of the opponents of the Theocracy, he goes forward in obedience to his divinely given commission, proclaiming the good news with a light and joyful heart. He has entered into the joy of the Lord and craves to have a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
4T	A man who covenants to be obedient to God’s law may awake to the realization that he is tied in marriage to a woman who opposes the kingdom and who attempts to force her husband to cease serving the King. Even the wife may be also consecrated to the Lord but attempts to control her husband in the course of action W’hich he takes. The man who yields to such influence walks right into the pitfall or net set by the adversary. The one who has a vision of the kingdom recognizes that his first obligation is to Jehovah God and to his King, Christ Jesus, and he gives full consideration and obedience to the words of the King, to wit: “If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.” (Luke 14:26) His love must be for God and against all who are against God’s government. Likewise the woman may find herself bound to a man who opposes the kingdom, but she is reminded that her first obligation is to Jehovah and his King and kingdom, and she takes the course of serving God first and all the time. To yield to any human creature because of fear that one will not receive the approval of men is certain to lead into a snare. Therefore the Christian who wholly devotes himself to the Lord, and who has a vision
348
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of the kingdom and continues to faithfully serve the King, rejoices that, so far as he is concerned, the snare set for him by the Devil has been broken and that he has escaped therefrom and found refuge and peace and safety in the Lord. Out of his mouth come with joy the appropriate words of the psalmist: “Blessed be the Lord, who hath not given us as a prey to their teeth. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers; the snare is broken, and we are escaped. Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.”—Psalm 124: 6-8.
GREAT
48	The members of the remnant yet on the earth, and who are in line for the kingdom, are in themselves very imperfect and hence make many mistakes. Those who are their “companions” are likewise imperfect and make mistakes. All such fully realize that their strength comes from the Lord and in his strength they can accomplish the work committed unto them. They know that if they keep a perfect heart devotion to God his everlasting strength will be manifested in their behalf: “For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him.” (2 Chron. 16:9) The faithful see and appreciate the greatness of the kingdom and that it is their privilege to firmly stand together and fight for their brethren and, doing so, to never yield because of fear of any man or devil and to never quail before the enemy. (Phil. 1: 27-29, Weymouth) They are not surprised when some do yield
to fear and fall away to the enemy and are ensnared. The faithful do not sorrow or weep because of the fall of such, because to do so would be to violate God’s commandment.—Ezek. 24:16.
49	The faithful remnant and companions recognize the kingdom as the greatest creation of God, and in the kingdom is centered their hope. God has builded up Zion, his capital organization, and made Christ Jesus the Head thereof, and there Jehovah establishes his dwellingplace. (Ps. 132:13) Those who truly love and fear God, who are fully and completely devoted to him, have fixed their hearts upon the kingdom, and hence they joyfully sing the song of Jehovah’s prophet: “Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in the mountain of his holiness. Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King. God is known in her palaces for a refuge.” (Ps. 48:1-3) “Truly my soul waiteth upon God; from him cometh my salvation. He only is my rock and my salvation; he is my defence: I shall not be greatly moved.” (Ps. 62:1, 2) “Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; and his greatness is unsearchable.” (Ps. 145: 3) The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom: “The fear of [Jehovah] is clean, enduring for ever.” (Ps. 19:9) All those who get life shall fear Jehovah. “0 fear the Lord, ye his saints: for there is no want to them that fear him.” (Ps. 34:9) “Let all the earth fear the Lord; let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him.” (Ps. 33: 8) “With [Jehovah] is my salvation and my glory; the rock of my strength, and my refuge, is in [Jehovah].”—Ps. 62:7, A.R.V.
SATAN NEVER IN HELL
((TEHOVAH GOD declares in his Word that he permits I Satan to go on unhindered in his wicked work until the
J end of a certain and fixed time and at that time He would then destroy Satan and all of his agencies. When Jesus ascended on high Jehovah said to him: ‘You must wait until my due time to put down the enemy and destroy him.’ (Psalm 110:1) The Scriptures then show that the year 1914 marks the end of that period of time for waiting and the beginning of the reign of Christ. In his great prophecy recorded in Matthew [chapter] twenty-four Jesus states that that time would be marked by a world war, followed quickly by famine, pestilence, revolution and distress of nations. A.11 of these things have come to pass since, and which began to have fulfillment in 1914. At that same time, the Scriptures show, a war was fought in heaven by Jesus and his angels against Satan and his forces and that Satan was ousted from heaven and east down to the earth.” (Quoted from Intolerance, page 24) This statement of Scripture truth drew the fire of The Bellarmine Society of England, and that Jesuitic Society published this year (1939) an attack on the author of the
booklet Intolerance, and in which attack, on page 3, it sarcastically said this, to wit, that the writer of Intolerance “has not thought it worth while explaining to us how Satan ever got back into heaven”.
This gibe is no doubt based on the teaching in the religious catechism, to wit: “All the angels did not remain good and happy; many of them sinned and were cast into hell; and these are called devils or bad angels”; to which a religious clergyman adds this further explanation: “One of these angels was most beautiful, and was named Lucifer, which means light-bearer. He was so perfect that he seems to have forgotten that he received all his beauty and intelligence from God, and, not content with what he had, became sinfully proud and wished to be equal to God Himself. For his sin he and all his followers were driven out of heaven, and God then created hell, in which they were to suffer for all eternity. This same Lucifer is now called Satan, and more commonly the devil, and those who accompanied him in his fall, devils, or fallen angels.”—Quoted from An Explanation of the Baltimore Catechism, 1921 edition, page 58, 38 Q., Imprimatur of archbishop of New York.
November 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
349
The Holy Scriptures do not bear out the thought that Satan has been debarred from appearing in heaven since the fall of man in Eden, nor at the time of the flood in Noah’s day. On the contrary, the Scriptures and the physical facts indicate that Satan was permitted to remain in heaven, God permitting it for a wise and good purpose. The context of Luke 10:18 shows that Jesus’ words there were prophetic of the future.
In proof of this the following is submitted: Job, the man of Uz, probably lived about the time of Abraham. Certainly the experiences recorded of him occurred subsequent to the great deluge. Job 1:6 reads: “Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came [along] also among them.” Without doubt at that time Satan was permitted to communicate with God, because there is recorded the conversation. The Lord spoke to Satan, and Satan responded. There he made an accusation against Job, showing that he had an opportunity to make accusations before Jeho\ah against the righteous; because Job was called a righteous man. (Job 1: 6-12; 2:1-7) To this agrees the vision of the prophet Micaiah in the days of King Jehoshaphat of Judah: “I saw the Lord sitting on his throne, and all the host of heaven standing by him on his right hand and on his left. And the Lord said, Who shall persuade Ahab, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead? . . . And there came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I will persuade him. And the Lord said unto him, Wherewith 1 And he said, I will go forth, and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And he said, Thou shalt persuade him, and prevail also: go forth, and do so. Now therefore, behold, the Lord hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these thy prophets.”—1 Ki. 22:19-23.
That the end of Satan is to be destruction there is no doubt. The inspired apostle, at Hebrews 2:14, writes: “Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, [Jesus] also himself likewise took part of the same; that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil.” Lucifer, now Satan, was given charge over the perfect pair, Adam and Eve, in Eden, to shield, screen and protect them. That he was there for that purpose there is no doubt, because Ezekiel 28:13-15 says of him: “Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God, . . . Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee so: . . . Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee.” God gave to Adam his law. He plainly told Adam that a violation of God’s law would result in the enforcement of the death penalty. Since Lucifer was given charge over man to shield and protect him, it follows that he had the power to inflict punishment for any infraction of the rules or laws governing man. Lucifer was made the executive officer of Jehovah over man. Then it would seem it would be his right and duty to put man to death for violating God’s law. According to Hebrews 2:14, above quoted, there can be no doubt that he was given the power of death.
Ezekiel 28:17 tells how Lucifer was impressed with his own beauty: “Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty; thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness." Addressing him under the figure of the king of Babylon (Satan’s organization), Isaiah 14:12-14 tells of
the conception of Lucifer’s wicked scheme; “How art thou fallen from heaven, 0 Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds: I will be like the Most High.” His heart was malignant ; that is, his purpose or motive secretly conceived was wicked. This does not prove that he was a usurper of power, but does prove he used the po wer and authority with which he was clothed for his own selfish gratification. Be it here noted that Satan has tempted everyone of God’s righteous creatures along the same line.
To carry out his wieked, diabolical scheme he told Eve that the eating of the forbidden fruit would not result in death. “Ye shall not surely die.” (Gen. 3:4,5) Intending doubtless to refuse to exercise against Adam and Eve the power of death, he expected to see them have the eyes of their understanding opened, that they would still live, and that they would then believe God to be a liar and believe Lucifer (Satan) to be their benefactor, and that therefore they would readily worship him and turn from God. In order that he might be adored and worshiped like the Most High God he was willing to betray his sacred trust, to make God out a liar and devoid of love; and he was willing to risk his own ability to save man from death. God knew of this wicked scheme in Satan’s heart, of course; and that was when iniquity was found in him.—Ezek. 28:15.
That Satan’s destruction has been deferred until his wicked works are destroyed is sure. (See 1 John 3:8.) In pronouncing judgment against him Jehovah said: “I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain [kingdom] of God: and I will destroy thee, 0 covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire [angelic hosts of heaven] . . . I will bring thee to ashes upon the earth, in the sight of all them that behold thee. . . . And never shalt thou be any more.”—Ezek. 28:16,18,19.
At the time of the tragedy in Eden there were no nations on earth. But looking down to the end, in prophetic phrase God said to him: “How art thou fallen from heaven, 0 Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit. Hell [(Hebrew) sheol; (Bible marginal reading) The grave] from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming: it stirreth up the dead for thee.” (Isa. 14:12,15,9) These words of final judgment clearly refer to the future, both by reason of the phrase used and by the physical facts.
The name Joshua means the same as Jesus, to wit, “Jehovah (is) Savior.” Jesus is the Head of The Christ of God. Jehovah God, through his prophet Zechariah, gives a picture of the development of The Christ. Zechariah 3:1-3 gives testimony to the fact that during the period of Christian sacrifice under the Greater Joshua, while the true Church has been in course of selection and development, Satan has been standing by to resist: “And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, 0 Satan; even the Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee.”
When Jesus was in the wilderness forty days Satan appeared to him and boldly claimed that the world be-
350
SEe WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
longed to him, and that he had the right to give it to Jesus only upon condition that Jesus would fall down and worship him. He, at that time, still possessed the great desire to be worshiped as Jehovah is worshiped. (Luke 4:1-8) Jesus did not deny that claim to ownership of the world. On the contrary, Jesus spoke of Satan as “the prince of this world”.—John 12:31; 14: 30.
“Michael” means “who is like God?” and applies to “the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people”, to wit, Christ Jesus, who is the “prince of the kings [the 144,000] of the earth” and who is also “the express image of his [Jehovah God’s] person”. (See Daniel 12:1; Revelation 1:5,6; Hebrews 1:1-3.) The prophet Moses, who was of God’s people, was permitted to see the land of Canaan from a mountain height, but was not permitted to go into it. Moses died. It seems evident that Satan then possessed the power of death because he claimed the right to the body of Moses. Michael seems to have recognized that Satan still had some authority and official power at that time before the birth of Jesus, because it is recorded that he contended with the Devil about the body of Moses. “Yet Michael the archangel [chief messenger of Jehovah], when, contending with the devil, he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him [Satan] a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.”—Jude 9; see also Deuteronomy 34 :1-6.
That Satan, up to A.D. 1914, has had access to heaven, and the privilege of communication with Jehovah, seems quite evident from the fact that during the period of Christian sacrifice he has been the accuser of Christ’s brethren day and night before Jehovah. At Revelation 12:10, the apostle John, writing of “things which must shortly come to pass” (Rev. 1:1), tells of the joy at Satan’s being cast out of heaven: “For the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night.”
Michael, who is Christ the Lord, remained silent until his time to rule in the midst of his enemies had come. “But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God; from henceforth expecting [waiting] till his enemies be made his footstool.” (Heb. 10:12,13) (See also Psalm 110:1,2.) The time of Satan’s uninterrupted rule expired in A.D. 1914, as shown by prophecy and the physical facts. Daniel 12:1 reads: “And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people; and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation even to that same time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book.”
There the Lord Jesus did stand up, and took his power to reign as representative of the Lord God Almighty. Hence it was then said: “We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art and wast, and art to come; because thou hast taken to thee thy great power, and hast reigned. And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come.” (Rev. 11:17,18) Then it was that there took place the birth of The Nation, Jehovah’s theocratic government or kingdom under Christ, and Christ Jesus was brought forth as Jehovah’s acting King on his throne, coming forth from Jehovah’s “woman” or holy organization Zion. Revelation 12:1-5, further describing “things which must shortly come
to pass”, thus symbolically pictures the event: “And there appeared a great wonder in heaven; a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars: and she being with child [the Kingdom] cried, travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered. And there appeared another wonder [not down in hell, but] in heaven; and behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth: and the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it was born. And she brought forth a man child [the Kingdom, Christ Jesus being the King], who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron: and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne.”
It should be expected that the first work the newly elevated and installed King, Christ Jesus, would do would be to throw the Devil out of heaven; and then and there the fight began. After describing the birth of the theocratic kingdom The Revelation 12:7-9 reads: “And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, and prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was east out into the earth [not down into hell, or Sheol or Hades, which is the grave], and his angels were cast out with him.”
No imaginary thing this! it was a real fight. The dragon and his official family, members of his invisible spirit government, fought and fought hard; but they lost, and were literally hurled out of heaven. It is inconsistent to think that Jesus, the righteous One, would take his power to reign in heaven in God’s due time and permit the Devil to remain there; and he did not. Both Satan and his angels, namely, his official family, his invisible joint-rulers of the wicked world organization, were hurled down to the earth. That fight must have begun in A.D. 1914, being accompanied by the world war of Satan’s visible organization on earth. Just how long thereafter the “war in heaven” lasted the Scriptures do not indicate.
There was no more place found in heaven for the dragon and his angels, but they were cast out into the earth, and Revelation 12:12 says: “Therefore rejoiee, ye heavens [now freed from Satan the Devil], and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea 1 for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because lie knoweth that he hath but a short time.” Do not the physical facts bear witness that since A.D. 1914, particularly since 1918, there has been a greater element of wickedness in the earth than ever before, and that this wickedness is on the increase? Crimes, wickedness indescribable, and ascribable to none other than the Devil’s influence, have become a common thing in these years since then. When Satan was hurled out of heaven and into the earth, then there was “heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; for the accuser of our brethren is east down, which accused them before our God day and night.” (Rev. 12:10) This is further proof that the casting of Satan the Devil out of heaven did not take place
November 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
351
until the Lord Jesus Christ took his power and began to reign, in A.D. 1914; and with the ousting of “that old dragon” from heaven comes the salvation of Jehovah’s royal family under Christ, the birth of the new Nation, the new
and theocratic government, which is for the vindication of Jehovah’s name and for the salvation of men of good will and for the destruction of Satan and all of his organization. No wonder, then, that there should be great rejoicing!
LETTERS
FULL DEVOTION TO KING OF ETERNITY
Dear Brother Rutherford:
“I will praise thee, 0 Lord, with my whole heart; I will shew forth all thy marvellous works. ... I will sing praise to thy name, 0 thou Most High. For thou hast girded me with strength unto the battle: . . . Unto thee, 0 my strength, will I sing.”— Psalms 9:1,2; 18:39; 59:17.
With hearts overflowing with gratitude and praise to Jehovah and the beloved Vindicator of his name, we, Jehovah’s witnesses and companions of Kansas Zone 3, assembled this day in Wichita, Kansas, desire to express from the depths of our hearts our full devotion to the King of Eternity, and to declare in most emphatic terms our determination to stand uncompromisingly for the King and kingdom. Appreciating the loyal, courageous stand, Brother Rutherford, that you have taken in behalf of that kingdom we desire also at this time to send our greetings to you—may we make it quite clear, and that in all sincerity, that our appreciation of your untiring efforts in the interests of Jehovah’s kingdom and in the interests of your brethren is of such degree that we fail to find words to adequately express the same. Simply we say: It is our united prayer that Jehovah’s richest blessing be ever bestowed upon you; may you ever be in his favor as you continue to serve humbly and earnestly in the temple.
Having in mind the above-quoted words of the psalmist, we pray that Jehovah will place within our minds and hearts a keen and fervent desire and determination to be more diligent from this day henceforth in the work of giving praise to Him, and showing forth his marvelous works. Well do we realize that these are days of real battle, and only in the strength of Jehovah of Hosts are we able to stand. Be it known, therefore, that this day we do leave behind us all slackness, idleness and indifference toward the kingdom service, and by God’s grace we will serve the King and kingdom, and will vigorously proclaim the message thereof until Jehovah says “it’s done”. Realizing that the time draws nigh for Jehovah’s “strange work” to come to an end, we will hasten to declare the warning of the impending tribulation at Armageddon. It is our desire to aid all of good will, to the end that they may take a firm stand for the kingdom before it is too late.
We rejoice as we call to mind the ringing words, to wit: “Onward, soldiers of the Lord!” What a blessed privilege is ours! Action! Action!! And more action upon the battlefield, going forth with the assurance that we are fighting a winning fight under the command of the Almighty Warrior! Our hearts are filled with inexpressible joy as we realize that we are not meeting the enemy in our own strength, but rather meeting them ‘in the name and strength of Jehovah of Hosts, whom they have defied’! To see the part we are permitted to have in the fulfillment of the many prophetic dramas causes us to strive all the harder to have some small part at least in the vindication of Jehovah’s name. May Jehovah ‘gird us with strength unto the battle’. Well do we realize that within ourselves there is no strength, but Jehovah is the strength of his people. Therefore let the enemy come on and fight 1 Let them come forth with great pride and boastfulness. Let them say, “Oh, we’re strong!” God’s people welcome the fight which will prove that Jehovah is supreme. We are ready. We are prepared. We are armed in the cause of righteousness and truth, and we have full assurance that our God will sustain us in the time of great peril.
Be it known, therefore, that tbis constitutes a fighting declara
tion on our part. To be sure, we are not fighting men; our weapons are not carnal. We have no hatred or ill will toward anyone, but we are unalterably opposed to anything that Satan brings against the Kingdom under Christ, and we have fully determined, and that without reservation, to stand for the Theocratic government first, last, and all the time. We are mindful that in this fight we will suffer at the hands of Satan’s agents; so be it. Some may die; even so, our only petition is: “God grant that we prove faithful to the very last, thereby proving Satan the liar that he is, and Jehovah to be true.” Even now we know that our brethren in many lands are being violently persecuted. Our hearts and prayers are with and for them as they stand firm in the strength of the Lord. We rejoice to know that ere long Satan and his entire organization shall be smitten to the dust, and Jehovah’s own great name exalted and vindicated, and his people delivered. Praise ye His name forever!
Assuring you of full co-operation in the fight for the kingdom, and with best wishes and warmest Christian love, we remain
Your brethren in the Lord’s army,
Kansas Zone 3.
NOW SERVES GOD
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Although we have been in the witness work since 1920 this is the first time we have ever written you. This has not been because of lack of appreciation of your devotion and faithfulness to Jehovah. We have hesitated to interfere with your important work in the Theocracy.
Now we come in behalf of an old man of good will whom we have found in our territory. He was born in Switzerland and was once a Catholic. After having sent for some French literature for him, he wrote for a French Bible. He has asked us to tell you that he loves you for your faithfulness and that he serves the same God as you do although he is of different nationality.
As we study the recent Watchtowers and look back upon the years since we first started in the service with a team and covered wagon, we realize we are just beginning to appreciate the privilege we have had in carrying the message of the kingdom to others. And may we take this opportunity to thank Jehovah and you for the new book, Salvation.
Yours in the interest of the Theocracy, Mrs. H. H. Nichols and Helen, Pioneers.
ARREST AFFORDED OPPORTUNITY
Dear Brother Rutherford:
This note is an expression of deep appreciation to Jehovah and to you, one of his witnesses, for the refreshments and instruction contained in The Watchtower, and now the Salvation book, a well of sparkling waters for a barren and parched humanity. The Westwood arrest afforded an opportunity to take the stand and declare some of its contents to the court, lawyers, and crowded courtroom.
As we approach the darkest time in earth’s history and (I have heard the mob crying for your blood) when the responsibilities of your office are so vast, there seems to be no good reason why you should sit on tacks and wear itchy underwear to show that you are suffering for Christ. I know that your love for all of the Lord’s little ones is limited only by your capacity to serve.
Yours in the Lord’s service,
D. E. Morgan.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
VICTORY IN A MILL-OWNED GEORGIA VILLAGE
“I succeeded in reaching the officials of the Tubize Silk Mill, who for years have interfered with the Kingdom work in the village. I requested an appointment with the manager, who was very secluded. I had to state the nature of my business at the Information Desk. After prolonged ’phone conversation I was requested to be seated, that he would see me. Presently the preacher appeared and was ushered in without any formality. Then the assistant chief of police entered. They were in conference for some time. When they departed I was told that the manager had referred me to the personnel man. I explained the work, our method of doing it, stating my attention had been called to the interference with Jehovah’s witnesses in the village by the officials for several years, they declaring the village was private property, that no one could visit the homes of the employees without first getting permission. I reviewed the Supreme Court ruling with him when he declared that ruling did not apply to them but to a municipal corporation. I assured him it did apply to his village and that the State court gave a person the right to enter and leave his premises without interference; also any guest could do the same if peaceable. In reply he stated: ‘Brother, you can’t bluff me, and I’m making the statement you can’t do your work here.’ I assured him we were not bluffing, but that I would make a positive statement to him that the work would be done and I was asking him not to interfere with it. He then asked for time to consult his attorney. Result: We could do the work all right, but if we disturbed the sleepers we would be run out. I warned him against interference, and as for running us out, that would be settled later. Last Monday, August 6, the Rome (Ga.) locusts invaded the village and ate up the varnish while Mr. Preacher, Mr. Policeman and Mr. Personnel Man watched, but no interference. So the King triumphed.”
THE MORE COURAGE, THE BETTER THE RESULTS
"Personally I felt up against a stone wall. I had plenty of literature and pioneer territoiy, and no grub nor money. The zone servant arrived next day. Meeting went fine. Following day we went out together in the witness work. I observed carefully the confidence, kindness and fearlessness with which he approached people. I recalled the remark of Judge Rutherford: ‘Henceforth we will take the offensive in this warfare . . . ’ The next day I went out determined to be bold in proclaiming the truth (though not rude). In seventeen hours (two days’ work, I placed ten Salvation, 25 booklets, had 27 sound attendar and made three back-ealls, one hour each. Montana is a w ide and vast country, but I am convinced that the more courageous we are the better results we get. The coyotes are yapping on the hill in the timber near by.”
RURAL TELEPHONE PHONOGRAPH SETUP (SASK.)
‘‘He said: ‘My son was telling us all about it. I would like to hear more, and I wish my wife was here as well.’ I put on the record ‘Relief’. When it was about half through he mumbled something about getting her (his wife) on the telephone; which he did as soon as the record was finished. I put on ‘Resolution’ and a loud-tone needle and held the phonograph up to the ’phone. He kept the receiver at his ear, and during the lecture he whispered to me that there
were two listening in (which is common on these Saskatchewan rural telephone lines). His wife said she heard and liked it all. I then arranged a back-call for a later date.”
TEXAS SOUND-CAR CO-ORDINATED WITH MARCHES
“When we were all prepared to march there were 22 in this march. The sound-car played a march and the marchers, keeping 15 feet apart, marched through the main streets of the city. Every so often the sound-car announced the plaee of meeting, the Court House square, where ‘Fascism or Freedom’ was played. About 100 heard the lecture, and two men came up to the operator of the soundear, identified themselves with the work, and each obtained Salvation, and one of the men asked that a meeting be started in his home. Immediately after the lecture we left for another small town, eight miles away. There had been considerable opposition here while working with the books. When the march started a man rushed out of a store and accosted the leader, asking where his permit to march was. Without stopping, the marcher said: ‘We need no permit to advertise the Kingdom.’ The sound-car operator obtained permission to park his car on an empty lot in the business district and went down the street announcing that Fascism would be exposed in a few minutes at the Economy Feed Store corner. Several Catholics came to the car and attempted to start an argument. The windows were up to prevent damage to the equipment, and the lecture went on Several would stand and listen for a while, then walk away, astounded at the information given. One man contributed 50c, saying he realized this was a good work, although he was not much interested in Rutherford. I believe the soundcar, used in this way, advertising the marches and plaee of meeting, will be of great help to those wishing to identify themselves with Jehovah’s organization.”
AMONG TEXANS TENTING LIKE JONADAB
"Disregarding the sandstorm, which was doing much havoc, we decided to work these tents down near and under the river bridge. The sand was blowing too much to continue using the phonograph at this time, and as I announced myself as ‘one of Jehovah’s witnesses’ a voice quickly welcomed me, saying: ‘I don’t know who you are, but if you have any books like this I sure do want them.’ I had to look a second time before I recognized the Face the Facts booklet he held up, for it was so disfigured, the back torn completely off, and it was soiled and rumpled. He had been so down and out—no work, nothing for him to live for—and had even considered suicide. 'When coining along the highway, someone had thrown this Face the Facts out of the car and it had landed in his face. He examined it and found it the best reading he bad ever had. He saw it was the truth and that he did have much to live for. Of course, I left him magazines and more books and the address of the meeting. He said he wanted to come soon to meetings and insisted upon contributing his last dime towards the literature, even though I had given it to him. A few days later, when I went back to make a back-call, he was gone. The people in the tent next told me he had been called to take a good job a few hundred miles from there and he had gotten them to read some of the booklets. I am sure he will never rest until he has gotten in touch with Jehovah’s witnesses where-cver he goes.”

CTs?t
«
-1

-i *
>yi
"5
3
<«>
«<
9&;
■ .v	. v ?C <2
■ A ,7u

IM5

IM.*
rc
:3


SI!

" e -	'./(Xci i

&»•
5
■*<
>^l
*'•’

M
ga


srz

r‘7	'^.
&
%-•

h?

VTXTCHTOWft?
^^WWH377r^trSB?
dchr'S!’
g«£K
■i

r£#
1
kjLsZ5t,l^i
n fw-n in

P/Ski* Wf 1

ssgfi>s
$?Ma
ffi
./?■
aft
»

Ui ft'
§Spj
Egs








^'fSSrly
W*d2
yy^r(
<-> f',

KQ.W
rrk
t
S
M*
v
3»

.f
W:M&
fli
M7
I 4
J
®-
'■Al'f^

Th^y shall know that lam Jehovah’'
-Ezekiel 35:15.
Vol. LX Semimonthly No. 23
DECEMBER 1, 1939
CONTENTS
The Theocracy............
Organize!..............
Visible Representatives.
Purpose ................
Development ............
The Enemy...............
Requirements............
Peace ..................
Four Angels Loosed........
Previews..................
Field Experiences........
.....355
.....355
......... 355
.....355
.....357
.....357
.....359
.....359
.....363
.....366
.....368
“War of Vindication” Testimony Period 354
Yearbook for 1940 .............
1940 Calendar..................
“Kingdom News” No. 5 „.........
Use Renewal Subscription Blank “Watchtower” Studies ..........


■
354
354
367
367
367

i
Cv2t,p. *> T5.':;


■.'
"
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street »	« Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Oflicer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Ofiieer thereof and Is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS Journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ iris beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It .does not indulge In controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Fobeign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, ano South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances Should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Bcmittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ............................. 34	Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian..........................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian................. 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African ................................ Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear In several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. Wo are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, wli»n requested, may be expected to appear on address label witbin one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T., under the Act of March S, 1819.
“WAR OF VINDICATION” TESTIMONY PERIOD
December marks the “War of Vindication” Testimony Period. Like the daily march around Jericho over a complete period, the testimony for Jehovah’s name and against the foes of Theocracy continues despite the season of the year. All Theocratic publishers should offer to the public first a three-booklet combination on a 10c contribution, including Government and Peace if available. If this offer is not accepted, Government and Peace will be offered on a 5e contribution, or any contribution possible to the obtainer. This will insure a wide distribution of this most timely booklet. Portable phonographs are not to be left in idleness, but should be used from house to house to run the latest recording, and the publications announced thereon will then be offered to the listeners. The war is on, and you will now do your part therein, reporting at the end of the month’s campaign the effectiveness of your intensive activities.
YEARBOOK FOR 1940
The 1940 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses presents a comprehensive report of the past year’s world-wide activities of these publishers of Jehovah’s Theocracy by Christ. You will marvel at the most interesting and most successful service year yet, even
with opposition increasing, nations being swallowed up by dicta tors, and wartime restrictions being generally applied, curtailing the Theocratic work in many countries. This report is prepared by the president of the Society. Additionally, there is a brief comment by the president on the text for the new calendar year, together with a text for each day of the year accompanied by an appropriate comment thereon as taken from recent issues of The Watchtower. The edition of the Yearbook is limited, and hence the regular contribution of 50e a copy is taken therefor Order promptly, with remittance to cover. Each company will place their orders with the local company servant, that he may convenience this office by sending in a combination order.
1940 CALENDAR
The 1940 Calendar sets out the text for the new calendar year, to wit: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.” (Psalm 13:5) A beautiful color illustration, specially painted, harmonizes with the theme of the text, and its portrayal of what is impending will gladden your heart. Neat calendar pads indicate the special Testimony Periods of the year and the special lines of endeavor of the other months of activity in publishing the Kingdom gospel.
(Continued on page 367)
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX	December 1, 1939	No. 23
THE THEOCRACY
Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place?”—Ps. 24:3.
TEHOVAH is the Almighty Theocrat. Christ Jesus I is the King, whom Jehovah has enthroned and J sent forth to rule. “Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.” (Ps. 2: 6) “To Jehovah belong-eth the earth and the fulness thereof, the world and they who dwell therein.” (Ps. 24:1, Rotherham) To his mighty King, Christ Jesus, whom he has enthroned, Jehovah addresses these words: “Ask of me, and I will give thee the nations for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.” (Ps. 2:8, Am. Rev. Ver.) Christ Jesus has asked, in obedience to the command of his Father, and he is now the rightful Euler of the world, hence the Governor and Executive Officer acting for the great Theocrat.
’ The Theocracy, therefore, is Jehovah’s government of the world by Christ Jesus, the righteous Overlord. “Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment.” (Isa. 32:1) The princes shall exercise authority in exact harmony with and according to the decision of the King, Christ Jesus. Such is the government, or great kingdom, concerning which Jesus directed his disciples to pray to Jehovah God: “Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.”—Matt. 6:10.
ORGANIZED
3	The organization of The Theocracy, as disclosed by the Scriptures, is this: The Almighty God, “whose name alone is Jehovah,” the Supreme One, is the Creator and Builder and Organizer; his only begotten and beloved Son, who is Christ Jesus, is Executive Officer of Jehovah God, whom God makes the King of the world; and associated with Christ Jesus by the grace and selection of Jehovah are 144,000 taken from amongst men, who prove faithful and are made “priests of God and of Christ”, and who “reign with him”. (Rev. 1:6; Rev. 20:4,6) There is “one God and Father of all, who is above all”. (Eph. 4:6) There is one Lord and Savior, Christ Jesus, the “mediator between God and men” (1 Tim. 2: 5, 6), whom God hath made Lord and Christ (Acts 2:36); and one body, of which Christ Jesus is the Head. (Eph. 1: 22; 4:15) Such is a brief description of the capital organization of Jehovah God, and
which in symbol is called Zion. (Ps. 132:13) “The Lord [Jehovah] hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his habitation. This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell; for I have desired it. I will abundantly bless her provision; I will satisfy her poor with bread. I will also clothe her priests with salvation; and her saints shall shout aloud for joy.” (Ps. 132:13-16) “When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory.”—Ps. 102:16.
VISIBLE REPRESENTATIVES
* The official or capital organization called “Zion” is not visible to human eyes. It is the new heaven of righteousness. The Scriptures further disclose that The Theocracy will have visible representatives on the earth, who shall perform the duties of governors under the direction and supervision of the theocratic King. Such men were in times of old called “fathers” in Israel. They proved their faithfulness unto Jehovah God and shall be made the children of The Christ and his representatives on the earth. This organization is described by the apostle Peter as the “new heavens and [the] new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness”.—2 Pet. 3:13.
3	The 144,000 body members of Christ are designated the “little flock” and share with Christ Jesus in his kingdom. (Luke 12:32; 22: 28-30) The visible representatives of the theocratic King are designated “princes in all the earth”. (Ps. 45:16) The term “prince”, as used in this text, means governor, ruler or steward.
8	The Scriptures disclose another class of persons, whom the Lord gathers unto himself and who receive life everlasting and live on the earth, and which company collectively is called his “other sheep” and the “great multitude”. (John 10:16; Rev. 7:9-15) Those “other sheep” are brought under the full supervision and control of the Lord Jesus Christ, the theocratic King, and under his direction they carry out the divine mandate to “multiply and fill the earth”.
PURPOSE
7	It is a vital necessity that persons who desire to live shall learn of Jehovah’s purpose, particularly
356
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
with reference to his Theocratic Government. His purpose God makes known through his Word, the Bible, and the reason for this Watchtower publication is to aid those who are of good will toward God to learn of his purpose and of his gracious provision for obedient men. Jehovah God created the earth for man, and he made man to inhabit the earth. “I have made the earth, and created man upon it; I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I commanded. For thus saith the Lord that created the heavens; God himself that formed the earth and made it; he hath established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited; I am the Lord, and there is none else.”— Isa. 45:12,18.
8	The earth shall be inhabited by men; that is to say, human creatures shall live on the earth forever, and never die, being obedient to the Theocratic Government. Not many persons now on the earth believe the good news concerning The Theocracy, but those truths are made clear and certain by the Lord himself. By his unchangeable Word he makes this declaration : “I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it.” (Isa. 46:11) ‘My word shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that whereunto I have sent it.’ (Isa. 55:11) Those who will constitute the “other sheep” of the Lord, and who will form the great multitude, must now inform themselves concerning Jehovah’s purpose and must rely wholly upon his Word. It is therefore essential to receive his instruction, as set forth in his Word, and to be diligent in the study of that Word, together with the helps that God has provided for the understanding of the same at this time. Jehovah God is “the Fountain of life”; “salvation belongeth unto the Lord.” (Ps. 36:9; 3:8) All who live must please God, and therefore must believe that God exists, and that he is the rewarder of those who diligently seek him. (Heb. 11:6) They must know that Christ Jesus is the Redeemer of faithful men and that God has provided that life shall be given to obedient men through Christ Jesus, and that there is no other name given whereby men may be saved and receive life. (Acts 4:12; Rom. 6: 23) Those who are of good will must now fortify themselves by reading these Bible texts and carefully considering them.
’ God created man a perfect creature and made his life dependent upon complete obedience to God’s law. The Devil induced that man to rebel against God, and his disobedience brought sin into the world. Thus disobedience brought death upon men. All the offspring of that man have been born in sin, which means that they have no right to life. (Rom. 5:12; Ps. 51:5) The Devil then rebelliously and wickedly declared before God that he could cause all men to disobey God and curse Him, and thus he challenged
God to put men on the earth who would remain faithful to Jehovah. (Job 2:5) That wicked challenge raised the question of who is supreme, Jehovah God or the Devil? God could immediately have destroyed the Devil and thus proved his own supremacy, but it pleased him to give the Devil full opportunity to prove his wicked challenge, and, he failing to do so, all creation must see and admit the supremacy of Jehovah God, and learn that life everlasting can be had only by full obedience to God’s law. Jehovah then said to the Devil: “But for this cause have I allowed thee to remain, in order to show thee my power; and in order that they may proclaim my name throughout all the earth.” (Ex. 9:16, Leeser) Since that declaration centuries have passed and the Devil has had full opportunity to make good his wicked challenge. He has failed, and his end is come, and that he knows. —Rev. 12:12.
PROMISE
10	God gave his Word that he would raise up a “seed” that would crush the Devil in due time. (Gen. 3:15) God then made prophetic pictures foretelling his purpose, and he used Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and others to make such prophetic pictures. To Abraham he said: “Thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies: and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.” (Gen. 12: 3; 22:10-18) In the picture made and recorded in the last above cited text Abraham offered his son Isaac in sacrifice. There Abraham pictured Jehovah God and Isaac pictured Christ Jesus, who is the real seed of promise. That picture foretold that God would permit his beloved Son, whom Isaac foreshadowed, to be offered as a sacrifice.—Gal. 3:16, 26-29; 4: 28.
11	Jacob, who is also called “Israel”, was a grandson of Abraham, and Jacob was also used by Jehovah to make prophetic pictures relating to the Theocratic Government. Jacob pictured The Christ, that is to say, Jesus Christ, the Head, and the members of “his body”. (Eph. 5:23, 30) This prophecy is recorded in the Bible, to wit: “There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Sceptre [symbol of ruler] shall rise out of Israel. . . . Out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, and shall destroy him that remaineth of the city.”—Num. 24:17,19.
12	Judah was the son of Jacob, and concerning whom this prophecy was written, to wit: “The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor the ruler’s staff from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the obedience of the peoples be.” (Gen. 49:10, A.jR.7.) That prophecy foretold Christ Jesus, the Messiah, the King of the world, the Theocrat’s great Executive Officer. Jesus Christ is “the Lion of the tribe of Juda” and “the Bright and Morning Star”. (Rev. 5:5; 22:16) Thus God used Abraham, Isaac and Jacob to make prophetic pictures fore-
December 1,1939
THE WATCHTOWER
357
teHing the coming of Christ his King and the One who should be the active Ruler of the great Theocratic Government. (For a more detailed consideration of this matter see the book Government, pages 88-130.) That it is the purpose of Jehovah God, by his King, to destroy the Devil and all of his works and organization is abundantly shown by the Scriptures. “He that committeth sin is of the devil; for the devil sinneth from the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil.” (1 John 3:8; Heb. 2:14; Ps. 110:2-5) The triumph of the Theocratic Government will be a complete vindication of Jehovah’s name and his Word. Christ Jesus the King is the Vindicator of Jehovah and the One who executes Jehovah’s purpose. From Abel to John the Baptist there were men who had faith in God’s promise that he would set up his Theocratic Government, and their hopes rested in that promised government. Because of their faith they received God’s approval, and in his due time they shall be fully rewarded.
DEVELOPMENT
A long period of time elapsed from the rebellion in Eden till the coming of Jesus. The conception of the child Jesus was not by the power of man, but by the power of the spirit of Almighty God. (Matt. 1:20-25) Jesus was therefore born holy, pure, harmless, undefiled, and without sin, and which meant that he was entitled to live. (Heb. 7: 26) God caused Jesus to be born as a man of flesh and blood that he might be the Redeemer of man and the King of the Theocratic Government. Jesus thus declared: “To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world.” (John 18: 36, 37) The birth of the child Jesus was announced by the angel of Almighty God. (Luke 2:10,11) Thirty years after the birth of Jesus Jehovah God “anointed” him, which means that he commissioned him to carry out the purpose for which he had been sent. (Matt. 3:16,17; Acts 10: 38) Immediately thereafter Jesus Christ entered upon the work which he was commissioned to do, and he began his testimony by making known that “the kingdom of heaven is at hand”. (Matt. 4:17) He was then the anointed King of the Theocratic Government, and, he being then present in the earth, it was literally true that the kingdom was at hand. From that moment onward the development of the kingdom progressed.
THE ENEMY
14	Satan the Devil is the adversary of God and the enemy of man. From the very time of the anointing of Jesus Satan began his work of opposition in his effort to destroy Christ Jesus. He laid before Jesus that which would have resulted in His destruction had Jesus yielded thereto. Satan failed, Jesus em
phatically declaring that those who live shall worship Jehovah God, and him only. (Matt. 4:1-11) Then the Devil employed every possible means to oppose Jesus and his work, and the chief instrument used by the Devil was religious leaders and the practitioners of religion, particularly called “Pharisees”, or clergy of that time. God had warned the Israelites that religion was a snare of the Devil, but the Israelites failed to give heed to that warning and, being led by and fearing men, they fell into the Devil’s snare. (Deut. 7:25; Ps. 106:36) The religious leaders called “Pharisees” having yielded to the Devil’s influence, they fell into the Devil’s snare and made the Word of God of none effect by teaching and practicing religion. (Matt. 15:1-9) Jesus informed those religionists that they were the instruments of the Devil, and they being blind, they were leading the blind people and turning them away from God and from his Word. (John 8:42-44; Matt. 15:14) The Devil continuously used the religious leaders and persecuted Christ Jesus, and at the end of three and one-half years that opposition succeeded by having Jesus arrested and convicted, upon false testimony, of the crime of treason; and Jesus was executed by being nailed to the tree, as if he was an accursed sinner. Then the Devil used those same religious leaders to bribe men to give testimony that the body of Jesus had been stolen from the tomb, and this they did in order to keep the people in ignorance of his resurrection. (Matt. 27:62-66; 28:12-15) The Devil thought his religious clergymen had done well and that he had defeated God’s purpose. Again the Devil had failed.
1S	Jesus being a perfect man and anointed to be King, why should he suffer ? He proved that man can endure the greatest suffering and at the same time remain faithful to God. Thereby he completely refuted Satan’s wicked challenge to Jehovah. Because of his full obedience under the most adverse conditions he proved his full perfection in harmony with Jehovah: “Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; and being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him.” (Heb. 5: 8, 9) He demonstrated the fact that all who receive God’s approval must be faithful.
16	Why should Jesus die? He did not die because of any wrong on his part. The manner of his death was as that of a sinner, but yet he was without sin, holy and harmless. He proved that man can be true and faithfully obedient to God even unto death. Because of Jesus’ faithful obedience God raised him out of death and exalted him to the highest position next to Jehovah in the Theocratic Government: “And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of
358
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the cross. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name; that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.”—Phil. 2: 8-11.
” The lifeblood of Jesus, the perfect man, poured out in death provided the purchase price for men who are sinners by inheritance and who by faith accept him as the Savior. Jesus is therefore the Redeemer, Purchaser, and Deliverer of those who believe on him and obey God’s law. (John 3:16) Adam’s sin brought death upon all mankind. The obedience of Jesus unto death opened the way for men to get life and to receive it as a free gift: “The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand. He that be-lieveth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abide th on him.”—John 3: 35, 36.
18 He died as a man. Jesus was resurrected to life a spirit with full power and authority to give life to all who believe and obey. “For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit.” (1 Pet. 3:18) “Therefore, as by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life. For as by one man’s disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.” (Rom. 5:18,19; 6: 23) He “was dead”, but now he is “alive for evermore” and is the world’s rightful King. (Rev. 1:18) As the Purchaser and Redeemer of man Jesus Christ is clothed with power and authority to give life to those who believe on and obey him. “And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him.”—Heb. 5: 9.
ENTHRONED
18 Jesus was raised to life “a life-giving spirit” and exalted to heaven more than nineteen centuries ago. (1 Cor. 15:45, A.R.V.) Did he begin the reign as King immediately after his exaltation? No; for the reason that such was not Jehovah’s due time for him to reign. When Jesus ascended on high Jehovah said to him, as it is written: “Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.” (Ps. 110:1) Concerning this it is written: “But this priest, having offered one sacrifice for sins evermore, sat down on the right hand of God: as for the rest waiting until his foes be made his footstool.”—Ileb. 10:12,13, Roth.
80 It was in the year 1914 that the period of waiting mentioned in the foregoing text came to an end, and
God then placed Christ Jesus upon his throne and sent him forth to rule. (Ps. 110:2) “Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.” (Ps. 2: 6) “Thou hast taken to thee thy great power, and hast reigned. And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come.” (Rev. 11:17,18) The fulfillment of this prophecy came in the autumn season of 1914, and this is further corroborated by the prophetic words of Jesus and the facts coming to pass in fulfillment of his prophecy.—Matt. 24: 3-8.
81 From the resurrection of Jesus until his enthronement as King Jehovah God continued to prepare and develop his royal organization. This the Lord has done by causing his purpose to be declared as written in his Word, that those who have heard and believed on the Lord Christ Jesus as Redeemer and King, and who have then fully devoted themselves unto God and Christ, have been given an opportunity to prove their faithful obedience unto God. The apostles and other faithful men did obey unto death and had the promise of partaking with Christ Jesus in his resurrection and in his kingdom. For that reason they must wait the second coming of Christ and his enthronement as King and the building up of Jehovah’s capital organization. Concerning this the apostle said immediately preceding his death: “For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight, 1 have finished my course, I have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.”—2 Tim. 4: 6-8.
28 It is to the faithful apostles and others of like faithfulness that the promise is given that they shall have part with Christ Jesus in the kingdom or Theocratic Government. (Luke 22:28-30) To such Jesus addresses these words: “Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.”—Rev. 2:10, A.R.V.
23 These faithful ones are the “little flock”, taken out from amongst men to be witnesses to the name and kingdom of Jehovah God. (Acts 15:14) Such are the witnesses for Jehovah. Such faithful ones constitute the spiritual temple of God, of which Christ Jesus is the Head. (1 Cor. 3:16; 2 Cor. 6:16) It was in the year 1918, that is, three and one-half years after his enthronement, that Christ Jesus came straightway to the temple of Jehovah. (Mal. 3:1-3) That was the time for the resurrection of the faithful apostles and other like faithful men who died after them, and concerning which the apostle testified at 1 Thessalonians 4:13-17. These being resurrected were brought into Zion, God’s capital organization. Then Jesus caused the consecrated ones on earth to be submitted to a fiery trial or test, as set
THE WATCHTOWER,
December 1,1939
forth in Malachi 3:1-4. The approved ones were builded up into Zion, the temple, in order that they might offer unto Jehovah an offering in righteousness by becoming his faithful witnesses. Collectively that approved number the Lord designated as the “faithful and wise servant”, to whom he committed his kingdom interests on the earth. (Matt. 24:45-47) All of such must from that time forward prove their faithfulness and meet the divine requirements if they would be forever in the royal organization of the great Theocratic Government.
REQUIREMENTS
u Who of the consecrated shall be made part of the Theocratic Government? David, the prophet and king of Israel, pictured Christ Jesus, the great Prophet, and in answer to the foregoing question uttered this prophecy: “Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place?” (Ps. 24:3) According to another translator the text reads: “Who shall ascend the mountain of Jehovah? and who shall stand in his holy place?” (Rotherham) This question propounded clearly indicates that some might enter the temple, being approved, and thereafter might not stand or remain in the temple, by reason of their failure to meet the requirements. It is written that every one in the temple must show forth the praises of Jehovah.— Ps. 29:9.
25	They must show their praise of him by faithfully being his witnesses and faithfully obeying the commandments of the Lord. (Heb. 13:15) The Lord Jesus makes known concerning those who become offended and are lawless that he sends forth his angels to gather them out of the kingdom, that is, to remove them from the temple: “The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity.”—Matt. 13:41.
26	The spirit-begotten ones on earth at the temple judgment who enter therein because of the Lord's approval constitute the remnant of the temple company, all of whom must be witnesses for Jehovah. (Isa. 43:10-12) Every one of such must declare God’s name in the earth before Armageddon. (Ex. 9:16) To all such the command is given to ‘preach this gospel of the kingdom to all the world as a witness’. (Matt. 24:14) The remnant therefore constitute the “feet of him”, that is, the last members of the body of Christ on earth, who by reason of being the witnesses for Jehovah bring good news to those who have the hearing ear. (Isa. 52:7) Those who are gathered into the temple and who then fail or refuse to obey the commandments of the Lord cannot remain in the temple.
27	The question is then propounded: “Who shall stand in his holy place?” That means, Who shall re
359
main in the capital organization of Jehovah? The Lord causes the answer to be recorded: “He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation.”—Ps. 24:4, 5.
28	Those who are brought into the “holy place”, that is, the temple, must devote their faculties to right and righteousness in obedience to God’s law and must refrain from touching or having anything to do with the Devil’s organization, which is unclean. The “heart” is the seat of unselfishness, or love, and therefore those of the remnant must be unselfishly devoted to the great Theocrat and his King. Such must not desire or seek vain things. That means that they must shun religion, which is the snare of the Devil and which is a defamation of God’s name. If they would stand or remain in the “holy place” they must not fear man; they must not desire the approval of men or fear that they might not receive man’s approval. They must fear God and be diligent at all times to seek his approval. They having made a covenant to do the will of God, that covenant must be faithfully kept and performed, and to break that covenant willingly means that such person has sworn deceitfully and hence could not remain in the “holy place”. That covenant with Jehovah requires the creature to avoid religion and to proclaim only the truth. The remnant must be not only willing but joyful witnesses of the Lord, giving full devotion to the Theocratic Government. Claiming to serve God and at the same time co-operating with or attempting to co-operate with religion or religious organizations means the breaking of the covenant with Jehovah. To stand in the holy place one must be fully and completely devoted to The Theocrat and his government. The test that has come upon the remnant of the temple during the past few years has demonstrated that some have failed to meet the requirements and have been gathered out and made a part of the “evil servant” class, the “son of perdition”.— Matt. 24: 48-51; 2 Thess. 2: 3.
PEACE
29	The Theocracy is a government of peace. The King is the Ruler of Peace, and everyone of his official organization must be at peace with God and his King and at peace with every member of the royal house. Concerning the Theocrat and his King it is written prophetically, referring to his birth and to his reign: “For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall he called Wonderful Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The
360
THE WATCHTOWER
Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this.”—Isa. 9:6, 7.
40 There shall be no controversy, and there shall be no end of peace in the Theocratic Government. That peace and harmony must prevail with the remnant of the temple company. Let everyone who hopes to remain in the Theocratic Government bear this in mind: that peace must at all times exist between those who are of the remnant. Each one who is in the temple is the servant of God, and all of the remnant collectively constitute that one body designated the “faithful and wise servant”, to whom are committed the kingdom interests on earth at the present time. It is plainly written that God hath placed the members in the body according to his good pleasure. (1 Cor. 12:18) No one in the temple can willingly withdraw from God’s organization and the service thereof and offer as an excuse for such that he is offended at another person who is of God’s organization. God judges his own servants. “Who art thou that judgest another man’s servant? to his own master he standeth or falleth. Yea, he shall be holden up: for God is able to make him stand.”—Rom. 14:1-4.
81 God has placed upon certain ones of his organization the duty of seeing that organization instructions are carried out. It may become necessary and hence proper for such a one, by reason of his position in the Society, that is, of the remnant of God’s organization, to rebuke another who is going contrary to organization instructions; but such rebuke is no excuse or justification for offense or withdrawal from the Lord’s service.—1 Tim. 5: 20; Titus 2:15.
82 He having gathered his people into the temple, all the temple company have come to the full and complete unity in Christ. (Eph. 4:13-15) That means that all must be at peace with one another and continue in peace amongst themselves. If it appears that some are bent upon disturbing the peace of the earthly members of the temple company, such is strong evidence that the disturber is not of the temple and that such person should be avoided. (Rom. 16:17,18) All members of the temple, fully united in love, must stand firmly together. “Stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together [unitedly] for the faith of the gospel.” (Phil. 1: 27) Let all companies of the people of God see to it that complete unity, peace and harmony exist among them and that they are all united fully in supporting the Theocracy. All who 'stand in the holy place’ must be wholly and completely faithful to the Theocratic government. There can be no middle ground, and there can be no compromise. All the temple class are united, all being
Brooklyn, N. Y.
anointed with the spirit of the Lord; and the Lord voices his pleasure in them when he thus through his prophet addressed to them these words: “Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!”—Ps. 133:1.
88 There is neither excuse nor justification for any of the remnant to be at enmity with their brethren, and none who are will receive the Lord’s final approval.
84 Mount Zion is builded up, and Jehovah has there appeared in his glory. (Ps. 102:16) He there appears representatively by his King, Christ Jesus, and hence it is the place of dwelling and action of Jehovah in carrying forward his government. (Ps. 132:13-18) The Scriptures written concerning Jehovah’s organization now apply: “Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thy habitations; spare not; lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes. For thou shalt spread abroad on the right hand and on the left; and thy seed shall possess the nations, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited.” (Isa. 54:2,3, A.R.V.) “But upon mount Zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be holiness; and the house of Jacob shall possess their possessions.” (Obadiah 17) “But the Lord is in his holy temple; let all the earth keep silence before him.”—Hab. 2:20.
“OTHER SHEEP”
88 The King, Christ Jesus, says: “And other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.” (John 10:16) These are they that shall make up the “great multitude”. They are now being gathered by the King, and those who come seeking the way to life by faith in Christ Jesus are given refuge and protection under the organization of Jehovah. The means employed by the Lord to gather his “other sheep” is by sending forth his witnesses to proclaim within the hearing of the people the message of Jehovah of and concerning the Theocracy. (Matt. 24:14) Christ Jesus and the members of the temple make known that the King has come and that it is the Theocracy that provides salvation to those who obey. “And saviours shall come up on mount Zion.” (Obad. 21) Hearing the glad tidings concerning the Theocracy, the “other sheep” of the Lord come from all nations, kindreds and tongues, seeking the way to life. (Rev. 7: 9) This the people of good will are doing at the present time, and those who thus come are told that they must seek righteousness and meekness and, so doing, they may be hid and find complete protection in the great disaster that shall shortly fall upon the world over which Satan has long been the invisible ruler.— Zeph. 2:3.
December 1, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER
361
PEACE EMPHASIZED
** Again peace is emphasized. This does not mean that peace shall come to every person, but that it will be given to those who are of good will toward the Theocratic Government. At the birth of Jesus, Jehovah’s messenger announced: “Glory in the highest, unto God! and on earth peace, among men of goodwill.” (Luke 2:14, Roth.) That declaration from heaven limits “peace on earth” to those who are of good will toward Jehovah and his government by Christ Jesus. To be of good will means to fully support the Theocracy upon learning of the same. The facts show that at the present time those of good will who learn of the Theocratic Government joyfully and enthusiastically support the same, giving their devotion to God and his King.
” The religious systems have hoodwinked and deceived many persons. This is particularly true with reference to the Roman Catholic ecclesiastical systems, ruled arbitrarily by the Hierarchy. Many honest and sincere persons who are held in the Roman Catholic organization desire righteousness, and these must hear the truth; and, hearing and obeying the message of the Lord, they come seeking the way to Zion, God’s capital organization, and they come with gladness of heart. Learning the truth, they lift up their hearts and voices with songs of praise to the Most High. (Isa. 35:10) Those who thus seek the Theocratic Government are not limited to any earthly organization, but the sincere ones seeking the truth come from all peoples and walks of life. Learning of the Theocracy, that multitude of persons of good will stand before the throne of the King, engaging in the praise of Jehovah and his Vindicator. They learn that salvation belongs to Jehovah, and not to men or any man-made organization. Therefore they sing: “Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.” (Rev. 7:10) At once they see their privilege of full devotion to the Theocracy, and, seeing it, they devote themselves to the service thereof at all times thereafter. “Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple; and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb, which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters; and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.” (Rev. 7:15-17) They become the joyful and obedient witnesses to the name and kingdom of the Most High, and hence they join with the remnant and bear testimony thereof to the people.-Rev. 22:17.
” Note now the peace and harmony that must exist and persist among all of God’s organization, and those who have found protection under the Theo
cratic Government. The remnant of the temple say: “I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord. Our feet shall stand within thy gates, 0 Jerusalem.”—Ps. 122:1, 2.
” “Jerusalem” in symbol stands for Jehovah’s organization in general, meaning all of the capital organization and those who find protection under it and who will form the great multitude. “Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together." (Ps. 122:3) Zion is the capital organization over the entire organization of the Lord. “For there are set thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house of David.” (Ps. 122: 5) David mentioned in this verse is the Greater David, the beloved Son, Christ Jesus: “Pray for the peace of Jerusalem; they shall prosper that love thee.” (Ps. 122: 6) This command is given to all who have been gathered unto the Lord, and all are told that peace must be within “thy walls”: “Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.” (Vs. 7) Thus it appears that both the remnant and the Jonathan class, who will compose the “great multitude”, are companions, and they must work harmoniously together: “For my brethren and companions’ sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee. Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good.” (Vss. 8,9) There must be complete unity and peace amongst all thus gathered un • to the King. The remnant and the Jonathan class will have their hearts closely knit together in love and firmly support and aid one another. Jehovah used David and Jonathan to make a beautiful picture of this unity: “And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking unto Saul, that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David; and Jonathan loved him as his own soul.” “Then Jonathan and David made a covenant, because he loved him as his own soul. And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and gave it to David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow, and to his girdle.” (1 Sam. 18:1,3,4) All those of the remnant and of the Jonathan class vdll appreciate that now their greatest privilege is to fully and wholly give their support to the Theocratic Government.
OPPOSED
40	Every government of earth is now against the Theocracy. There is not one that is for the Theocracy. The King of the Theocratic Government says: “He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad." (Matt. 12:30) The facts now well known fully prove that all the political, commercial and religious organizations are against the kingdom of God. The reason is, because Satan, the invisible “god of this world”, and all his power, and the power of his agents, are against the Theocratic Government. (2 Cor. 4:4;
362
WvVATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
John 14: 30) Prompted by the Devil and at the immediate instance of the religious system the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the political, commercial and religious elements of the world have conspired together against the Theocracy, to destroy those who serve that righteous government. Concerning this God prophetically foretold: “The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.” (Ps. 2: 2, 3) “They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones.” (Ps. 83: 3) All the nations practice some kind of religion, and all the nations have forgotten God, and none of them call upon his kingdom and look to it as the means of salvation and deliverance.
41	The end of Satan’s operation is at hand, and, knowing that his time is short, Satan has brought great woes upon the peoples of the earth. (Rev. 12:12) Fear has gained control of the political and commercial elements, and these have invoked religion to bring them aid. Upon earth there is “distress of nations”, “men’s hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth.” (Luke 21: 25, 26) All the forces of the world under Satan’s command are gathered together for the battle of the great day of God Almighty. (Rev. 16:13-16) All of Satan’s forces are against The Theocracy and those who stand for The Theocracy. Jehovah’s time has come to show his power against all that oppose his government. (Ex. 9:16) It is Jehovah’s time when he, by his right hand, Christ Jesus, 'should destroy them which destroy the earth.’ (Rev. 11:18) That means everything that is against The Theocracy. Agreeable to his expressed purpose, Jehovah has given to Christ his King the nations for an inheritance and the uttermost parts of the earth for possession. (Ps. 2:8) And what shall the Lord do with all the nations that are against The Theocracy? He answers; “Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.” (Ps. 2:9) Such disaster will befall the nations at Armageddon. Only those who fear God and serve his government will survive.
CONTRAST
** Standing over against the institutions of this wicked world is the glorious kingdom of Jehovah. His government is that of everlasting peace, joy and life. Those who have been taken into the temple, together with their companions who trust fully in and serve the great Theocracy, now can joyfully and truly say: “I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep; for thou, Lord, only makest me dwell in safety.” (Ps. 4:8) There are no other people on
earth who can truly utter these words of the psalmist. Those who know not God are in great fear and trepidation, but those who trust wholly in the great Theocrat and his King can rest in peace.
43	The remnant and the Jonathan class, their “companions”, love the great Theocrat and his. King. To them Jehovah now graciously gives a vision of his glorious government. It is the kingdom for which faithful men from the time of Abel till now have hoped and prayed. Those faithful men of old include all the faithful prophets, and by faith they beheld the coming of Jehovah’s government and they fully served God, remaining faithful even unto death. “Wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God; for he hath prepared for them a city [a lasting-habitation ; a dwelling place in peace].” (Heb. 11:16) Soon those faithful men will be resurrected from death, made perfect, and exalted to the place of the visible governors in the earth. The righteous King shall be over them, and those men shall act in exact harmony with his decisions. Over them all is the Almighty God, “whose name alone is Jehovah,” and that government shall be a righteous one. (Isa. 32:1) That government will bring peace to the people, and there the righteous shall flourish. (Ps. 72: 7, 8) Many of the nations of earth are now at war, and all nations are in fear and trepidation; but following Armageddon the Theocratic Government will establish everlasting peace on the earth. Of the mighty King of the Theocracy it is written: “And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks; nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.” (Isa. 2:4) The King at Jehovah’s direc tion will give life everlasting to all who obey. (Roni. 6:23) There will be no more tears shed, because The Theocracy gives to the people everlasting joy. (Rev. 21:1-4) The great multitude under the immediate command and direction of the theocratic King will fulfill the divine mandate to “multiply and fill the earth” with a people of righteousness. Truly then the earth will be inhabited in fulfillment of God's purpose, inhabited by human creatures whose peace and joy will know no end. Every creature that survives and lives shall sing the praises of Jehovah and his King. By faith the Lord permits his people now to see these good things near at hand.
44	It is now the privilege of everyone who has a vision of the Theocracy to give his entire service to the Kingdom and devote every faculty that he possesses to that service, and such is his reasonable duty. Today those who have a vision of the Kingdom and an appreciation thereof and who continue with such appreciation can never withdraw from the service of the Theocratic organization. Having once been
THE WATCHTOWER
363
December 1,1939
privileged to enter into the service of the Kingdom and then willingly withdrawing therefrom means the certain and complete end of that person: “For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them. But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire.”—2 Pet. 2: 21, 22.
45	Complete faithfulness to the Theocracy is required of everyone who enters the kingdom. All must be faithful even unto death. The faithful men of old who shall be made princes exhibited that same degree of faith and faithfulness. Those who will form the “great multitude” must have and exhibit a like degree of faith and faithfulness, even unto death if such be required.
48	While darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the people, and while strife and wickedness rule today amongst men, all persons of good will are invited to give their allegiance and devotion to the Theocrat and his King. Such is the only hope of mankind, as Jehovah has plainly proclaimed to the world. (Matt. 12:18-21) No one can pin his hope to anything the nations of the present -wicked world offer. He that devotes himself to the full and unselfish service of the Theocratic Government shall live. None other shall live. Let all who have a desire for life and all who hate wickedness and love righteousness give heed to the words of the Lord. The earth is his, and the fullness thereof, and he alone can give
salvation to life. Zion is builded up, the Theocratic Government is functioning. All people of good will must now seek the Lord and his kingdom and give their unstinted and uncompromising support thereto. Therefore it is written in the prophecy: “This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face, 0 Jacob. Selah.” (Ps. 24:6) To all who love righteousness and whose faces are turned toward the great Theocratic Government God through his prophet says: “Lift up your heads, 0 ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in. Who is this King of glory ? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle. Lift up your heads, 0 ye gates; even lift them up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in. Who is this King of glory ? The Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory. Selah.”—Ps. 24: 7-10.
47	Jehovah is the King of Eternity. He has enthroned Christ Jesus, his King of the Theocratic Government. Jehovah has appeared in his glory, and the day of deliverance is at hand for all those who flee to the Theocratic Government and give their allegiance and unselfish devotion to the Theocracy. Because of the limited space only a brief outline can here be given of the Theocratic Government. The books Salvation, Government, and Riches give a more detailed description thereof. By pursuing those studies together with the Bible, which God has provided for those who love righteousness, one may learn the truth and know Jehovah and his King: “This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.”—John 17: 3.
FOUR ANGELS LOOSED
TEHOVAH by Christ Jesus revealed to the apostle John I a vision of seven angels with trumpets. Each angel J sounded his trumpet in turn, which sounding was followed by interesting events, which the vision describes symbolically. When the sixth angel sounded John heard the voice of Christ Jesus command the angel: “Loose the four angels which are bound in [at] the great river Euphrates.” The “four angels” or commissioned messengers of the Lord are all of Jehovah’s witnesses anointed and commissioned and commanded by him to bear the testimony of Jesus Christ to the nations of the earth. (The term “angels” literally means “messengers”, and does not always apply to creatures having a spirit organism.) During the World War period these messengers had been held in prison or restraint by Satan’s organization, which is symbolically called “Babylon”, and which was foreshadowed by ancient Babylon built on both banks of the river Euphrates. In July, 1927, Jehovah’s witnesses assembled in international convention at Toronto, Canada, and sent forth the proclamation “To the Peoples of Christendom”, which proclamation was supported by the speech “Freedom for the Peoples”, de
livered to a visible audience of 15,000 and at the same time broadcast over a network of radio stations, 53 in number, from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
Both speech and proclamation were issued shortly thereafter in a publication under the title Freedom for the Peoples; and fifty million copies thereof were distributed throughout “Christendom”. The following quotation from the speech, which was delivered July 24, 1927, seems here appropriate, and its agreement with the command given to the sixth angel may be noted:
“The people desire peace, freedom, prosperity, life and happiness. All thinking persons must now see these can come only from God’s kingdom through Christ. They can never be realized by or through the false system called ‘organized Christianity’. The hypocritical and evil course of ‘Christendom’ is an insult to God and to Christ. It is the deceiver and oppressor of the people. It is completely under the control of Satan the Devil. It depends for its support and maintenance upon the multitudes of peoples, while at the same time it continues to defraud and oppress the people. Let the multitudes of peoples completely and entirely
364
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
withdraw all support morally, financially, and otherwise from ‘Christendom’, or ‘organized Christianity’, so called. Let them give their hearts’ devotion and allegiance entirely to God and to Christ, the Prince of Peace, who is now earth’s rightful King. Let them dwell together in peace, and do good to each other, and be ready to receive the blessings which God has in reservation for those who love and obey him. The day of complete freedom is at hand!
“The peoples should therefore for ever abandon and forsake ‘organized Christianity’ called ‘Christendom’ and turn their hearts and minds and their allegiance wholly to God and his Christ for the following reasons, to wit:
“(1) Because ‘Christendom’ is the Devil’s organization operated by him to keep the people in subjection.
“(2) Because it is an instrument of oppression which has been used to make the burdens of men grievous to be borne.
"(3) Because it is false, hypocritical, and wicked, and against the interests of the multitudes of the peoples.
“(4) Because it holds out absolutely no hope for the betterment of the peoples.
“(5) Because God’s time has come when that evil and hypocritical system shall be destroyed in the greatest time of trouble the world has ever known.
“(6) Because God commands all the peoples who love him to flee from that unrighteous system of so-called ‘organized Christianity’ and thereby escape the dire calamities that shortly shall befall her.
“(7) Because God has set his anointed King, Christ Jesus the Messiah, upon his throne, and bids all the peoples of earth to hear and obey him; and those who so do shall receive and for ever enjoy the blessings of complete freedom, everlasting peace, prosperity, life, liberty and happiness.”
Referring now to the prophetic picture of Revelation 9:13,14 concerning the ones bound at the Euphrates: The ancient city of Babylon was located on the river Euphrates and controlled the traffic and commerce of that river. It was the main part of the ‘waters of Babylon’. (Ps. 137:1,3) God’s prophet long ago foretold how spiritual Israelites, the messengers of Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, would be carried away captive, to the river Euphrates, symbolically speaking. (Jer. 13:1-11) The “great river” was where the prisoners were bound, the river therefore picturing the multitudes of people under the control and dominion of Satan’s organization. As stated at Revelation 17:15: “And he saith unto me, The waters which thou sawest, where the whore [Babylon, Satan’s woman or organization] sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.”
Revelation 9:15 (A.R.P.) declares that, in obedience to the command, “the four angels were loosed . . . that they should kill the third part of men.” Note that, according to Revelation 16:19, Satan’s organization is “divided into three parts”, to wit: commercial, political and religious; therefore the expression “the third part of men” would not mean one third of Satan’s organization, but would symbolize the three-divisioned official element of Babylon. It is therefore seen now that the Lord through his angel directed the preparation of the contents of the above-mentioned booklet Freedom for the Peoples, which dealt with all three of the elements of Satan’s organization, to wit, high finance, statesmen and the clergy. God’s message of truth, like fire and
brimstone, “shocked the religious susceptibilities” of the chief moguls of “Christendom”; and their mouthpieces, the public press and magazines, re-echoed their many howls. So badly was the National Broadcasting Company, which freely co-operated in the broadcasting of the Resolution and supporting speech, burned and scorched by the turning loose of that message of truth that thereafter its radio facilities cannot be used to broadcast the message of God’s kingdom. Then the ‘waters of the great Euphrates’ began to dry up, as foretold at Revelation 16:12-16, because the Greater Cyrus, Christ Jesus, had turned them away to prepare “the way of the kings of the east”. This drying up of the river Euphrates follows the loosening of the four angels, which had been bound, and it seems clearly to signify that other bound ones aside from Jehovah’s witnesses would be released and would march joyfully to Jehovah’s organization.
Prior to the time of the Toronto convention of 1927 many of the consecrated ones were still “bound” in fear, and thus their service to the Lord was hindered. Thereafter Jehovah’s witnesses became bolder and fearless. The witness work moved forward with greater unity and increased zeal. At that Toronto convention an address was delivered on the subject “The Mission of a Christian”, and therein the great importance of the house-to-house preaching of the gospel of the kingdom was stressed. It was at that convention that the so-called “Pilgrim Service”, of traveling lecturers, was superseded by field-service representatives; which has developed into the arrangement of the regional and zone servants of today. From that time onward, also, the pioneer service, by those devoting their full time to house-to-house work, increased. These matters were not deliberately arranged in advance by men, but the Lord himself directed them, because he is in charge of the service work of carrying the message to the people. He directs his angels what to do, and through them steers his witnesses on earth in the right direction, and all praise and honor are due to the Most High.
Note now Revelation 9:16: “And the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred thousand thousand: and I heard the number of them.” It is written (19:14): “And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, elothed in fine linen, white and clean.” These armies doubtless include the myriads of angels, as well as the little company of Jehovah’s witnesses on earth. Joel 2:11 reads: “His camp is very great: for he is strong that executcth his word.” God’s army is well-equipped and is fearless. (Job 39:19-25) This two hundred million of the Lord’s army sound the message of woe to the world rulers under Satan. Jehovah’s anointed ones on earth should hereby be encouraged. Let them rejoice and say: ‘They that be with us are more than they that be with the enemy.’—2 Ki. 6:16.
John’s vision discloses that the horses and riders have breastplates of fire, jacinth, and brimstone, and the horses had heads like lions, and out of their mouths issued fire and brimstone. (Rev. 9:17) Such a fiery, sulphurous breastplate would be a terrifying sight for the enemy to behold. At Isaiah 63: 4 the Lord says: “The day of vengeance is in mine heart.” Such also is the heart attitude of the Lord’s army, pictured by the fiery breastplate, and that fiery zeal
December 1, 1939
3&WATCHT0WER.
365
for Jehovah is pictured as covering the most vital organ, to wit, the heart, and it terrifies the enemy but speaks victory to God’s anointed.—Phil. 1; 28.
Christ Jesus, “the Lion of the tribe of Juda,” leads the army of the Lord, and the members of his body are appropriately described as having heads like lions. This is a very appropriate description of the cavalry division of the army of the Lord, which is strong in the Lord and in the power of his might. “What is stronger than a lion?” Like those who followed David, they are “men ... fit for the battle, . . . whose faces were like the faces of lions”. (1 Chron. 12: 8) The Lord’s people are of the Davidic class. Proverbs 28:1: “The wicked flee when no man pursueth: but the righteous are bold as a lion.”—Proverbs 19:12.
The apostle John declares (Rev. 9:18,19) that the power of these soldiers of the Lord is in their mouths and in their tails, which are like the tail of a serpent. Jehovah has put his message in the mouth of his people and has made them his witnesses while he does his great “strange work”. (Isa. 51:16) These preach his Word and sing his praises, and this message issues from their mouths. The symbolic “tail” is the prophetic message which they deliver. God has not authorized the wicked to speak his Word, but has commissioned his anointed witnesses to deliver his message of truth and speak his word of vengeance against the enemy organization. (Ps. 50 :16,17) These servants of the Lord speak the message by their mouths, and leave the prophetic message, as the “tail”, behind, which the people read; and therefore they assault the enemy organization “both coming and going”. The public witness message that went forth from Toronto was spoken by word of mouth and broadcast over fifty-three radio stations. Without a doubt a great number of mouths (loud-speakers of radio receiving sets) took the message from the ether and heralded it to millions of listening people. The immediate response by wire and letters from every part of the country proves this fact to be correct. Then followed the world-wide distribution of the message in printed form. This message from the mouth and “tail” has stung the enemy organization, and still stings. By the three destructive agencies, “fire,” “smoke,” and “brimstone”, many were killed; that is to say, their influence and power to deceive the people was rendered nil. The message of the Lord, following in printed form in the booklet Freedom for the Peoples, went both to the governing powers and to the people. It was not man’s message, but God’s message taken from his Word, and tells of his destruction of the unrighteous systems. Isaiah 30: 33, speaking of that destruction at Armageddon, says: “The breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it. For Tophet [the valley of Hinnom, where devil worship was carried on] is ordained of old; yea, for the king [that is, the worldly ruling powers] it is prepared: he [Jehovah] hath made it deep, and large [to accommodate all the wicked] ; the pile thereof is fire and much wood.”
This “strange work” of declaring his vengeance against “Christendom.” the Lord does when he comes to his temple, to wit, from A.D. 1918 onward. Psalm 11: 4, 6 states: “The Lord is in his holy temple, the Lord’s throne is in heaven: Lis eyes behold, his eyelids try, the children of men. Upon the wicked lie shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest; this shall be the portion of their eup.” That memage, spoken by word of mouth, and then thrust
into the hands of millions of people, and left behind for them to “chew on”, left a smarting sensation like the sting of a serpent. God had said: “Behold, I will send serpents, . . . which will not be charmed, and they shall bite you, saith the Lord” (Jer. 8:17); and this prophecy was fulfilled.
The public press, which is the tool and mouthpiece of the ruling powers, immediately thereafter sent up a cry or howl, as a result of the sting. The Toronto press the next day after the convention speech urged the legal department of the government to take immediate steps to deport the public speaker of the occasion who read the resolution, and then vigorously denounced the message that was delivered in support. The New York Times broke its silence, and for once screeched and howled against the truth and delivered the cries of the clergy. The National Broadcasting Company, another mouthpiece of the unholy alliance, joined in the howl and denunciation, and ever thereafter has refused to have its radio facilities again used in broadcasting the message of God’s Word of truth. In an effort to offset the truth it sets itself up as the one to determine what shall be given to the people in religious matters.
It was the Lord that sent forth his invisible angels to sound the trumpet and direct the message, and he caused his visible servants on earth to join in that work. By their mouths they have spoken the message; and they have left behind “the tail”, which is the prophetic message, and this has caused the Devil’s representatives to squirm and writhe under the torment. Manifestly this is what the prophet saw when he wrote (Psalm 2:4): “He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh; the Lord shall have them in derision.” God’s people laugh with him.
The public message delivered at Toronto showed the close alliance between the clergy, Big Business, and the politicians, the three elements of Satan’s official organization. Thereafter many of the clergy went out of the business and went into commercial pursuits. Their preaching business was killed.
Revelation 9:20, 21 adds: “And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood; which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk: neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts.” Men of the world of all divisions thereof still insist on a government without Jehovah God and without Christ Jesus. Even though the truth is pointed out to them that God has set his King upon his throne, and the time has eome to establish his kingdom, and that this is the panacea for the ills of humankind, they still persist in their wicked course of oppressing mankind, and insist on ruling them. They refuse to welcome earth’s rightful King. They continue to bow down to Satan and his doctrines concerning man’s origin and his destiny. They worship material things rather than the Creator. The influence of Satan still induces many of them to hate (which is murder) the Lord’s people and to persecute them. Many who profess to be Christians still continue their illicit relationship with the unrighteous things of this world, which is spiritual fornication. They have a preference for the doctrine of devils rather than for the Word of God. They rob and kill their fellow men. They rob God of that to which he is justly entitled.
PREVIEWS
JEHOVAH now gives to his faithful servants glimpses of the magnificent arrangement and order that will prevail throughout all the earth after his slaughter of all enemies of his theocratic government, at Armageddon, the universal war now near.
By his prophets he has declared that all the survivors on earth of that greatest trouble of all time shall regularly assemble to commemorate the mighty acts of the Most High God. Solemn feasts of worship have been divinely ordained for that purpose. For the benefit of all who come to those festal assemblies Jehovah has provided good traffic rules, as symbolically pictured in Ezekiel’s vision of the temple. The temple rule is stated thus:
“But when the people of the land shall come before Jehovah in the solemn feasts, he that entcreth in by the way of the north gate [of the temple] to worship shall go out by the way of the south gate; and he that entereth by the way of the south gate shall go forth by the way of the north gate; he shall not return by the way of the gate whereby he came in, but shall go forth over against it [straight before him (R.V.)].” (Ezek. 46:9) The line of happy celebrants is kept moving in one direction, so there is no disorder; showing that with Jehovah everything is orderly. Furthermore, the people in exercising their privileges in connection with God’s temple, must go clear through, and not merely a part of the way, if they will be reconciled to God and be brought permanently into his organization.
In “Christendom” the leaders have been foolish shepherds. In Jehovah’s organization the earthly “prince”, that is, the ancient prophets and other faithful witnesses from Abel down to John the Baptist, resurrected as perfect men (Heb. 11: 35, 39, 40), will with authority always direct the people in the right way. “And the prince [meaning each of the 'princes in all the earth’ who ‘shall rule in judgment’ (Ps. 45:16; Isa. 32:1) as visible representatives of the permanent theocratic government] in the midst of them [the people], when they go in [the temple], shall go in; and when they go forth, shall go forth. And in the feasts, and in the solemnities, the meat [or meal] offering shall be an ephah to a bullock, and an ephah to a ram; and to the lambs as he is able to give, and an hin of oil to an ephah.” (Ezek. 46:10,11) The princes are thus in a responsible position toward Jehovah, and during the thousand-year reign of the Lord Jesus Christ will see that the people practice justice and righteousness.
The symbolic temple had gates, both inner and outer gates, on the north, south, and east. The east inner gate of the temple will be open on state occasions. As to this it is written: “Now when the prince shall prepare a voluntary burnt offering or peace offerings voluntarily unto the Lord, one shall then open him the gate that looketh toward the east, and he shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings as he did on the sabbath day; then he shall go forth; and after his going forth one shall shut the gate.” (Ezek. 46:12) This is a further testimony of the loving-kindness of Jehovah, showing his consideration for the faithful prophets of old and that they will be favored with a “better resurrection” than those who come up in the general earthly resurrection. (Heb. 10: 35) There will be nothing about their service that is compulsory, but they will serve joyfully, willingly and with a ready mind. They will
be happy to worship and make offerings of praise and thanksgiving to the Lord privately and when not acting in an official capacity with the people. Note that when the princes conclude offering their voluntary (or free-will) offering ‘he shall go forth; and after he goeth forth one shall shut the gate’. This shows that the doors of audience with Jehovah’s heavenly priesthood, of which Christ Jesus is the High Priest, will always be ready to open to these princes of the earth whenever their personal needs require them to seek communion with the Lord of heaven. As it is written: “And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer: and while they are yet speaking, I will hear.” —Isa. 65:24.
Furthermore, provision is made for daily sacrifices of praise to Jehovah. The temple rule says: “Thou shalt daily prepare a burnt offering unto the Lord of a lamb of the first year without blemish ; thou shalt prepare it every morning. And thou shalt prepare a meat [meal] offering for it every morning, the sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of an hin of oil, to temper with the fine flour; a meat [meal] offering continually, by a perpetual ordinance, unto the Lord. Thus shall they prepare the lamb, and the meat [meal] offering, and the oil, every morning, for a continual burnt offering.” (Ezek. 46:13-15) All this is symbolic or prophetic: The acknowledgment of praise and thanksgiving will be offered up to Jehovah God through his royal priesthood consisting of Christ Jesus and his 144,000 associates in heaven, and it shall no more be that “the daily sacrifice [continual ascending-sacrifice (Roth.)] shall be taken away”. (Dan. 12:11) Then the Satanic political organizations symbolized as the “beast” and the “image of the beast” will have been disposed of, so that they cannot interfere on earth.
The “princes in all the earth” are granted an everlasting favor from Jehovah. Concerning this it is written: “Thus saitli the Lord God, If the prince give a gift unto any of his sons, the inheritance thereof shall [belong to his sons. ff.P.] ; it shall be their possession by inheritance.” (Ezek 46:16) In the day of ancient Israel sons were raised up to perpetuate the family name and possessions that these might remain for a lasting inheritance. All this was necessary because of the dying condition of the human race Under Jehovah’s kingdom by Christ Jesus the resurrected leaders and faithful prophets or princes will not div “Neither can they die any more.” (Luke 20:36) They will not need sons to maintain the family inheritance, forasmuch as these princes are resurrected by and receive life through Christ Jesus and thus will be “sons” by reason of their inheritance from their princely Father, Christ Jesus. It is therefore plain to be seen that the terms “princes” and “his sons” here used jointly stand as a prophetic picture of all the “princes in all the earth” who are to be made the “children” of The Christ, the great Prince of Glory. (Sv Psalm 45:16.) Therefore this prophecy given to Ezekiel pictures that these princes shall never have their names die out and what God has ‘given to them as an inheritance shall be their possession by an inheritance for ever.
The “princes” appear to have granted to them certain discretions in matters of service unto Jehovah. This is pic tured in these words: “But if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants, then it shall be his to the year 30C,
December 1,1939
THE WATCHTOWER
of liberty [the jubilee year] ; after it shall return to the prince; but his inheritance shall be his sons’ for them,” (Ezek. 46:17) There will be a world-wide service to be performed during the period of reconstruction, and it seems that the Lord will leave it to the discretion of the “princes in all the earth” as to whom they shall grant the honor of special service in Jehovah’s organization. The opportunity will be afforded to those of the people who really love God to show their faithfulness and their devotion and readiness to serve, and they will qualify themselves for service. It is the privilege of the remnant who now have children to teach them to really devote themselves to Jehovah God and to his service and to be in line for and ready for service under the direction of the “princes in all the earth”. Such is likewise the privilege of the Jonadabs or the present-day people of good will who have children. Let all such children be encouraged to read The Watchtower and study it with their parents. Take the children with you to the study classes where the Watchtower publications are studied. Remember that God’s injunction to you is that your children must seek righteousness and meekness before Armageddon begins. The Watchtower will be of great value to you in giving heed to the admonition of the Lord, and will enable your children to learn the way of righteousness. No doubt the “princes” or rulers will bestow benefits of special service upon those who possess the qualifications to serve and who are anxious to serve and to please.
The full office of service in the earth is the inheritance of “the princes”, but this work will require service of many, and the “princes” will have the privilege of opening to others the opportunity of assisting in the work under the direction of the “princes in all the earth”. The privilege thus bestowed as a “gift” or favor “shall be his [that is, the servant’s] to the year of liberty”, and then it shall “return to the prince”. That means that the “servants” may have this privilege of service under the princes or rulers and that the honor that the position carries with it will endure to the end of the Millennium, and at the end thereof these servants shall not be different from others of mankind who maintain their integrity and who will then “be delivered . . . into the glorious liberty of the children of God”. (Rom. 8:21) It will be wonderful, however, to be privileged to serve the people under the direction of the rulers of the earth, and the faithful on earth should now instruct their children to this effect. Whatever glory the
367
servants do have and enjoy in doing service will belong to the princes, but they will enjoy it by favor.
This scripture shows that persons of Hebrew nationality (sometimes by themselves and by others loosely called “Jews”) will have no favors different from those of other nationalities. During the Millennium Hebrew persons could at the very most have service under the princes. Such persons will not be favored any more than any other people; Jesus’ words show it may be “more tolerable” for these others. Faithfulness and devotion to the Lord and his kingdom will bring to such his blessings. Although as a people the fleshly Jews have been unfaithful to God, especially during the time of their covenant of old, yet Jehovah will extend his mercy to the redeemable ones, and because of the faithfulness of their fathers, which fathers are now during the Millennium made “princes in all the earth”, God will give opportunity to them to be fully reconciled to him. Of the remnant of the Jews that accepted Christ Jesus it is written: “They are beloved for the fathers’ sakes.” (Rom. 11: 28) There would be no reason why any Jew after the flesh should be given any special service during the Millennial reign unless he is specially qualified and devoted to Jehovah God and his King Christ Jesus. The above-quoted words of Paul cannot be construed to mean that persons of Hebrew nativity will be given a favor above other people. Every one who comes into God’s organization must have faith like unto Abraham’s, and in that way they become Israelites indeed, true Jews, praisers of the Most High God and his loyal servants, under the King, Christ Jesus.
Jehovah makes it plainly to appear that no oppression shall be tolerated in the kingdom. “Moreover, the prince shall not take of the people’s inheritance by oppression, to thrust them out of their possession: but he shall give his sons’ inheritance out of his own possession; that my people be not scattered every man from his possession.” (Ezek. 46:18) This shows that what God assigns to the prince shall not encroach upon the people’s inheritance. All the earth becomes the habitation of obedient mankind, and this they shall hold for ever. The people shall dwell permanently and in full security. The princes will acquire no glory or wealth at the expense of the people, nor will the people be scattered. The ‘rulers in all the earth’ will bring the people into close connection as one big human family of great peace, and all will give praise to the everlasting Creator.—Ps. 150: 6.
(Continued from page 354)
Calendars, of which the supply is limited, will be sent on order, remittance accompanying, at 25c each, or $1.00 for five sent to one address. Companies will please order through their company servants.
“KINGDOM NEWS” NO. 5
Now released! Excellent for general distribution from house to house, in conjunction with your regular house-to-house testimony work or otherwise. This new issue publishes the feature “Ensnared”, by the president of the Society, warning the people against the move to entrap all people to their destruction, under the guise of religion. Companies of Jehovah’s witnesses desiring to engage in a distribution of Kingdom News No. 5 should order them through their respective company servants. $1.00 per 1,000 copies on small orders.
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The blank sent you one month before expiration of your Watchtower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office in the country where, you reside. Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals for The Watchtower, should always use these blanks. By filling in these renewal blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the time of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a great help if you sign your name uniformly, and note any recent change of address, on the renewal slip.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of January 7: “The Theocracy,”
fl 1-26 inclusive, The Watchtower December 1, 1939.
Week of January 14: “The Theocracy,”
fl 27-47 inclusive, The Watchtower December 1,1939.
FIELD EXI
EAGERNESS FOR TRUTH IN NEW ZEALAND
"I was witnessing to a lady one Sunday morning a little way out of Auckland. After reading the testimony card she said: ‘Wait a minute, please.’ She went inside for a little while, then came out with a sixpence on the card and said: ‘I will take the four booklets.’ I gave her Face the Facts, Consolation, Fascism or Freedom, and Freedom or Romanism, a real good combination. She told me she could not afford to take the new book Salvation, but when I come around again she would take it. It was the last one I had with me. Before I left I noticed a cop’s hat hanging in the hall. I went to the next house and presented the testimony card again, and it was read both sides and the lady looked at my hand and said: ‘I will have Salvation.’ She gave me 2/- for it, and said the extra would help to meet my expenses. Then I gave her the combination of booklets above mentioned, and she was delighted. On leaving that house I heard someone whistling. I looked around and there was a man standing in the garden of the house where I had just left. He said: ‘Here, I want you!’ He went indoors, and I thought I was in for trouble. When I got to the door the lady came out again and said: ‘I will take that book Salvation, if you like.’ ‘Sorry,’ I said, ‘you can’t have it now.’ ‘Why?’ ‘Because the lady next door took it joyfully.’ She looked very much disappointed. Then the man that called me in came to the door and said: ‘Why in the dickens didn’t you take it when you had the chance? Now I have missed Judge Rutherford’s latest book. That’s a woman all over!’ He asked if it was possible to get another. ‘Yes, sure. I will be here again next Sunday and bring you one.’ ‘What!’ he said, ‘wait till next Sunday. Oh dear, oh dear!’ The woman said: ‘If I give you the contribution now, could you post one to me?’ ‘Yes, of course.’ She got the shilling, and threepence extra for postage. The man said: ‘Now I will get the book.’ ”
SIGNALMAN WITNESSING BY TELEPHONE IN ENGLAND
“He often gives out the message of the Kingdom to his fellow signalmen during the early hours of the morning, and does so by means of the telephone. While on night duty, and during intervals between traffic, the signalmen of a dozen stations often link up together as if they were all in the same room. These stations are up to thirty miles apart. The publisher takes this opportunity to give out the Kingdom message, and as interest is shown by his fellow signalmen he posts the books and booklets to them.”
ZONE SERVANT MEETS PARSON IN TRANSVAAL
“I happened to knock at the door of the English parson of the place. He was polite. I explained briefly what I was doing and gave him a copy of ‘The Protest’ (re banning of Riches). He then remarked that he was in favor of certain books’ being banned because the uneducated people misunderstand them even though the author’s ideas might have been well meant. I then said: ‘Have you ever thought how many millions have misunderstood and still are misunderstanding the Bible? Do you mean the Bible should be banned, too? And furthermore, aren’t there many people who have already misunderstood some of your sermons?’ ‘Yes, they did,’ he answered. ‘Well,’ I said, ‘why not stop preaching!’ He immediately got up, went for a donation and took Riches and Salvation with the remark, ‘I’d like to study those books.’ ”
ERIENCES
PRISON IS THE TERRITORY OF PRISONER NO. -
He writes the company servant: “And I wish to thank you for your interest in my receiving the Kingdom message, and your efforts in seeing that none of them go astray. I thank you, not only for myself, but for the many others that read them. They are their only, but sufficient, source of spiritual food, with the bound books and booklets that they read also between issues of The Watchtower and Consolation. Lately I have been averaging two hundred loans of literature every month, and for the past five years have been averaging more than seventy loans of literature every month. So the literature has done, and is doing, much good, in giving individuals a genuine respect for their Creator, and the literature is all consolation in the fullest sense.”
SOUND-CAR EPISODES IN NOVA SCOTIA
“We were running our sound-car one evening near Digby, N.S., and had on two of the ‘Face the Facts’ records. We noticed a car stop and listen for a few minutes, then it drove on past about fifty yards and turned and listened again, and then drove back right close to the sound-car. Presently the woman beckoned me to come over, and they asked if we sold any of those records. Fearing a trap was being set I was careful in my reply, but all was O.K. Result: Placed a set of records, also Salvation, and took a Watchtower subscription. A couple of weeks later near Yarmouth we had one horn of sound-car toward the town and the other toward the Old Folks Home or county home. Towards the close of the lecture we saw a man coming down from the home-; but on seeing the ladies in the car he was going on by, so I spoke to him and asked if he could hear it O.K. at the home, and he seemed delighted. Took Salvation and Face the Facts and Fascism or Freedom, and said he was a Catholic but didn’t believe in the ‘Purgatory’ racket. He had l ead Riches over and over and knew what a Jonadab is, too.”
ILLINOISANS WOULDN’T SIGN THE COMPLAINTS
“The police chief said: ‘If you will take down that one sign all the rest of your work is O.K.’ He was asked if he would furnish the name and address of a complainant if he disturbed us any more. He said he surely would. ‘Very well, that is all we ask. Goodbye, we are going back to work’; and we did. We marched in the main business district again. The chief had said: ‘If you carry that one sign there will be trouble.’ On Saturday, September 19, the officers took thirteen marchers down to the station after fifteen phone calls came in. All of them were asked to come right down and sign a complaint; and all refused. The marchers were let go at once; they had not been detained more than five minutes. The following Monday two publishers went to see the chief to find out if there were any complaints signed. On this occasion the chief was very much a different man. He said: ‘We have investigated your work, and it is all right. You can go ahead and come to this town any time you want to.’ He also said: ‘Any time they won’t sign a complaint I am off of them.’ He said: ‘If you would take off that one sign there would not be any trouble, and I don’t like it myself.’ We told him we would rather take off all the rest, that one thing was commanded to be made known b\ Jehovah and now is the time it must be done, and no power would be able to stop it.”
tjctjJ w	'• j fc-V. rfi'
J
ffiww
y i
'W.
1
i i
Announcing o
Jehovalis KhgdomM
'G
I

s
a?





"They shall know that I am Jehovah
Vol. LX
-Exekiel 3545.
Semimonthly No. 24
DECEMBER IS, 1939
CONTENTS

'J'

! i
Lazarus Comforted .
Introduction .......
Fulfillment.......
The Beggar .......
Changed Conditions Gulf .............
Corroboration ....
Prosperity .........
Letters ............
Field Experiences . Index for 1939 .....
371
371
372
374
375
377
378
380
382
383
384

L.

*
“War of Vindication” Testimony Period 370

g5«ttii iii&trrirr'rt
..Iio
n ,Z«i r*rrf'r.'X^~‘<n»'^.ife7i»ni-n -VW.4 -... , frlii, ■ , ’.

Yearbook for 1940 ...
“Model Study” No. 2 ..... 1940 Calendar........
•‘Watchtower” Studies
...370
...370
..... 382
...382
.<!
w1



©WTB. &T5.
I mi* ijy wmMa »
Kfe-^ »m< .1 ' —. -- > — -* > -	'.4ii	«■* - ... «	... *	»	- '*2*	.*♦.•-	•	- -	"	-	-	' -	—	-	-
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE O TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President____W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ....................................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England Canadian..............................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian....................7 Beresford Road, Stratlifield, N. S. IV., Australia
South African .................................Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
AU sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price nmy have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each j ear, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration! W'ill be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of Mai ch J, 1879.
“WAR OF VINDICATION” TESTIMONY PERIOD
December marks the “War of Vindication” Testimony Period. Like the daily march around Jericho over a complete period, the testimony for Jehovah’s name and against the foes of Theocracy continues despite the season of the year. All Theocratic publishers should offer to the public first a three-booklet combination on a 10c contribution, including Government and Peace if available. If this offer is not accepted, Government and Peace will be offered on a 5c contribution, or any contribution possible to the obtainer. This will insure a wide distribution of this most timely booklet. Portable phonographs are not to be left in idleness, but should be used from house to house to run the latest recording, and the publications announced thereon will then be offered to the listeners. The war is on, and you will now do your part therein, reporting at the end of the month’s campaign the effectiveness of your intensive activities.
YEARBOOK FOR 1940
The 1940 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses presents a comprehensive report of the past year’s world-wide activities of these publishers of Jehovah's Theocracy by Christ. You will marvel at the most interesting and most successful service year yet, even
with opposition increasing, nations being swallowed up by dictators, and wartime restrictions being generally applied, curtailing the Theocratic work in many countries. This report is prepared by the president of the Society. Additionally, there is a brief comment by the president on the text for the new calendar year, together with a text for each day of the year accompanied by an appropriate comment thereon as taken from recent issues of The Watchtower. The edition of the Yearbook is limited, and hence the regular contribution of 50c a copy is taken therefor. Order promptly, with remittance to cover. Each company will place their orders with the local company servant, that he may convenience this office by sending in a combination order.
“MODEL STUDY” NO. 2
This booklet is a valuable and indispensable complement to the original model study booklet. Model Study No. 2 enables anyone equipped with phonograph and lecture recordings to carry on model studies on the seven latest recorded speeches by the Society’s president, from the speech “Safety” in 1937 down to and including “Government and Peace” in 1939. The booklet also contains a Reference Index very convenient in locating the desired (Continued on page 382)
J&eWffCHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LX	December 15, 1939	No. 24
LAZARUS COMFORTED
"And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted.” —Matt. 23:12.
TEHOVAH is “the Father of mercies, and the God I of all comfort”. (2 Cor. 1:3) He it is who puts
J down the self-exalted ones and who raises up the obedient ones: “But God is the judge; he putteth down one, and setteth up another.” (Ps. 75: 7) These are fixed rules and truths, which cannot be changed. God never changes. (Mal. 3: 6) Jehovah God is representatively in his holy temple by Christ Jesus, his Executive Officer, who is judging the nations and putting down the “goats”, or self-exalted ones, and giving comfort to the obedient ones, his “other sheep”, for whom the earthly blessings proceeding from the kingdom are provided.
2 The parables uttered by Christ Jesus are prophecies; which means that they cannot be understood until fulfilled or in course of fulfillment. A parable partially fulfilled may appear so clear that the remainder of it can be well understood. The parable uttered by the Lord Jesus Christ concerning “the rich man and Lazarus” has been the subject of much discussion in times past, but no private interpretation thereof could be correct. (2 Pet. 1:20) Only when God brings to pass the physical facts in fulfillment of a prophecy can that prophecy be understood. The prophecy or parable concerning the rich man and Lazarus now appears to be at least partially fulfilled, and, further, in course of fulfillment, and it appears to be proper to now consider the same. To enable the consecrated in the study of that prophetic parable it is suggested at the outset that the principal characters therein named represent the following, to wit:
Rich Man : The “evil servant”, “the man of sin,” “the son of perdition,” the ultimate end of which composite body is destruction in Hades.
Beggar Lazarus: The people of good will, who are also pictured by Jonadab and Jonathan and others, and who seek the Lord, and which class ultimately form the “great multitude”.
The Gulf: The great chasm or division formed by reason of the final judgment rendered by Christ Jesus’ completely separating the “goats” from the “sheep” and thus disclosing, to wit, an impassable
371
condition between the organization of Satan and that of Jehovah.
Father’s House: Satan’s house or organization, to which the religionists and their supporters belong.
Five Brethren: The five together with the rich man, himself making six, picture the entire earthly organization of Satan, including those who support and form the visible part thereof.
INTRODUCTION
8 The context discloses that Jesus was addressing his disciples, and the self-righteous Pharisees were near by and heard his discourse. To his disciples Jesus emphasized the necessity of complete faithfulness in the performance of a covenant made with Jehovah. The Pharisees being in the law covenant were unfaithful to that covenant that God had made with the nation, and they had adopted and were practicing religion in the place and stead of God’s law, and in this they were hypocrites and made the law of God of none effect. Thus they turned the common people away from God. They claimed to be servants of God, but in fact were the servants of the Devil, as Jesus told them in plain phrase. (Matt. 15:1-9; John 8:42-44) Jesus, addressing his disciples, manifestly intended the Pharisees to hear his speech, and they understood that it applied to them. Jesus said: “No servant can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon. And the Pharisees also, who were covetous, heard all these things; and they derided him.”—Luke 1G: 13,14.
‘ Those words of Jesus galled the Pharisees, because they understood that they were guilty of the very things about which Jesus spoke. They had been and were unfaithful to God and to their covenant. The Pharisees then occupied a position of great ease and comfort as compared to what the common people had. Their place corresponded with the position of the clergymen of the big religious organizations of the present time, which affords them ease, creature comforts, and much power amongst the people. As
THE WATCHTOWER,
372
the Pharisees, compared with the common people, were thus rich, likewise the clergymen of the big religious organizations of the present time are rich. They were ‘lovers of money”. (Rotherham; and Diaglott) In them was the “root of all evil”. (1 Tim. G: 10) Such was the condition of the Pharisees, and in this they pictured a class that occupy a similar position in the last days and which are described by the Scriptures as being covetous and entirely unfaithful. (2 Tim. 3:1,2) The Pharisees hearing the words of Jesus attempted to justify their position, and this they manifestly did that they might hold the support of the common people and continue to enjoy without interruption their condition of ease and comfort. Jesus, knowing their minds and hearing what they had to say, answered their words of derision: “And he said unto them, Ye are they which justify yourselves before men; but God knoweth your hearts; for that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God.”-Luke 16:15.
8	Their self-exaltation amongst men made them an abomination in the sight of God. Those religionists feared that men would not think so highly of them as they desired, and, having a desire for the approval of men and fearing to lose the same, they had been led into the snare of the Devil. (Prov. 29: 25) They had become religionists and were therefore an abomination in the sight of God.
6	The words of Jesus thus identify the Pharisees and the class that they picture as being the “rich man” mentioned in the parable. Then Jesus emphasized the importance of the kingdom and the absolute necessity on the part of those who would enter the kingdom of obeying God’s commandment. Verses 16-18 also constitute an introduction to the parable, and may be considered at some later time. The Watchtower devotes the discussion specifically to the parable that follows. Jesus was drawing a striking contrast between faithfulness and unfaithfulness to one’s covenant, and emphasizing the fact that selfexaltation results in debasement and that humble obedience results in exaltation of the creature by the Lord. In harmony with this the prophet at Psalm 75: 5-7 said: “Lift not up your horn on high; speak not with a stiff neck. For promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south: but God is the judge; he putteth down one, and setteth up another.”
’ Having stated some of the fixed rules of God’s Word, Jesus then continued his discourse to his disciples and in the presence of the Pharisees, to wit: “There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day.” (Luke 16:19) In support of the abstract statements made at the outset herein the Scriptural proof is offered as follows: The parable referred to had
Brooklyn, N. Y. its miniature fulfillment and application to the religionists of the Jewish people. The Jews, as a people, were in a covenant with God. They were favored above all other peoples of the earth because God had said of them: “You only have I known.” (Amos 3: 2) The chief men amongst the Jews were the clergy, particularly the Pharisees, and who were bound by the covenant to teach to the people the commandments of God and themselves to obey those commandments. Those Pharisees having set before them the privileges and blessings of the promised kingdom were in line to be truly rich, conditioned upon their faithful obedience. “The blessing of the Lord, it maketh rich.” (Prov. 10:22) Instead of obeying God’s commandments and in due time receiving the proper riches, they preferred to receive the favor and the power and the plaudits that might come to them by ruling over and dominating the people and receiving what the world might bestow upon them. They were “high-minded” and ‘trusted in uncertain riches’; concerning which the apostle afterwards spoke. (1 Tim. 6: 9,10,17) Among the favored Jews was Judas Iscariot. Jesus had chosen him as one of his disciples and had assigned Judas to a responsible place in his company. Judas was in line for great heavenly riches, but he preferred to have things visible that might enrich him amongst men, and, falling into the snare of the Devil, Judas betrayed the Lord, and Judas therefore was named by Jesus as “the son of perdition”.—John 17:12.
FULFILLMENT
8	That which came to pass upon the Jews, particularly the religious element of that people, constituted types or ensamples of larger things to come to pass, and those things concerning the Jews were “written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world [have] come”. (1 Cor. 10:11) The fulfillment of the prophetic parable in completeness, therefore, must take place after the enthronement of Christ Jesus, the King, and more particularly after his coming to the temple in 1918. It was then that Zion was builded up, the approved ones were brought into the temple, the “evil servant” was set on the side, and the judgment of the nations began.—Ps. 102:16; Mal. 3:1-3; Matt. 24: 48-51; 25: 31-46.
” Since the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple and the building up of Zion, the Lord has revealed to his faithful people the identity of his ideal “man”, his ‘elect servant’, and that such is Christ Jesus the Head and those who are made members of his body. Although made up of many members, such are designated “a perfect man”. (Isa. 42:1-6,19,20; Fph. 4:13; 1 Cor. 10:17; John 17:21) Those who are opposed to the Theocratic Government, and yet who falsely claim to have God for their Father, con
December 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOWER,
373
stitute “the man of sin”, “the son of perdition.” (2 Thess. 2:1-3, A.R.V.) The “man of sin”, “the son of perdition,” is a composite body made up of men who are in an implied covenant to do the will of God or in an actual covenant to do God’s will, and which “man of sin”, “son of perdition,” includes clergymen, “elective elders,” and particularly those classed by the Lord as the “evil servant”; all of whom together conspire to do injury to God’s organization, and persecute his people. (Matt. 24:24,48-50; 2 Thess. 2:9) All of such, that is to say, the composite body, are the instrument of the Devil and opposed to the kingdom of God. All of those who compose the “evil servant”, “the man of sin,” “the son of perdition,” are religionists and practice in some form what is improperly labeled “the Christian religion”. The clergy of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy take the lead amongst such religionists and are given to bombastic claims, while others likewise boast and lay claim to that which they do not have, and all such render evil toward God’s faithful people, and all are pictured by Judas, and are all in one and the same class, their end being the same.
10	The parable describes the “rich man”, but does not give his name. Probably that was due to the fact that the class pictured is made up of God’s enemies who are not worthy of a name. The description fits the class above mentioned. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy of control are rich in this world’s goods literally, and they, together with others who practice religion for temporary gain, enjoy many material riches of this world, and the plaudits and honor of men, and they have become high-minded and heady. They are, as the apostle describes, the class arising in these evil days, ‘lovers of their own selves, boasters, proud, blasphemers, covenant-breakers, despis-ers of that which is good,’ and they persecute those who proclaim the kingdom message. While claiming to serve God, they exhibit a godlike attitude but deny the power thereof. (2 Tim. 3:1-5) They draw near to God with their mouth only, and take a course of action contrary to the commandments of God; and they follow the traditions of men, which they teach and by which they make the Word of God of none effect. (Isa. 29:9-13; Matt. 15:7-9) They are hypocrites and an abomination in the sight of the Lord, and this is true also with reference to the “elective elder” class who form a part of the “evil servant”. The deceitfulness of worldly riches (that is, what this world can give) chokes them off from the truth of God’s Word. (Rom. 3:1,2; Luke 8:14) They are greedy and covetous, and love ease and the approval of men. Concerning such religionists, who exalt themselves and look toward their own ease and comfort, and who therefore are blinded to God’s purposes, God’s prophet says: ‘’Uis watchmen are blind; they are all igno
rant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand; they all look to their own way, every one for his gain from his quarter. Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.” —Isa. 56:10-12.
11	Exhibiting their desire for ease and showing their blindness to the truth, and having turned to worldly things, they call for the wine of the world and fill themselves with strong drink, that is, the Devil’s wine; they revel in the material things, and they have and exercise much power and influence amongst the common people. They not only deceive themselves, but deceive many about them and lead them into complete blindness.
12	Those once in the covenant with God and in line for the kingdom and who become offended and turn to lawlessness by murmuring and complaining, and who abuse their brethren and persecute them and oppose the kingdom, after having once been enlightened, are relegated to “outer darkness” and assigned specifically to the “evil servant” class. Being once in line for the kingdom, they claim God as their Father. Both they and the clergymen of the religious institutions take themselves to be “the seed” by whom civilization can succeed, and both of which address God as Father, like the Pharisees, who said, “We have Abraham for our father”; although they were in fact the sons of their father the Devil. (Luke 3:8; John 8: 39-44) Those here described collectively constitute “the man of sin”, “the son of perdition.” Such class themselves as being rich, like the Laodiceans, who say: “I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing.” (Rev. 3:17) Concerning the religionists, particularly the leaders that go to make up antitypical Babylon, it is written: “How much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously.”—Rev. 18:7.
13	In the parable the rich man is described as wearing purple. In mockery a purple robe was put on Jesus. (Mark 15:17-20) The modern-day “rich man” is wealthy enough to buy royal robes. The rich man in the parable is described as wearing fine linen, which symbol, when applied to the faithful of God, means the righteousness of the saints. (Rev. 19:8,14) The modern-day “rich man” is self-righteous, but does not possess any of the righteousness of the saints. The modern-day “rich man” class ignore the true riches of God: “For they being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God.”—Rom. 10: 3.
14	The “evil servant", "the man of sin.” claims to
374
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
be the favored ones of God and that they enjoy his blessings, but manifestly they are described in the Scriptures as being in the class thinking themselves to be rich and yet having nothing. “There is that maketh himself rich, yet hath nothing.” (Prov. 13:7) The present-day class fulfilling the description of the rich man have looked to self and self-interest, continue to exalt themselves, and push aside the “other sheep” of the Lord. (Ezek. 34:4, 6) They do nothing to bring comfort to those who are poor and seeking the way to life.
THE BEGGAR
” In the parable the beggar is specifically named; and when the Lord names one, that name is significant. “And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate, full of sores.” (Luke 16:20) The name “Lazarus” means “God [is] helper”, that is, one who receives help from God. The beggar is mentioned here in striking contrast with the rich man, which latter one gets no help from God, while the beggar receives God’s help in due time. Being a beggar, Lazarus necessarily pictures a poor class. This does not necessarily mean poor in the material things of the “present evil world”, but poor in things that pertain to God’s Word of instruction, that is, poor in spirit, about which Jesus spoke when he said: “Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.” (Matt. 5:3) Thus it is shown that those who become truly rich are the ones who receive their blessings from or through his kingdom. The words “beggar” and “poor” are from the same Greek word. “This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles.” —Ps. 34:6.
1S	The beggar, therefore, pictures a class of persons realizing that all their help comes from the Lord, and who cry unto the Lord for help and receive it because of their faith in God and their obedience to God: “But I am poor and needy; yet the Lord thinketh upon me; thou art my help and my deliverer; make no tarrying, 0 my God.” (Ps. 40:17) Such constitute the class to whom the Lord says, “I will satisfy her poor with bread.” (Ps. 132:15) Such pray: “Lord, be thou my helper.” (Ps. 30:10) “Behold, God is mine helper; the Lord is with them that uphold my soul.”—Ps. 54:4.
17	The facts well known to all who are fully consecrated to the Lord exactly fit the class of persons who now earnestly seek the help of the Lord. Within the religious organizations, such as the “Catholic population” of the Roman Catholic system, are many sincere persons who have desired to know God and his provision for their salvation and blessing. They have been held in subjection to the religious organization and have remained with it because they know nothing better. They are described
by the prophet of God as The men that sigh and cry for all the abominations that are done in the midst’ of the religious organizations, which organizations claim to serve God. The prophet then shows that God hears their cry and commands his witnesses, the remnant, to “go through the midst of the city”, that is, amidst the organization and the people that constitute the same, and give them an opportunity to hear the truth. The prophet says: fGo through the midst of Jerusalem and set a mark on the foreheads of those that cry and sigh for the abominations done therein.’ (Ezek. 9:4) Since the year 1922 Jehovah’s witnesses have been doing that very thing in obedience to God's commandment.
18	Note now how the description of the beggar further fits the Jonadab or Jonathan class, the people of good will. In the parable the statement is made that the beggar was laid at the gate of the rich man and was full of sores. Because of receiving no lifesustaining spiritual food the “Catholic population”, who desire the truth and who have not received it, have become sick and diseased, and the clergy not only have neglected to give them spiritual sustenance but have deliberately kept the truth of God’s Word away from those honestly seeking for the same. By his prophet God says of these unfaithful ones who claim to serve him: “The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them.” (Ezek. 34:4) These words exactly describe how the honest and sincere persons under the religious organizations have been ill-treated by the self-exalted ones. The persons of good will, therefore, have long been sick, full of sores, and in a dying condition, and are still in that condition so far as religious organizations are concerned. The religious leaders have claimed that they have the life-sustaining Word of God, but insist that they alone can dispense that Word to the people, and they discourage the people in finding out anything about God’s Word. The persons of good will pictured by Lazarus have desired to be fed even by the crumbs of truth which fall from the rich man’s table; that is to say, they have eagerly looked for the smallest particles of truth, that they might feed thereupon, and have found little or nothing: “And desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man’s table; moreover the dogs came and licked his sores.” —Luke 16: 21.
18	It is certain that the rich clergy and others who claim to be rich as hereinbefore described, to wit, the “evil servant”, have not ministered to and do not minister to or feed the poor, and the parable shows
THE WATCHTOWER
Ob)
December 15, 1939
that only the dogs lick the poor man’s sores. It may well be said that the dogs picture the worldly reformers who have tried to alleviate the sufferings of the people and give them some comfort but who have been unable to do so because they have only visionary schemes. No doubt many reformers, Socialists, and many like organizations, have desired to do good to the people and have put forth their schemes, and, being regarded by the higher-ups as outcasts, like dogs, have been the only ones who have ministered unto the people of good will until the Lord’s due time to give the modern-day “poor man” help.
20	The “evil servant” class show no desire to help the poor of good will. These desire to be fed, and both the “evil servant” class and the clergy have held aloof from them and failed or refused to bring any comfort to those seeking the way to life. Those of the “evil servant” class have salved their own conscience by saying that “restitution blessings will be given to those people during the Millennial reign, therefore there is no need for us now to give any attention to them; we are concerned about spiritual things and preparing our characters that we may go to heaven, and then we will minister to the needs of the world”.
21	Rahab the harlot pictured the same class of people of good will, and she was ostracized by the religionists and she was required to live on the outskirts of the city. (Josh. 2:1,15) The self-exalted ones of Rahab’s day did nothing for the poor, just as the religionists of the present day have done nothing for the comfort of the people of good will toward God. The self-exalted and self-righteous ones, having their attention called to the “beggar” class, have exhibited their own self-righteousness and prayed hypocritically, and, like the Pharisee, have said: “I thank [God] that I am not as other men are.” (Luke 18:11) The rich man did not feed Lazarus, but pushed him aside and gave him no attention; and in the fulfillment of the parable the religionists do not feed the people of good will toward God, but try to starve them. About the only crumbs that have fallen from the rich man’s table of modern times have been “purgatory for pay” and “restitution for the future”.
22	God’s due time came for the fulfillment of the parable with reference to the poor man, and then he revealed to his faithful people that the “great multitude” is an earthly class, which class will live on the earth forever. (Rev. 7: 9-17) That message from the Lord was delivered to his people in 1935, and brought unbounded joy to those people of good will who heard it. Likewise the faithful remnant rejoiced. Did the “elective elder” class take part in expressing their joy in carrying the message of good news to the peoples of good will? No; far from it. On the contrary, those of the self-righteous “elective elder”, “evil serv
ant” class then said, and continue to say: “Where is there any evidence that the great multitude will bo an earthly class? Where is the proof that the great multitude is now being gathered? We see no great multitude.”
23	Such of the “evil servant” class have held and still hold to the doctrine that the “great multitude” is a class secondary in faith, into which the halfway faithful may land if they are not able to reach heavenly glory. They have wanted that class to exist as a place for themselves in which to light in case they came short. Being selfish, they are ignorant as to the truth; and instead of helping to feed those who are of good will, the “evil servant” class has been diligent to hinder the work of the Lord and his faithful witnesses in carrying the message of the kingdom to those who will form the “great multitude”.
2‘	Then when the Lord revealed to his people that the “great multitude” will not only be an earthly class but be privileged to fulfill the divine mandate to “multiply and fill the earth”, the “elective elder” class vigorously opposed the same and disputed and continue to deny that comforting truth, still holding to the unscriptural doctrine that the “great multitude” will be a secondary spiritual class, and to the “restitution” doctrine for imperfect man, who will be “restored during the reign of Christ”. It is therefore seen from the Scriptures and the facts that the description of the rich man in the parable, who was self-righteous, well describes the self-righteous religionists, the clergy and the “evil servant” class, all of whom are against God’s kingdom and who are diligent in their efforts to keep the people of good will in ignorance of the truth that brings comfort to those who love righteousness.
CHANGED CONDITIONS
23	Death means the absence of life or right to life. By reason of sin all men have been born sinners, and therefore without the right to life. (Rom. 5:12; Ps. 51: 5) The entire human race, therefore, is found in the condition of being “dead in trespasses and sins”, and hence without the right to life. (Eph. 2:1) God made provision that those who would believe on the Lord Jesus Christ might have life by and through Christ Jesus. (John 3:16; Rom. 6:23) Jehovah made a covenant with the nation of Israel and gave that nation his law in order that the Israelites might be held in line of righteousness until the coming of Christ Jesus. (Gal. 3:19) When Christ Jesus came, those who did believe on and accept him as the Messiah were given the right to life. The Jews were bound to keep that law covenant, but because of inherited imperfections they could not keep the letter of it; but by their unselfish devotion to God and his commandment they could keep the spirit of
376
Sfte WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
that law. A few faithful Jews did that very thing, and those who did accept Christ 'became dead to the law by the body of Christ’. (Rom. 7:4) Those who knew nothing of God’s provision to give men life could not accept that provision, and, as stated in the Scriptures, all such “were dead in trespasses and sins”. (Eph. 2:1; Col. 2:13) Those who did believe on Christ and devote themselves to God and his King were 'delivered from the power of darkness and translated into the kingdom’. (Col. 1:13) It is therefore seen that death means a radical change, which makes an end to a former condition and brings about another and different condition. The word “death”, therefore, properly applies to those who have a temporary existence, but without the right to life, and also to those who are out of existence and are buried.
28 In the miniature fulfillment of the prophetic parable the poor man stood for a class of common people who have been kept in ignorance of God’s provision for their salvation and who have been pushed aside by the religious leaders, which leaders have counted themselves rich. The common people heard Jesus gladly, but the religious leaders were always trying to turn the people away from Christ. Lazarus was in a miserable condition; and therefore the people of good will have been in a miserable condition; but in due time, as the parable teaches, a changed condition comes about: “And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham’s bosom; the rich man also died) and was buried.”—Luke 16: 22.
” The changed condition in the fulfillment of the prophetic parable brings the Lazarus class “into Abraham’s bosom”. Abraham stands for or pictures Jehovah God, and his bosom therefore represents God’s favor toward the beggar class. The Scriptures clearly disclose that Jehovah God is called the Greater Abraham. (Rom. 4:16,17, margin) The “other sheep” of the Lord were alienated from God and were kept in ignorance of God’s provision for them by reason of the influence of the religionists, and in this condition they remain until after the coming of Christ to the temple and his beginning the work of gathering to himself his “other sheep”. (John 10:16) At the temple the Lord Jesus is accompanied by the host of “holy angels”, who serve him and obey his commandments. (Matt. 25: 31) At that temple judgment the approved ones, the “remnant”, are brought into the temple, commissioned and sent forth as the witnesses of Jehovah and to carry the message of truth to the hungry ones, including the “great multitude”. It is manifest that the Lord at the temple uses his angels to get this message to his servants on earth, and thus he uses the angels to carry out his purpose in gathering his “other sheep” to himself. When the Lord brought this message to the people
of good will, otherwise called the “Jonathan” or "Jonadab” class, those who have heard and accepted the message and devoted themselves to Jehovah and his kingdom have a changed condition and are truly carried away into the favor of Jehovah, the Greater Abraham, that is to say, into the bosom of the Lord, where they find rest and peace.
28 Then says the prophetic parable: “The rich man also died, and was buried; and in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.” (Luke 16:22,23) There is nothing to indicate that the rich man ever gets out of the condition in which he then finds himself. Being dead and buried means that he had ceased to have any right to life. He still had a temporary existence, otherwise he could not have lifted up his eyes, because “the dead know not any thing”. (Eccl. 9:5,10) The rich man at this point, therefore, pictures a class of persons who have received their final judgment from the Lord. For three and one-half years Jesus confined his teaching to the Jews, and hence the Jewish clergy were especially favored, because they ‘sat in Moses’ seat’. Instead of accepting that favor they spurned it and opposed the Lord. Likewise, since the days of the apostles the clergy have had the Scriptures and claimed to know that which told of God’s gracious provision for mankind. Since the coming of the Lord Jesus and his enthronement the clergy and the “evil servant” class have enjoyed the splendid opportunity of hearing and learning the truth and obeying it. Being self-exalted and self-important, they have spurned God’s goodness, and therefore a complete change of condition in regard to them has come about. They have lost all opportunity to live and have spiritually died and gone to Hades, although still having a measure of life or existence.
20 The prophetic parable clearly refers in symbolic language to the condition of the two classes. The changed condition comes to both classes, and both awaken to a realization thereof. The “Lazarus” class, the people of good will, awaken to the fact that life is set before them, and, accepting this, they awaken to peace, joy, and to life everlasting. The “rich man” class awaken to the fact that they are rejected by the Lord, and they hear his judgment pronounced; therefore they awaken to lasting contempt. The Lazarus class “God helps”, and the rich man class God declines to further favor. The rich man class abide in death, ‘although he liveth.’ (Eph. 2:5; 1 Tim. 5:6) Because of their faith and obedience the Lazarus class, the people of good will, become far removed from their former condition and find rest under the organization of the Lord. Therefore with peace, joy and comfort the Father of mercies and God of all comfort comforts them.
THE WATCHTOWER,
377
December 15, 1939
•• The time comes when the rich man class cries for help. “And he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame.”—Luke 16: 24.
This part of the parable is today in course of fulfillment. The truth now being proclaimed concerning the religionists and the “great multitude” is like a fire of torment to the religionists and to the “evil servant” class. They begin to realize that the message proclaimed is true and shows them to be in a deplorable condition. They begin to murmur and complain concerning the Lord’s people and to persecute both the remnant and the Jonadab class. Jude describes them in this language: “But these speak evil of those things which they know not; but what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves. Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Co're. These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear; clouds they are without water, carried about of winds; trees whose fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots.”—Jude 10-12.
12 Thus it is seen that the modern-day “rich man” class is described as covetous, greedy, without fruits, “twice dead, plucked up by the roots”; which means their end. The parable shows that they come to a full realization of the fact that they have sinned against light and therefore can receive no more favor from the Lord. (Luke 12:10) The facts show that they are in the class named “the son of perdition” because willfully defaming God’s name; they have trodden under foot the Son of God, and counted the blood of the covenant an unholy thing.-Heb. 10:29-31.
83 The Greater Abraham answers the cry of the rich man class: “But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.”—Luke 16: 25.
84 Those of the “great multitude”, whom God has recently helped and now comforts, are greatly rejoicing. For many years the Lazarus class received that which was hurtful to them, but now having come into God’s favor they enjoy great comfort and peace. The message which comforts the “great multitude” is at the same time a message of despair to the “evil servant”, “the man of sin,” “the son Of perdition.” The present-day facts show a fulfillment of this part of the parable, and particularly the fact that the rich man class is tormented by the kingdom message, while those who are for God’s kingdom greatly rejoice. The “evil servant” class and others of the “man of sin” were once in line for the kingdom and, had they shown faith and obedience, would have received
kingdom blessing. Turning to lawlessness, the result to them is stated by the Lord Jesus as follows: “The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; and shall cast them into a furnace of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.” (Matt. 13:41,42) That evil class now is wailing because of their condition, and gnashing their teeth against both the remnant and the “great multitude”.
GULF
88 The parable speaker addresses the wicked class even as Joshua spoke to Achan, who pictured that same money-loving, wicked class (Josh. 7:19); and hence he calls him “son”. Then the Lord adds: “And beside all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed; so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence.”—Luke 16: 26.
88 What is that great gulf? Manifestly it is the chasm which cannot be passed over, resulting from the final judgment Christ Jesus is now pronouncing and in which he separates the “goats”, the wicked ones, from the faithful “sheep”. (Matt. 25:31-46) This separation forms a great and impassable gulf between the two classes. To the “goat” class the Lord says: “Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire [destruction] prepared for the devil and his angels.” With that final judgment uttered the “goat” class can never come to the Lord’s blessing, and the “other sheep”, the ones faithful to the Lord, can never go over that gulf without losing life. Hence it is impossible for either of the two classes to again be brought together. Jehovah makes it clearly to appear from the prophecy of Ezekiel that before his final judgment is executed against the wicked ones that class know that Jehovah is the Supreme One and, further, that the wicked have lost all favor with him. (Ezek. 35:9,15) The “evil servant”, “the man of sin,” the modern “rich man” class, is then pictured as crying unto the Lord that he would send Lazarus to his father’s house to warn his five brethren: “Then he said, I pray thee therefore, father, that thou wouldest send him to my father’s house: for I have five brethren; that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of torment.”—Luke 16:27,28.
37 The father of the “rich man” class is the Devil, as Jesus plainly informed them. (John 8:44) The five brethren of the rich man therefore, together with the “rich man” class, make six and picture all of Satan’s house or organization. To the rich man’s request the Lord gives reply: “Abraham saith unto him, They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them.” (Vs. 29) In other words, these have had the Scriptures, to which they might have given heed
378
WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and found comfort. They had an opportunity to hear the message of God, as set forth by his faithful prophet Moses and others of the prophets. They have the words spoken by Jesus and the apostles. Instead of following God’s law they have preferred religion and they have urged upon the people, and today urge upon them, “more religion,” which God declares is a snare. When Jehovah’s witnesses approach them with God’s message of truth today they persecute those witnesses. When the witnesses of the Lord attempt to warn them in the language of the Scriptures concerning the snare of the Devil, they not only refuse the message, but ill-treat Jehovah’s witnesses because they speak of God’s Word. When the modern-day “rich man” class cry to Jehovah that, if he would send some who have been dead to their brethren, they might repent (vs. 30) the Lord replies: “If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.” (Vs. 31) Even if the faithful witnesses of old shall shortly return from the dead and bear testimony before the religionists and their followers, the politicians and the financiers, they will not hear and obey the truth. The judgment of Christ Jesus at the temple upon the nations is final.
88	The great gulf or chasm between the “goats” and the “sheep” can never be changed, because God does not change. A striking illustration of this is found in the divine record concerning Judas and Esau. (Matt. 27: 3-5; Heb. 12:17) Concerning those who have preferred Satan’s house and who have opposed The Theocracy it is written: “Let favour be shewed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness ; in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the Lord. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see; but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at the people; yea, the fire of thine enemies shall devour them. They are dead, they shall not live; they are deceased, they shall not rise; therefore hast thou visited and destroyed them, and made all their memory to perish.”—Isa. 26:10,11,14.
88	One of the pet theories today of the “evil servant” class is the false doctrine of universal salvation, including the Devil himself. They have defamed God’s name by teaching that one can willfully and deliberately oppose God’s kingdom and still be saved. This parable showing the final end of the opposers completely explodes that false theory.
CORROBORATION
40	AU of God’s Word is harmonious because all of his ways are right. Other scriptures which corroborate the foregoing statements concerning the parable of the rich man and Lazarus are here mentioned. The twelfth chapter of Daniel, particularly verses
one and three, clearly refers to the “day of Jehovah”, which began with the enthronement of Christ Jesus the King in 1914. Within that day the following text applies: “And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.”— Dan. 12:2.
41	Clearly this text could not refer to the general resurrection of the dead during the reign of Christ. The wicked shall never have a resurrection. (Ps. 145: 20) The offspring of the “great multitude” that turn to wickedness shall be annihilated. (Isa. 66: 24) Neither could Daniel 12:2 refer to the awakening of the wicked at the end of the thousand-year reign.
42	This prophecy of Daniel 12:2 clearly refers to the awakening of two classes, one class to a realization of their deplorable condition, which must be realized by them prior to Armageddon, and the other class awakened to an opportunity of life everlasting. This prophecy describes both classes as “them that sleep in the dust of the earth [and] shall awake”. Figuratively “the dust of the earth” represents that which is low, mean and worthless, the dry and discredited things of the earth, that is, a condition of ignorance and inactivity and darkness. Men who are wicked sleep in the light and awake when night comes. The apostle declares that those who are the faithful followers of Christ Jesus are not of this class. (1 Thess. 5:3,4) The beginning of “the day of Jehovah” and “the day of Christ” finds the condition in the world exactly as described by the Lord’s prophet, when “darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people”. (Isa. 60: 2) With the appearing of Christ Jesus at the temple greater light came upon God’s Word, and those who desire righteousness and life then sought diligently to get a better understanding of his Word, much of which was sealed to that time. Then ‘many run to and fro, and knowledge is increased’.—Dan. 12: 4.
43	Light makes manifes4 the things that are right and that which is wrong: “But all things that are reproved are made manifest by the light; for whatsoever doth make manifest is light.” (Eph. 5:13) Those who had once agreed to do the will of God but who had become negligent and hence asleep were dead to their privileges; and to them this message is addressed : “Wherefore he saith, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil.” (Eph. 5:14-16) Likewise the man who desires truth and righteousness and who is in great need of instruction finds himself in a bad condition and prays: “My soul cleaveth unto the dust; quicken thou me according to thy word.”—Ps. 119:25.
44	One who begins to see the light joyfully cries:
THE WATCHTOWER
379
December 15, 1939
“As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.” (Ps. 17:15) As the light of truth has caused those who love righteousness to awake from their condition of sleep in the low things of the earth, so likewise the religionists are brought face to face with light that reveals to them their deplorable condition. The “foolish virgin” class awake too late and find themselves in a deplorable condition. (Matt. 25:5-8,11,12) The religious leaders and the principal of their flocks have for long slept in the dust of the earth. To them the Lord says: “Awake, ye drunkards, and weep; and howl, all ye drinkers of wine, because of the new wine; for it is cut off from your mouth.”—Joel 1: 5.
45	They do awake and, awakening to their miserable condition, see disaster staring them in the face. (See The Watchtower June 15,1939, page 185.) Both classes thus awakening from the dust of the earth are described in Daniel 12:2. This awakening takes place in the day of Jehovah and before Armageddon. The “other sheep” class, composing the “great multitude”, awake to everlasting life, and the “goat” class awake to everlasting contempt. The prophecy, therefore, applies to the present time and includes the antitypical “rich man” and the antitypical Lazarus class. It is in the same day of the Lord that “they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever”. (Vs. 3) We are in the day of awakening, and the fulfillment of this part of Daniel’s prophecy is progressing.
“Abraham pictured Jehovah God; Isaac was a type of Christ Jesus, the beloved Son of God; Jacob, a type or picture of The Christ, Head and body. (Col. 1:18) Thus was The Theocracy pictured. (See The Watchtower December 1, 1939.) The Jonathan class, which shall form the “great multitude”, now see and appreciate The Theocracy, and such are now coming to God’s kingdom, and they are coming from all parts of the earth, and they find refuge, protection, rest and comfort under the organization of Jehovah. In the light now given to God’s people by his Word note these words of Jesus spoken concerning a lowly, humble man who showed his faith in the Lord and who sought help from the Lord: “When Jesus heard it, he marvelled, and said to them that followed, Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel.” (Matt. 8:10) The faith exhibited today by the Jonathan class (who are not spiritual Israelites) often exceeds the faith and zeal manifested by those who claim to be Israelites after the spirit. Speaking of this faith of the centurion, Jesus then, addressing those who stood by, said: “And I say unto you, That many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven.
But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”—Matt. 8:11,12.
4T	Today the information is being brought directly to the clergy and to the “evil servant” class who claim to be Israelites after the spirit and many of whom no doubt were once in line for the kingdom, and these are being told that the kingdom is at hand and that all who support The Theocracy shall find life, and those who oppose it shall be destroyed. The “other sheep” of the Lord, hearing this message, are coming from all quarters of the earth and from all walks of life amongst the common people. These “other sheep” now see and appreciate the Theocratic Government. They see that Abraham pictured the Greater Abraham, Jehovah God; that Isaac pictured Christ Jesus, the beloved Son of God; that Jacob pictured The Christ, Head and body; and that such constitutes the Theocratic Government. Seeing this by faith, they hasten to put themselves under The Theocracy, and thus they “sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob”, composing the heavenly Theocracy; and by the words “sit down” it is shown that they have found rest, protection, ease and comfort and know what God has in reservation for them that love and serve him. At the same time those once in line for the kingdom come to a realization that they are cast out and are in “outer darkness”, and hence they indulge in howling and wicked persecution of God’s people. (Matt. 8:12) Other scriptures show that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob resurrected will be on earth immediately preceding Armageddon, and the people of good will forming the “great multitude” will be literally associated with them; and therefore this scripture (Matt. 8:11) is subject to this double meaning.
48	In the past “the man of sin”, the antitypical “rich man”, has had many favors and advantages from the Lord, but, having the selfish desire to be rich and to enjoy power and influence amongst men and approval of men and fearing that they would not get such, they have turned easy victims to the snare of the Devil. “But they that will be rich fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. For the love of money is the root of all evil; which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.”—1 Tim. 6: 9,10.
48	The “evil servant” class, “the man of sin,” trust their own riches to take them into the kingdom. To that class Jesus said: “When once the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence ye are;
380
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets. But he shall say, I tell you, I know you not whence ye are; depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, and you yourselves thrust out.”—Luke 13: 25-28.
80	Within that same time the words of Jesus apply (vs. 29): “And they [the Lazarus class, who will form the great multitude] shall come from the east, and from the west, and from the north, and from the south, and shall sit down [find rest and peace] in the kingdom of God.” Other scriptures show that the "great multitude” come from all quarters of the earth and that they give praise to Jehovah God, evidencing their rest and joy: “Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple; and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb, which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters; and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.”—Rev. 7:15-17.
81	The honest, sincere ones who desire righteousness, and who seek the Lord, are now finding rest and comfort. The Father of mercies, the God of all comfort, now brings consolation to them, affording to them the privilege of knowing him and of joining with others in carrying the message concerning God’s kingdom to the world in distress. The Lazarus class now receive the “good things” from the hand of the Lord.
82	At the twenty-third chapter of Matthew the Lord Jesus describes again the same class pictured by the
rich man, and with the most scathing words ever spoken he denounces that class and says to them: “Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children of them which killed the prophets. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers. Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers! how can ye escape the damnation of hell ?”—Matt. 23:31-33.
88	The religious element, including the “elective elder” class, have for long exalted themselves. The poor in spirit, humble-minded, and meek, have tried to learn, but, being influenced by the religionists, they have been kept in ignorance and pushed aside; but now the Lord is causing his message to be carried to them and the words spoken by Jesus to his disciples are now being fulfilled, to wit: “And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted.”—Matt. 23:12.
84	The Lazarus class are now coming into their own. By faith they see the great blessings that God has in store for them. With burning zeal they go forth to the service proclaiming The Theocracy. Their joy is ever increasing, and they delight to have a part in the vindication of the name of the Greater Abraham and to serve his Beloved, the King of the Theocratic Government.
88	If you are of good will toward the Lord and hearing his gracious message concerning your salvation, then be exceedingly diligent to give your full and unstinted allegiance and support to'The Theocracy and join in sounding the praises of Jehovah by declaring his name and his kingdom to others as you have opportunity. All who will now retain the favor of the Most High must thus give their whole devotion and support to Jehovah and to his King.
P R O S P
THE faithful “remnant” of witnesses are Jehovah’s people taken out from the nations “for his name”. (Acts 15:14) They have a work to do and must use the Lord’s message and their divine working equipment in the Lord’s service. Addressing his remnant, who have been delivered from captivity in “Babylon”, the Devil’s organization, and been set to work at his temple, Jehovah says by the mouth of his prophet Zechariah (8:9): “Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Let your hands be strong, ye that hear in these days these words by the mouth of the prophets, which were in the day that the foundation of the house of the Lord of hosts was laid, that the temple might be built.” It is those who hear and appreciate the prophecies which Jehovah has opened and made plain to his people in this day that must be strong and active. It is their privilege to help the weaker ones understand; that is, quoting Isaiah 35:3, “strengthen . . . the weak hands.” The temple work of bearing witness is now in progress, and the Lord supplies
E R I T Y
the needed food to his remnant that they may be strong in him and in the power of his might.
It was in A.D. 1922 that the people of God learned that Christ Jesus, as Jehovah’s Messenger and Judge, was at the temple, attended by all his holy angels, and only from that time forward could they appreciate the privilege of Kingdom work. Zechariah 8:10 correctly states: “For before these [ (R.V.) before those] days there was no hire for man, nor any hire for beast; neither was there any peace to him that went out or came in, because of the affliction; for I set all men every one against his neighbour.” Zechariah was not here prophesying about the present commercial depression that exists in Satan’s organization, but about conditions that came to pass among God’s people prior to 1922. They did not seriously realize prior to that date the importance of organized witnessing service; hence there was no hire or effective service for them. There was no real peace. There was a measure of fear and restraint upon them
December 15, 1939
THE WATCHTOVVEK
381
because of bowing themselves down and being submissive to the commercial and political elements of Satan’s organization and of recognizing such elements «s “the higher powers” spoken of at Romans 13:1. Consequently there was no peace. “Character development,” so called, was the chief doctrine taught and the matter chiefly discussed by the “elective elders” of the congregations who wished to shine before men; and they put the field-service work in the rear. No real, zealous and effective work was done. God’s people were afflicted and hindered by the modern-day people of Samaria who still continue to commit the “sin of Samaria”, or “golden calf worship”, by looking to the words of men and not to Jehovah as to what should be done. (Amos 8:14) The Devil used these and other elements of Satan’s organization to oppress and put fear in the hearts of God’s people ; there was also strife in their company or congregation where the swell-headed “elected elders” lorded it over God’s heritage. These must be cleared out of God’s sanctuary before unity would fully exist. Even after they were cleared out some of that opposing element continued and will continue their efforts to hinder the work of Jehovah’s witnesses; but the faithful ones will go steadfastly ahead and give no heed to the opposition, avoiding those who attempt to hinder.
When Zechariah prophesied, the foundation of the temple of God at Jerusalem had been laid and the work had progressed for two years. That well corresponds to the time from 1922 on, and particularly from 1926 on, which latter date is in fulfillment of the prophecy of Daniel 12:12 and marks the beginning of the time of blessedness. “But now I will not be unto the residue [the remnant] of this people as in the former days, saith the Lord of hosts.” (Zech. 8:11) The “former days” were the days of negligence. But when God’s covenant people came to realize that Jehovah had a work for them to do, conditions amongst them changed and prosperity followed. Zechariah 8:12 declares: “For the seed shall be prosperous [(Roth.) shall be secure] ; the vine shall give her fruit, and the ground shall give her increase, and the heavens shall give their dew; and I will cause the remnant of this people to possess all these things.”
Take note how Jehovah has fulfilled this prophecy by and through Christ Jesus, the mighty Builder of the temple. The security or prosperity mentioned by Zechariah exactly corresponds with the prophecy of Haggai 2:19 and Isaiah 30:23. Hence there is now an abundance of spiritual food for those who care to partake of it. This spiritual food the Lord graciously permits to be published in the Watchtower publications and to be put within the reach of all that love God. The “seed” has prospered, resulting in ‘peace that passeth the understanding of man’.
Jehovah produces the Kingdom fruit by his “vine”, and the Christ is that vine. (Isa. 27:2,3; John 15:1,2) The remnant delight to bear that fruit to their brethren and to all others who hear. The remnant at the same time ‘drink deeply of the fruit of the vine new’ and give praise to the anointed King and to Jehovah. (Matt. 26: 29; Luke 22:18) The Lord-has blessed the labors of his remnant in building up the land or organization, and thus he has brought the increase and good resulting to the glory of the Lord. The report in the Yearbook for 1940 proves this.
The divine promise that “the heavens shall give their dew” says in symbol that there shall be no scarcity of truth,
but that the Lord will continue to supply the remnant on earth with all things needed. The Lord has placed upon his table an abundance of fresh, life-sustaining food for his remnant and has brought them great joy and peace. In times past about one-half of the space of the magazine The Watchtower was taken up with “Views from the Tower”, so called, meaning things pertaining to the world; but since 1924 such things have disappeared and all the space is given to the truths pertaining to Jehovah’s kingdom, and this gracious provision of the Lord has kept his faithful people refreshed. God through his prophet foretold in the book Deuteronomy: “My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass; because I will publish the name of the Lord; ascribe ye greatness unto our God.” (Deut. 32:2,3) Now his people have learned that the truths set out in the book of Deuteronomy apply particularly to God’s people who are brought to the temple. Those in Christ have been brought into unity, which unity is “as the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of Zion: for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore”.—Ps. 133: 3.
Jehovah’s promise by Zechariah was, “I will cause the remnant of this people to possess all these things” ; and truly he has fulfilled this promise and continues to do so. The work began in earnest in 1922, and in a very marked degree from and after 1926, which year marks the beginning of the Lord’s special work of cleansing the sanctuary in preparation for the greater work to follow. (Joel 2:23-28) The obedient ones of Jehovah continue to rejoice and praise him while engaged in temple work, regardless of what the enemy may say or do, well knowing that they have protection from Jehovah and in his name they are safe.
Jehovah uses his people as instruments of blessings for others; hence Zechariah prophesied: “And it shall come to pass, that as ye were a curse among the heathen, 0 house of Judah, and house of Israel; so will I save you, and ye shall be a blessing; fear not, but let your hands be strong.” (8:13) The mention of the “house of Judah and house of Israel” shows that the prophecy has fulfillment at a time of unity in Christ. Because of disobedience they had been under God’s curse and they dwelt amongst the heathen who also cursed them; and this was the condition of spiritual Israel prior to 1922, when God was angry with his covenant people because of disobedience and negligence. Then his anger was turned away. (Isa. 12:1) Now the faithful delight to diligently proclaim his name and his works, and so continue; and, as stated at Revelation 22:3, “there shall be no more curse” for them. Diligence in proclaiming the message of Jehovah’s kingdom is indeed a blessing to many people, particularly to the Lazarus class, the “great multitude” of people of good will. Micah 5:7,15 declares: “And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people, as a dew from the Lord, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor waiteth for the sons of men. And I [the Lord] will execute vengeance in anger and fury upon the heathen, such as they have not heard.”
Jehovah is preparing his people for the battle of the great day of God Almighty, and hence he commands them to fear not. At Deuteronomy 20:3 he says: “Hear, 0 Israel; ye approach this day unto battle against your enemies; let not your hearts faint; fear not, and do not tremble, neither be
382
^He WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ye terrified because of them.” Gog, who is Satan’s invisible field marshal, has brought into the conspiracy all of his forces, and these are directing their efforts against Jehovah’s "hidden ones” (Ps. 83: 3); but those who trust Jehovah implicitly need not and will not fear. (Pss. 27:1; 118:6; Zeph. 3:16; Heb. 13:6; 1 John 4:17,18) Therefore the remnant in this day of judgment are bold in declaring the message of the kingdom and will continue so to do regardless of all opposition.
Prior to 1918 Jehovah caused the truth then due to be proclaimed on earth, and “Christendom” had an opportunity to know about the kingdom of God under Christ. While that work, the “Elijah work”, as it is called, was thus being done, and particularly in the year 1918, the Lord’s faithful people were ill-treated by “Christendom”. Among God’s covenant people in that time there were the “elective elders” who, like the “rich man”, failed to serve God, and because of their unfaithfulness it became necessary to clear these out that the approved ones might be prepared for God’s purposes. “For thus saith the Lord of hosts, As 1 thought to punish you, when your fathers pro
voked me to wrath, saith the Lord of hosts, and I repented not.” (Zech. 8:14) The Lord did not repent, but has done the purging work that he may have a company who will “offer unto [him] an offering in righteousness”. (Mal. 3:1-4; Ezck. 20: 35-38) Judgment must begin at the house of God and continue until God’s sanctuary is cleansed, and then lawlessness against God shall have an end.—1 Pet. 4:17; Ezek. 21: 24, 25.
From and after 1922, and more particularly since 1926, Jehovah has prospered his “faithful servant” class. Jehovah foretold this in these words (Zech. 8:15): “So again have I thought in these days to do well unto Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah; fear ye not.” This Jehovah has done because it is the time for the vindication of his name, and not because the remnant deserved the blessing. (Ezek. 36:21-23) The “man child” having been born by his “woman” in A.D. 1914 (Rev. 12:1-5), meaning the Kingdom having begun there, it is the “set time” to favor Zion, his capital organization, and to honor and vindicate Jehovah’s name. This he will do by his kingdom under Christ. —Ps. 102:13; Isa. 63:4.
LETTERS
RESOLUTION
The company of Jehovah’s witnesses at Rio de Janeiro recently unanimously adopted the following resolution defining their stand for the Theocracy:
“We, Jehovah’s witnesses organized and assembled in the company of Rio de Janeiro, in view of the notice of the execution by a firing squad of August Dieckmann for refusing to go to the front in the war between Germany and Poland, present through the president of the Society, J. F. Rutherford, our votes of full accord with the brethren who are faithful in Germany, on the side of Jehovah God, asking his protection for all who are bearing with dignity the perils to which we are at all times subjected, in order that we may hold in the highest place the name of the Almighty God, through Christ Jesus, and thus maintain our integrity to him, obeying faithfully his commandments.”
JEHOVAH HAS LED AND BLESSED
Dear Brother Rutherford:
At the united service meeting of the Greater Glasgow company of Jehovah’s witnesses it was unanimously agreed that we send to you once again an expression of our fervent love in the Lord, and our deep appreciation of the way in which Jehovah has led and blessed us through you in the year which has just passed.
Though the war clouds continue to hang ominously over us, and many of the brothers are likely to be haled before tribunals as conscientious objectors shortly, yet the zeal and loyalty of all the brethren has not diminished, but rather increased, as a result
(Continued from page 370)
lecture record on any particular subject of vital interest today. There are 64 pages of material, enclosed in a sturdy cover, and the booklet will be supplied on your contribution of 5c a copy. Those in organized companies should send in their orders in combination through the local company servant.
1940 CALENDAR
The 1940 Calendar sets out the text for the new calendar j’ear, to wit: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.” (Psalm 13:5) A beautiful color illustration, specially painted, harmonizes with the theme of the text, and its portrayal of what is impending will
of these conditions. We find the people as a whole more receptive of the message and our numbers continue to increase. What with this and the fact that, though the nation is at war, we are still able to continue almost unrestricted in our privileges of service, we realize that, though there is indeed on the earth “distress of nations with perplexity”, yet we can now ‘look up and lift up our heads and rejoice, for our redemption draweth nigh’.
We appreciate that Armageddon is very near, and we are determined by Jehovah’s grace to stand shoulder to shoulder with you and to continue steadfastly in bis service right to the end.
We render thanks to the Lord for the rich feasts of fat things coming to us through the columns of The Watchtower, and we pray that he may continue to bless you as you keep pressing the battle to the gates of the enemy.
IN FULL HARMONY
(The following is from the son of 0. R. Moyle)
Dear Brother Rutherford:
On August 8, 1939, when the Bethel family was asked to express their disapproval of the letter of O. R. Moyle, I expressed my approval by remaining seated. After prayerful and Scriptural consideration of the matter I am now of the opinion that my action was wrong.
I wish to state that I am in full harmony with the Theocracy of Jehovah and I recognize the Society as the visible part. I desire to co-opcrate to the best of my ability and opportunity.
Yours in the Kingdom interests,
Peter O. Moyle.
gladden your heart. Neat calendar pads indicate the special Testimony Periods of the year and the special lines of endeavor of the other months of activity in publishing the Kingdom gospel. Calendars, of which the supply is limited, will be sent on order, remittance accompanying, at 25c each, or $1.00 for five sent to one address. Companies will please order through their company servants.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of January 21: “Lazarus Comforted,”
]] 1-24 inclusive, The Watchtower December 15, 1939.
Week of January 28: “Lazarus Comforted,”
j[ 25-55 inclusive, The Watchtower December 15,1939.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
CHECKING UP ON SOUND ORDINANCE CLAIMS
“I was informed by the police chief that they had an ordinance against use of sound-cars and I would have to see the mayor and obtain a permit. I called at the mayor's office, introduced myself as one of Jehovah’s witnesses, informed him of my mission, and asked for a copy of the ordinance forbidding use of sound-cars in the city. I was received in a most unwelcome manner, was informed he would not change the city ordinance just to suit my request, and he stated that I had better preach in our own place of worship and stay off the streets with those phonographs, etc. He refused to listen to the lecture ‘Snare and Racket’, walked out of his office and left me. During the conversation the police chief had come in and overheard all that had been said. As soon as the mayor walked off I turned to the chief and asked: ‘What’s the matter with the mayor? why won’t he give me a copy of the ordinance? Where can I obtain one?’ His reply was: ‘Now, you look here, you can’t get me to say anything against the mayor; I work for him, and I don’t have to tell you everything I know. If you want the copy of the ordinance, try and get it. You were not invited in this town. You know the road you came in on, and you can get out the same way.’ At this I informed the chief I was bringing the people of this town a vitally important message, and unless they produced the ordinance I would proceed to start the lectures. On leaving I went to the city clerk’s office and requested a copy of the ordinance, and was informed that the city had no such ordinance and that every show in the country used sound equipment in the town and he didn’t see any reason why the people should not be permitted to hear the lectures I referred to. Assured that there was no ordinance against use of sound-cars, I proceeded to swamp the town with ‘Snare and Racket'. Not one attempt was made to stop the message. Hundreds of people came out of their houses to listen, resulting in a tremendous witness to the town of Kendallville, Indiana.”
ANNOUNCEMENT FOLDER WAS HIS “LAST WORD”
“ ‘I don’t want to buy anything!’ and the door was immediately closed. As a last resort the publisher slipped a meeting folder under the door, on one side of which was the meeting-place address where Judge Rutherford’s lectures could be heard, and on the other side an advertisement of Enemies. The lady inside, picking up the folder and reading it, came outside, waited for the publisher until he came out of the next place, and then called to him. ‘The judge is tops with me!’ she said, and then obtained a copy of Enemies, and the publisher arranged to make a back-call. Next Sunday, at time of lecture this lady was there and, going straight to the book-desk, she asked for Prophecy, and then wanted to know what book went well with Enemies. Salvation was offered to her. Observing Preservation, she remarked that it was a pretty book; and after its contents were briefly explained, she decided to take it also. She selected three booklets from the shelves, and then offered to contribute for her possessions. She then requested to know the time of the meetings so that she would know when she could come and get more books after she had read these. Her name and address were taken for a back-call. When the publisher made the back-call, he placed Enemies with her, together with another copy of Salvation. They discussed the truth and the lady offered him a glass of cold orange juiee and informed him that she would like to subscribe for The Watchtower in about a month.”
LOANED PHONOGRAPH PUT TO WORK
“After hearing ‘Fill the Earth’ she seemed different. Suddenly she said she didn’t read very well, and she wished she had a phonograph on which to ‘play some of those records slowly’ when by herself, without the children running in and out, when she could ‘think’. I said, ‘We have an old, heavy phonograph my husband will bring down to you here. We will loan it to you, and from time to time I will lend you different records.’ I called on a Sunday, by invitation, when her husband (a World War veteran) was there. He seemed pleasant, but didn’t say very much. Later, one day she remarked to me: T\Iy husband says he thought “that woman is against America”, but I told him you are not, and that he didn’t understand [it was about the Salute question].’ She said: ‘I can explain to him best by myself. I didn’t understand at first, but every word is true, and you said last summer Czechoslovakia would fall, and it did fall, and I said, “This is not against America.” ’ Still later, on another day, she added: ‘My husband said he wished he could play those records on the boat [where he is a cook], where it’s quiet; and I said I would ask you. He will take good care of it.’ So he took the phonograph, with a considerable number of the older records I was not using, on the boat as he wished. When I again saw them, his face was shining. He said he had played the records ‘over and over’, from the boat, at various hamlets along the river and bay. He said dozens of people would gather on shore and at the wharves to listen; and that they talked and asked questions among themselves, and once, when he tried some popular music instead, he found they preferred these records. At one place a whole hamlet of colored people listened gladly. I told him that by this he was also witnessing and pleasing the Lord. We tried to count up the time, and he thought well over a hundred people had listened to the records, besides what was heard at his house by the neighbors when his wife played records four or five times over.”
WAS A BOOKMARK PUT IN THAT BOOK?
“We parked our car, and each publisher was given his assignment. As I started up the street to begin work I saw a car come speeding down the street, and, when opposite me, the driver applied his brakes and came to a sudden stop. A man got out of the car and, rushing over to me, said: ‘Are you one of those putting out that book called Salvation? I want one, and I want to read it today!’ He dropped two dimes and a nickel into my hand and rushed back to his car. A woman in the car with him called from the car window, saying: ‘The battle is pretty near, isn’t it?’ The driver stepped on the gas, and away they went! All this happened before I hardly had time to get my breath.”
POLICE COULD NOT GET IT ON RADIO
“I loaned a phonograph to an interested person, who was using the records ‘Government and Peace’. The police officer sent from the next apartment to ask what station did she have, for he tried every station on the radio but could not get it. She said that he would have to come and listen in with her, as he would not be able to get it on his radio." 383
INDEX FOR 1939
JANUARY 1
MAY 1
Deliverance Guaranteed ...........
Captivity .........................
Sanctuary ........................
Take Jeiioiah at Hla Word (Letter) Meld Experiences .................
‘•Lovers of HiRhteou«ness” ........
Watchtower Campaign ...............
Watchtower Studies ................
Year Book for 1939 ................
1939 Calendar ....................
Face the Facts ...................
. 3 .. 12 .. 14 . 15 .. 10 . 2 .. 2 . 2 . 15
. 15 . 10
Drama of Vindication (Tart 7) ........ 131
Kingdom Work ..........................142
On Earth After Armageddon .............142
Field Experiences .....................144
“New Earth” Testimony Period...........130
Impostors .............................130
Convention ............................130
Watchtower Studies ....................130
SEPTEMBER 1
Doom of Religion (Part 6) ........-...259
Who May Escape .....................2GG
Animal Souls on Earth Before Man .....268
How Many Get to Heaven? ..............270
Jehovah’s Provision (Letter) .........271
Field Experiences ....................272
“Theocracy” Testimony Period .........258
Go vetnment and Peace ................258
For Your Information ...............  258
Wotchtou ft Studies .................—	271
JANUARY 15
MAY 15
SEPTEMBER 15
''Government and Peace" Princes ................
Vindicator .............
Letters ................
Field Experiences ......
•‘Lovers of Righteousness’ Watchtower Campaign ... Correction .............
Watchtower Studies ... . Year Book for 19.;:' ...
1939 Calendar...........
19 2S 29 31 32 18 IS 18 18 31
31
The Ransom (Part 1) ....................................147
“For All” ................................-	150
“Exagornzo” ...............................152
Third Trumpet ................................155
Zeal for New’ Government .....................158
Hasten While Opportunity Is with Us (Letter) ............... .............159
Held Experiences ............................IGO
“New Earth” Testimony Period .................146
Watchtower Studies............................146
Remittances ..................................140
Doom of Religion (Part	7) ..............275
Resistance ............................278
Defense ...............................279
Admonition ............................281
The Three Gods of Religious Racketeers ....284
Letters..............................    286
Field Expeiieuces .....................  288
“Theociacj” Testimony	Peiiod ............274
Government and Peace	................274
Salvation ............................  —	274
Watchtower Studies ......................274
FEBRUARY 1
Drama ct Vindication (Part 1) ...........35
Beginning of Fulfillment ..............39
Ranah .................................41
First Trumpet ...........................44
Letters .................................40
Field Experiences .......................4s
“Lovers of Righteousness” ...............34
Watchtower Campaign .....................34
Watchtower ‘ tndies .....................34
Year Book to, 1939	  47
1939 Calendar .......................... 47
JUNE 1
The Ransom (Part 2) ....................163
To Cover .......................—.....167
Excluded .............................168
Bringing Back ........................170
Three Days in Hell and	Out .............172
Letters ................................174
Field Experiences ..................... 176
“New Earth” Testimony Period ...........162
Convention ............................ 162
Vacation .............................. 162
Watchtower Studies....... .............,162
OCTOBER 1
Doom of Religion (Part 8) ..............291
Sixth Trumpet ..........................299
Obedience Instead of Religion ..........301
Leiters ................................303
Field Experiences ....................  304
‘Theocracy” Testimony Period .......... 290
Government and Peace .	 290
Notice of Annual Meeting ...............290
Watchtower Studies .....................290
Salvation ...........................—...290
OCTOBER 15
FEBRUARY 15
Drama of Vindication (Part 2)	 »1
The March Begins ......................50
Second Trumpet ..........................GO
Letters ............................... <>"
Field Experiences ......................<>4
Memorial .	.............50
"Lovers of Righteousness" ...............50
Watchtower Studies ......................50
Watchtower Campaign .....................50
Year Book for 1939 ......................63
1939 Calendar ...........................03
JUNE 15
Doom of Religion (Part 1) .............179
His Name ..........................  180
Hate ................................181
Joel’s Prophecy .................... 182
Armies ..	.................184
Is Death an Adventure	?............   1x9
Field Experience* .....................192
“New Eaith” Testimony Pciiod ..........178
Convention ........................... 178
Vacation ..............................191
Watchtower Studies ..................-..	191
Doom of Religion (Part 9) ...................
Increasing Blessings ......................
\ictory ...................................
Jnfoi niation......	.................
Who interprets the Bible? ...................
Letters .....................................
Field E.xpetiencos .	...........
“Thtocract” Testimony Peiiod ................
Gocc nment and Peace ..	..............
Discontinue Information Marches .............
Watchtower Studies ............... ..........
307 312
314 316
317 319
320 306
306 306
306
NOVEMBER I
MARCH 1
Drama of Vindication (Part 3) ..........67
Another Witness .......................7 4
77
Kingdom Blessings' Manifold (Letter) ...79
Field Experiences ..................... 80
“New Heavens” Testimony Period ........ 60
Fascism or Frecuom .....................60
Watchtower Studies ..................~..60
Memorial ...............................00
Watchtower Campaign .....*.	............79
Watchtower Binder ......................79
MARCH 15
Drama of Vindication (Part 4) ...........83
Passover ..............................*8
Memorial ............................... 92
Letters from Alield .....................94
Field Experiences .......................90
Convention ..............................82
Fascism or Ftecdom ......................82
“New Heavens” Testimony Period ..........82
XVatchtoicei Studies ..................  82
Memoii.il ...............................82
Watrhtoicci Binder ..................... 95
APRIL 1
Drama of Vindication (l’art 5)	  99
Who Are the “(Boal Multitude”? .......... 199
Field Expoiiem.es ...	 112
Convention	  OS
Fascism of Ftccdom .................... 98
“N<w Heavens” Testimony Period ......... 98
Watchtower Studies ..................... 98
Memorial .............................   98
Wdtc/itower Campaign .................... VI
Watchtower Binder .................  .	Ill
APRIL 15
Drama of Vindication (Part 0)	  115
fn What Body Did He Appear? ................ 127
Field Experiences ...........................128
Convention ..................................114
Fascism or Ficcdom ........... ............... 114
“New Heavens” Testimony Period ..............114
Il ntchtower studios ....................... 114
atchtoirer Binder ..................	114
JULY 1
Doom of Religion (Part 2) ................195
Howl ...................................199
Fourth Trumi'ut ......................... 204
Things Required ..........................206
Field Experiences ........................208
Vacation ................................ 194
Correspondence ...........................194
Use Renewal Subscription Blank ...........	194
IFatc/itoucr Studies....................._	194
JULY 15
Doom of Religion (Part 3) ..................211
Darkness ................................212
Descriptive ............................ 210
Fifth Trumpet ..............................219
Letters ....................................222
Field Experiences ..........................224
Salvation ..................................210
“Divine Mandate" Testimony Period ..........210
Watchtower Studies .........................2’0
Vacation ...................................	210
AUGUST 1
Doom of Religion (Part	4)	.............227
Warning His Peiple	............... 232
Call to Action .........................231
Minute Instruction .....................234
The First Woe .............................236
“Back to Palestine ' > or	to	Zion? ........239
Field Experience* .	...........240
“Divine Mandate ’ Testimony	Period .......226
Salvation ....................................226
Watchtower Studies ........................226
Vacation ................................. 226
AUGUST 15
Doom of Religion I Part 5)	............. 243
As.suianee .................................246
The Theocracy ............................. 249
Reul Time of Re^r .............................252
From Lucifer to Satan ........................ 254
Field Experiences .............................256
“Divine Mandate” Testimony	Period .........242
Saltation ..............................................212
Watchtower Studies ..........................  242
Uwe Renewal Subscription Blunk ................242
Neutrality ...........................  323
Neutrality Foreshadowed ..............325
Self-Defense..........................329
Christian s Position .................332
Rehgiuus Harlotry ......................333
Letters ................................335
Field Experiences....................   336
“War of Vindication” Testimony Period ... 322
Government and Peace ...................322
Kingdom News No. 5 .................... 322
Watchtower Studies .................... °22
NOVEMBER 15
Snares ...................................
Religion ...............................
Fear ...................................
Millions Ensnared ......................
Satan Never in Hell ......................
Letters ..................................
Field Exn''iiences........................
“War of Vindication” Testimony Peiiod .
Kingdom News No 5 ........................
Use Renewal Subscription Blank ...........
Watchtower Studios .......................
339 339 342
344 348 351
352 338 338 338 338
DECEMBER ]
The Theocracy...................	  355
Requirements .........................359
Four Angels Loosed......................363
Pieviews .............................. 366
Field Experiences	........3G8
“War ot Vindication"	Testhnoii.v Period 354
Yearbook for 11)40 .................... 354
1940 Calendar...........................354
Kingdom News No 5	...	 367
Use Renewal Sntw< liption	Plank ....... 367
Watchtower Studies	....... 367
DECEMBER 15 .
Lazarus Comforted ........
Fulfillment ............
The Beggar .............
(’hanged Conditions ....
Gulf .	...........
371
375 377 380
382
383
384 <370
370
Prosperity ................................
Letters ...................................
Field Experiences..........................
Index for 1939 ............................
“War of Vindication” Testimony Period ... “Model Study” No. 2 .......................
384