Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points. Check yourself.
● What is the first essential if we would please God?
Accurate knowledge of who he is, what his purposes are and what his will for us is.—P. 5.a
● How did the Greek government in 1963 show itself to be like Pontius Pilate?
In that it let religious pressure influence it to commit a gross injustice against God’s servants.—P. 12.
● What was outstanding about the testimony the apostles gave when haled into court?
Their outspokenness. (Acts 4:13)—Pp. 11-15.
● In how many lands and islands of the sea did Jehovah’s witnesses preach in 1963, and in how many languages did they distribute Bible-study aids?
In 194 lands and in 162 languages.—Pp. 23, 27.
● What two basic meanings has the Greek word aión?
(1) Time period, age, or epoch, and this time period can go on forever. (2) The state or “system of things,” characteristic of a certain time period.—Pp. 44, 45.
● In what three ways is kósmos used in the Scriptures?
(1) The framework of things that surrounds humankind. (2) All those humans opposed to God. (3) All mankind, apart from their moral condition. People as a whole.—Pp. 49-51.
● What should a woman do when threatened with rape, and to what extent should she resist?
She should scream and resist even though her life is threatened.—Pp. 63, 64.
● What factors are essential to understanding Bible prophecy?
God’s due time, his holy spirit, his visible organization or earthly channel of communication, a right heart condition.—Pp. 67, 68.
● What three fulfillments did Isaiah 52 have?
In 537 B.C.E. when the Jews returned from Babylon; in the days of the apostles; in our day, since 1919.—Pp. 75, 79, 82.
● What scripture shows that Christians are not to expect to be able to speak in tongues today?
1 Corinthians 13:8: “Whether there are tongues, they will cease.”—P. 90.
● Why is sincerity of belief not sufficient if we would please God?
Because one could sincerely believe pagan falsehoods, which certainly would not please God.—Pp. 101-103.
● What test of Godship is proposed at Isaiah 43, and whom does it prove to be the true God?
Being able to predict the future and make one’s predictions come true. Jehovah.—Pp. 111, 112.
● What folly of idol worshipers does the prophet Isaiah expose?
Worshiping an idol made from a part of the same tree that one uses to feed a fire for cooking a meal.—Pp. 116,117.
● When should child training begin?
In early infancy.—P. 139.
● What is an especially fine way in which fathers can prove their love for their children?
Giving them of their time, their companionship.—P. 141.
● What are some forms of toying with immorality that are to be avoided?
Flirting by a married person with one of the opposite sex who is not his mate, close dancing with one of the opposite sex not one’s mate, telling obscene jokes, viewing sexy entertainment, perusing sexy literature.—P. 154.
● How do most persons view service to God, but how should it be viewed?
As something from which they can get something instead of something to which they can contribute.—Pp. 165-167.
● Why should the principle of headship not seem disparaging to womankind?
Because it also applies to men and even to Jesus Christ.—P. 173.
● On what kind of adornment should Christian women place the emphasis?
On the secret person of the heart, a mild and quiet spirit.—P. 174.
● Who only may properly partake of the Lord’s evening meal?
Only spirit-begotten and anointed Christians who have been brought into the covenant for the Kingdom with Christ Jesus, who have the witness of spirit sonship and who are living up to their vows.—P. 170.
● Under what three conditions should a Christian woman wear a head covering?
When teaching or praying in the presence of her husband; when teaching a group that includes a dedicated Christian male; when, because of the absence of a suitable Christian male, she presides or prays at a congregational meeting.—P. 201.
● Why do the words “For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen,” not appear in many modern Bible translations as part of the Lord’s Prayer?
Because they are no part of the inspired Gospel account.—Pp. 231, 232.
[Footnotes]
Page numbers refer to The Watchtower for 1964.

