Former Opposers Accept Bible Truth
PEOPLE who severely oppose the work of Jehovah’s Christian witnesses often do so in ignorance. At heart many are not what their harsh words suggest. Among those who are now studying the Bible with Jehovah’s witnesses or sharing with them in preaching the good news are former opposers. What caused some of these people to change?
● A Canadian man who had chased Jehovah’s witnesses away when they called on him changed his attitude after reading just one copy of Awake!
While shopping in a city near his home, this man saw an Awake! magazine lying on the street. Torn and dirty, it bore the striking title, “Are the Churches Nearing Their End?” The man picked up the magazine and took it home. He and his family read and reread it. They almost memorized its contents.
When again visiting homes in the area, Jehovah’s witnesses were hesitant about calling on the opposed man. But one Witness did so. Imagine his surprise when he was greeted warmly and enthusiastically! The man had been waiting for Jehovah’s witnesses to call. The entire family eagerly accepted the offer to have a Bible study in their home. Before the first study could be conducted they traveled forty miles to visit the Witness. A five-and-a-half-hour Bible discussion followed. At last report, the family is making good progress in a study of the Scriptures.
● Often, not the spoken or written word, but the conduct of Jehovah’s witnesses breaks down prejudice.
A Nigerian Witness found a wallet containing one pound ($2.80) at his place of employment. This wallet belonged to the head of the department, a man who disliked Jehovah’s witnesses. Unknown to the Witness, one of the man’s co-workers told him that ‘he would never get his money back unless that “Jehovah man” found the wallet.’ As it happened, the Witness did find it and immediately took it to the head of his department. The man was amazed. Now he saw that there was a difference between Jehovah’s witnesses and other people. Later, the Witness gave him the Bible study aid The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life. In time a Bible study was started with this former opposer.
● In a village of Nigeria lived a man who hated Jehovah’s witnesses. He worshiped the “juju” and practiced native medicine. One day, when he climbed a palm tree on his farm to tap palm juice, his rope broke. He tumbled to the ground, breaking his legs. He cried out in pain, but his neighbors and friends, perhaps out of superstitious fear, deserted him. Some Witnesses heard about the incident and rushed to the place. The injured man was unconscious. The Witnesses quickly got him to a hospital and made arrangements for his care. Regaining his consciousness, the man learned that those whom he hated had cared for him, whereas his friends had deserted him. Thereafter he agreed to have a home Bible study with Jehovah’s witnesses. Today he is a baptized Witness and, through his efforts, four others in his family accepted Bible truth as proclaimed by Jehovah’s witnesses.
● In New Zealand one woman was so opposed to the calls of Jehovah’s witnesses that she asked her husband to put up a sign at the gate forbidding them to enter. Before the notice was put up, a Witness called on this woman, only to receive a hostile reception. Noticing that the woman was having difficulty with “topping” for a cake, she kindly offered to assist her. This friendly gesture calmed the opposed woman and led to her accepting a Bible study.
Soon this former opposer began attending the meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses. Previously she had been given to uncontrollable nervous outbursts and regularly took tranquilizers. But, upon applying the Bible’s counsel on conduct, she no longer needed drugs. She also gave up the tobacco habit. Today she, as a baptized Witness, is talking to others about the Scriptures.
One should never judge people according to outward appearance. It is God’s will that “all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:4) Hence Jehovah’s Christian witnesses endeavor to continue calling on all persons, including opposers, with the “good news” about God’s kingdom.

