Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., NOVEMBER 1, 1917 


No. 21 


A TRIBUTE TO THE SEVENTH MESSENGER 

"The mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest in my right hand ... the seven stars are the angels [messengers] of the 

seven churches." — Rev. 1:20. 


Since the days of the Apostles of Jesus no man on earth 
has held a dearer place in the hearts of consecrated Christians
 than has PASTOR CHARLES T. RUSSELL. He was 
known the world around, and loved most by those who knew 
him best. For thirty-six years he -was the sole editor of The 
Watch Tower. It seems fitting, therefore, that we should in 
these columns at this time take notice of the first anniversary 
of his glorification, which occurred on the last day of October
, 1916. 

Pastor Russell was a great man. This fact is more fully 
recognized today than it was a year ago. Appreciation of 
him by the people will necessarily increase as they come 
to a fuller realization of the position he occupied as a servant
 of the Lord. Some men are born great, while others attain
 greatness by reason of their faithfulness to duty. Pastor 
Russell was a great man from both of these viewpoints. The 
Scriptures indicate that he was chosen of the Lord from his 
birth. His mother was a consecrated Christian. She taught 
her son in the way of the Lord, and he early gave evidence of 
his loving devotion to the great Master. 

God used the Prophet Ezeidel to foretell the events that 
were to come to pass upon Christendom. He used Pastor 
Russell as an antitype of Ezekiel to make clear to Bible students
 the real meaning of these events as they came to pass. 
The great Master, speaking to the church through John the 
Revelator, foretold that the church would be developed during 
a time of stress, and that the entire Gospel age would be divided
 into seven distinct epochs or periods of time. He also 
clearly indicated that each of these periods or epochs of lime 
would be blessed by a special messenger representing him. 
The great drama of the Gospel age opened with the Apostle 
Paul as the chief messenger, or angel, to the church. It 
closes with Pastor Russell as the seventh, and last, messenger 
to the church militant. For the other ^ve epochs*of> the 
church the Lord provided messengers in the order named: St. 
John, Arius, Waldo, Wycliffe and Luther. Each in his turn 
bore the message due to be understood during the epoch he 
represented. The two most prominent messengers, however, 
are the first and last — St. Paul'and Pastor Russell. 
4 'THAT WISE AND FAITHFUL SERVANT" 

The Lord Jesus, in his great prophetic statement in Matthew
 24:45-47, made known the fact that at the end of the 
age he would be present and would have a special servant 
whom he would "make ruler over all his house to give meat 


in due season to the household." For many years Christian 
people of all denominations have been looking for the manifestation
 of that promised servant. For several years some 
have recognized, and now many more are recognizing, that 
Pastor Russell is that servant. Forty ^years ago he noted that 
the Scriptures held forth the undoubted testimony that the 
age would end with a great time of trouble, which would begin
 with international war; that the war would he followed 
by revolution j and that revolution would in turn be followed 
by anarchy, which would wreck all the ecclesiastical and civil 
institutions of the world, and thus make way for the establishment
 of Messiah's kingdom of righteousness, for which 
Christians have long hoped and prayed. He proved by Bible 
chronology the presence of the Lord from 1874 on, and demonstrated
 that 1914 would mark the end of the Gentile period and 
the beginning of the great international conflict. Time and 
events have proven the correctness of his deductions from 
the Scriptures, showing he possessed heavenly wisdom. 

Contrary to the rule of ecclesiasticism, Pastor % Russell 
never lifted a collection. He spent his own private fortune 
in making kiiown the "glad tidings." His writings and publications
 have reached a larger circulation than those of any 
man or class of men on earth, the Bible alone excepted. He 
long ago showed from the Scriptures that there would be a 
federation of churches nominal and a departure by them from 
the "faith once delivered to the saints," and that the true 
saints would be gathered together into the garner of the Lord. 
All of these things are practically accomplished facts, all of 
which testify that Pastor Russell is the servant promised to 
the church in the closing days of its earthly pilgrimage. Many 
are perceiving more and more each day that he was chosen of 
the Lord to perform a great work. 

HIS OBDINATION 

There are two ordinations of the servants of God, One is 
the divine ordination; the other, an ordination by the church. 
Ordination means authority to act as a representative of another
. Ordination of a minister of the Gospel means authority
 to preach the Gospel. Comparatively few ministers of our 
day have the real ordination. Pastor Russell had both the 
divine ordination and the ordination from the church. The 
ordination that comes from Jehovah is received by' all who 
are begotten and anointed of the holy Spirit, as set forth 
in Isaiah 61:1-3, The ordination that comes from the church 
is authority granted by an assembly of Christian people to a 


[6153] 


(324-325) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BROOKLYN, N. Y. 


certain one to represent them in delivering the Gospel of the 
kingdom. When quite a young man Charles Taae Russell 
received the divine ordination. Shortly thereafter he received 
the ordination from the church by being authorized to preach 
the Gospel. A faithful representative or the Lord he was. For 
many years he proclaimed the sweet message of the kingdom. 
The gracious words which the Lord poured upon his lips and 
caused his pen to write have thrilled the hearts of many 
Christian people for years past, and in the years to come 
thousands will feed upon these words with gladness of heart. 
The great Master, through the Revelator, foretold that 
his voice should be heard through his messenger instructing 
his people to prepare the way of the Lord. He used PaBtor 
Russell to be that voice, ami a beautiful and faithful voice 
it was. Another has well said of him: 

"Beautiful voice of the Lord: strong, humble, wise, 

loving, gentle, just, merciful, faithful, self-sacrificing; 

one of the noblest, grandest characters of all history." 
Although he has passed forever from activities in the flesh, 
yet his voice is still heard in 2ion, both theoretically and 
actually — theoretically in the printed message he has left as a 
heritage to the Israel of God, and actually in the phonographic 
records of his speeches, which are yet spoken for the encouragement
 of those who love the Lord and his cause of righteousness
. 

Shortly after the Apostles fell asleep there began a period 
of great injustice to the people. Ambitious men entered the 
sacred precincts of the church, and human theories were substituted
 for the faith of Jesus and the apostles. The clergy 
as a class now came into existence, and by their actions indicated
, and have since indicated, that their chief prerogative was 
and is to look after self, to fleece the poor sheep; and to accomplish
 this they have kept the people in ignorance. The 
result is that darkness prevailed on the earth, and gross 
darkness was upon the people. This continued for more than 
1200 years; and then the great Reformation movement began, 
which has progressed amidst adverse conditions even to this 
day, 

HIS MISSION 
Pastor Russell, as we have observed, is the messenger to the 
Laodicean epoch of the church. The word Laodicea literally 
means "Justice to the people." Well does the record of Pastor 
Russell show that he was a man chosen of the Lord for this 
period of the church, his work being always unselfishly in the 
interests of the people. With malice toward none and love 
for all, he kindly removed the garb of deception that covered 
the self-constituted, arrogant clergy, and exposed them and 
their fallacious doctrines to the gaze of mankind. He turned 
on the great searchlight of divine truth and drove error away 
from the minds of many. He showed that for centuries the 
clergy, and the systems they represent, have defamed God'a 
holy name by teaching that he is a fiend who takes pleasure 
in the torture eternally, in a hell of fire and brimstone, of the 
masses of his creatures; that they had used such God-defamatory
 doctrines to deceive the people and keep them in subjection
. His voice was heard throughout the earth proclaiming
, "The doctrine of eternal torture is a foul stain upon the 
name of Jehovah, driving from his loving care innumerable 
companies of people who would otherwise have gladly sought 
his face." 

In the interests of the people Pastor Russell tore down 
the false and fraudulent walls of the doctrines that have held 
multitudes in Babylon; and many poor, emaciated saints have 
escaped therefrom, giving glory to God for their deliverance. 
He made clear to the Christian peoples of the earth the philosophy
 of the great ransom-sacrifice. The doctrinal walls of 
predestination and foreordination — the salvation of the few 
in heaven, and the eternal-torture of all others in the lake of 
fire and brimstone — fell with a great crash before the onslaught 
of this man of God, who earnestly and faithfully smote them 
with the mighty slaughter-weapon with which God armed 
him for the fight. As a result, many have been able to see 
that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for 
every man," and that in God's due time every man shall be 
brought to an accurate knowledge of the truth; for "there 
is one God and one Mediator between God and men, the man 
Christ Jesus, who gave his life a ransom for all, to be testified
 in due time," — 1 Timothy 2:5, 6. 

It was the fight of this Laodicean messenger in behalf of 
the people that enabled students of the Lord's Word to see that 
the mystery of God is The Chbist, Head and body; that The 
Messiah or mystery class is developed during the Gospel 
age; and that thereafter "times of refreshing shall come," 
when the great restitution blessing for mankind will be put in 
operation. What a glorious message of comfort is restitution 
for the groaning creatures of earth! As Christian people have 
been delivered from the captivity of nominal Zion (Babylonish
 systems), and have learned of the coming blessings of 
restitution to all of mankind that would be obedient, their 
hearts have found expression in the words of the Psalmist: 
"Then was our mouth filled with laughter and our tongue 
with singing, . . . the Lord has done great things for the 
people."— Psalm 126:2. 

God caused certain plagues to come upon Egypt, which 
illustrated and foretold the plagues coming upon Babylonish 
Christendom in the end of the Gospel age. Pastor Russell was, 
and is, "the great voice [instrument of the Lord] out of the 
temple saying, Go your ways and pour out of the seven vials 
of the wrath of God- upon the earth." (Revelation 16:1) The 
seven vials of wrath represent the seven volumes of Studies 
in the Scriptures, which the Lord used Pastor Russell to 
prepare and publish to the world, six of which were published
 while he was with us, the seventh being a posthumous 
publication. And thus, "Though he be dead, he yet speaketh." 
The message contained in these seven volumes of Studies in 
the Scbiptubes, sets forth the great loving plan of Jehovah 
for the false, fraudulent and God-dishonoring systems that 
encumber the earth, and shows how that the wrath of God 
coming upon them shall destroy them all. These are indeed 
plagues upon Christendom. Many years ago Pastor Russell 
pointed out from the Scriptures that such would come; and 
now, beholding the fulfilment of these prophetic statements, 
Christian people who understand what they mean, are looking 
up and lifting up their heads because, as Jesus testified, such 
would be evidence that the deliverance of the last of the saints 
is at hand. 

Years ago the Pastor published far and wide the evidence 
that the Reign of the Lord would begin with a great woe or 
trouble upon the unrighteous systems of the earth, and that 
such is necessary to prepare the way for the full establishment 
of the kingdom of righteousness. Such woe is visited, as he 
foretold, upon those interested in maintaining indefinitely 
the present oppressive order of society to the personal advantage
 of a few. Pastor Russell said concerning such woe that 
"The battle of this great day of God Almighty will be the 
greatest revolution the world has ever seen. Behold how even 
now the searchlight of general intelligence is discovering the 
secret springs of political intrigue, financial policies, religious 
claims, etc.; and how all are brought to the oar of judgment, 
and by man as well as by God declared right or wrong, as 
judged by the teachings or the Word of God!" 
THE WORK ENDTTBES 
Only a year ago Pastor Russell passed from the earth. 
Those who felt keenly the lash of truth as he laid it on, and 
who preferred darkness to light, exultantly said. "Now the 
work that Russell began will soon die, and his name will be 
forgotten/' But not so! Millions of people today find themselves
 free from the burden of fear, imposed upon them by the 
teachings of hell fire and other false doctrines, and are therefore
 supporting Brother Russell, in some measure, even 
though they take little or no active part in spreading the 
glad tidings of great joy which soon shall come to all. The tide 
of truth, which began more than forty years ago, is still 
steadily rising and will continue to rise until it fills the 
whole earth; and its opponents might as well try to sweep 
back with an ordinary broom the waves of a mighty ocean as 
to prevent the truth from spreading throughout the earth. 
Zealous Christians are greatly rejoicing as their privileges of 
service and suffering continue. God promised to turn his 
hand upon his little ones; and indeed the proof shows that 
he has done so. During the past year every branch of the 
work of the harvest has increased. This work is conducted by 
the Watch Toweb Bible and Tbact Society, a corporation 
organized for that purpose by Pastor Russell years ago, and 
which, without doubt, was organized under the Lord's direction
, and which was managed and directed by Pastor Russell 
until his death. 

A comparison of the work of 1916 with that of 1917 discloses
 the fact that the amount of volunteer literature distributed
 during 1917 is far in excess of 1916. At this time 
there are over 200 more colporteurs in the field than there 
were ten months ago. More pilgrims are upon the road today 
than there were in 1916, bearing the message to those who have 
hearing ears. The voluntary contributions to the funds of the 
Society for carrying on this work are, for the first ten months 
of 1917, far in excess of what they were during the entire year 
of 1916. Today 954 classes are pushing vigorously the pastoral
 work, which work has 'more than doubled during the 
past six months. 

The year 1917 chronicles the publication of the Seventh 
Volume of Studies in the Scbtptubes, the last of a series 
produced by Pastor Russell. The first edition of 75,000 in 
cloth and 10,000 in karatol is fully exhausted. The second 


[6160] 


Novbubkk 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(325-327) 


edition of 100,000 is going rapidly, as orders are daily being
 received at the office in large numbers. Letters from 
hundreds of the friends throughout the country show an increasing
 zeal for and activity in the work. Thus we see that 
in many ways the Lord is manifesting his blessing upon the 
work of the harvest, greatly to the joy of those who are able 
to participate therein, either by actual labor or otherwise. 
JESUS THE GREAT CHIEF BE APE B 
Why, we are asked, is the work still progressing? We answer
, Because it is the Lord's work and not man's! Brother 
Russell always recognized that the work of the harvest is directed
 by the great Master of the harvest — Christ Jesus; and 
that all of those who labor therein are greatly privileged 
above all other creatures on earth. Furthermore, the Scriptures
 show that those who died since 1878 have been changed 
instantly, "in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye," and have 
entered into their eternal reward. "The Scriptures declare that 
while such have ceased from their laborious efforts, their works 
do follow them. (Revelation 14:13) Hence our dear Pastor, 
now in glory, is without doubt, manifesting a keen interest 
in the harvest work, and is permitted by the Lord to exercise 
some strong influence thereupon. (Revelation 14:17) It is 
not unreasonable to conclude that he has been privileged to do, 
in connection with the harvest work, things which he could not 
do while with us. Although we recognize that the Lord is the 
great Master and Director of the harvest, yet we recognize that 
he would privilege the saints beyond the veil to have a part 
in the work on this side; and thus all the saints, both in 
heaven and upon earth, are now given the honor of concluding 
the work on this side, preparatory to the full establishment of 
the kingdom of glory. 

"SCATTERING COALS OF FIBE" 

Pastor Russell organized the Watch Toweb Bible and 
Tract Society, under the Lord's direction, to carry on this 
work. This corporate body clearly seems to he designated in 
Revelation 14:18. It is the only organization on earth that 
is maintained by the sacrifice of the saints — the little voluntary
 sacrifices or the Lord's dear people throughout the world, 
who love him and his cause better than this life, and who 
joyfully make sacrifices in order that they may have a part 
in the work of setting the ecclesiastical heavens on fire, and 
announcing "the kingdom of heaven is at hand!" Thus the 
Society is granted power and authority to scatter coals of 
fire (truths destructive of error), particularly as contained 
in Volumes IV. and VII. of Studies in the Scriptures. 

Pastor Russell was a prodigious worker. He labored 
early and late to make known the precious message of the 
kingdom. The welfare of the church was always dear to his 
heart. Like the great Apostle Paul, he ceased not day and 
night to warn the flock of God, if not with literal tears, yet 
often with weariness of body and sadness of heart. One of the 
last messages which he delivered to the church was that after 
his departure great trials would come upon the Lord's flock; 
and we witness the fulfilment of this prophetic statement. 
While fiery experiences bring sadness for the time, yet all 
who are properly exercised thereby rejoice to be partakers of 
these sufferings as a further evidence of discipline from the 
Lord. 

For years he was the head of the Bethel family and director
 of a large corps of workers, both in America and abroad. 
Notwithstandng his arduous duties, he was never too busy 
to hear the troubles of others; and like a loving father and 
shepherd he sympathized with, comforted and directed the 
Lord's dear children. At the weekly meetings addressed by 
him, and at the many conventions which he attended, he always
 devoted a portion of the time to private counsel and aid 
to "the Lord's dear flock, over whch the Chief Reaper and 
Shepherd had made him overseer. Truly he was a Barnabas 
to the consecrated scattered throughout the earth. 

When the great adversary came in like a flood, threatening 
to overwhelm the saints, Pastor Russell, the Lord's chosen 
servant, raised up a standard against him (Is*. 59:19), bring* 


ing forth the "vow" of faithfulness, which has proved a protection
 and blessing to many in these evil days. The "Morning
 Resolve", another product of his fertile brain, has been 
a great comfort and help to many in time of need. 
HIS DEVOTION TO THE LORD 
His firmness wa3 a distinct part of his character. Once 
sure that he had the mind of the Lord upon a subject, he 
permitted nothing to stand in his way or to prevent him 
from carrying out what he considered to be the Lord's will. 
Indeed, the Lord foretold that his servant would possess this 
attribute of character, saying through his prototype: 

"Behold, I have made thy face strong against their 
faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads. 
As an adamant, harder than flint, have I made thy forehead
."— Ezekiel 3:8, 9. 
Whatever trying situation Pastor Russell faced, the Lord 
made him equal to it, and gave him the strength to prevail 
according to God's holy will. His life motto, in fact the 
very keynote of his wonderful career, was, "God first" ; and 
this motto he kept faithfully, at whatever cost to himself 
or others dear to his heart. His loving devotion to Jehovah 
and to the Lord Jesus was an inspiration to all with whom 
he came in contact and served. Though firm, yet he possessed 
a gentleness like unto that of a woman. Benevolence was a 
marked attitude of Pastor Russell, which manifested itself in 
his liberality of sentiment and his untiring efforts to bring the 
"glad tidings" of the kingdom of peace to those who sit in 
darkness. He suffered much, yet was able to steel his mind 
against difficulty and attack/ and by the Lord's grace was 
enabled to stand firm and steadfast while others would grow 
weary and discouraged. He was endowed with keen perceptive
 powers, thereby rendering his range of observation extraordinary
; while his memory and ability to analyze, and to 
reach rapid and accurate conclusions, continued to be a marvel 
to all who were associated with him closely. He had an 
exalted sense of duty as a servant of the Lord, and the conviction
 that each moment is precious and must be utilized 
to the Master's praise seemed to pervade his entire being. 
This was a source of inspiration to the brethren generally. 
He faithfully and untiringly administered the affairs of the 
church, the members of which he loved devotedly. It was said 
of the Apostle John that when he was too old and feeble to 
walk to the meeting of the early Church, he was carried into 
the house and placed upon a couch, where he delivered his 
exhortation and message of love to the flock of God, always 
admonishing them to love one another. With a like loving 
spirit Pastor Russell faithfully looked after the interests of 
the Lord's ljttle ones, until his dying hour. When almost too 
feeble to walk and too feeble to stand for any length of time, 
he was assisted to the platform of the hall where the church 
at Los Angeles, California, was assembled; and there sitting 
with bowed head, he delivered to them the last loving message
 that he ever spoke. When he had finished this last message
 he quoted and asked the congregation to sing: 

"Abide, sweet Spirit, heavenly Dove, 
With light and comfort from above, 

Be thou our guardian, thou our guide; 
O'er every thought and step preside. 

f Teach us in watchfulness and prayer 

To wait for thine appointed hour, 
And fit us by thy grace to share 

The triumphs of thy conquering power*" 

Great men are not fully appreciated while they are 
among us. Such is true with reference to Pastor Russell. 
Like the great Master whom he devotedly loved and faithfully
 served, he was misunderstood and persecuted, all of 
which he bore in patience. He finished the work given 
him here to do, and iB now forever with the Lord, where 
there is fulness of joy and pleasures for ever more. 


THE HISTORY AND OPERATIONS OF OUR SOCIETY 


NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the annual meeting of the Shareholders of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract 
Society will be held at Carnegie Hall, in the City of Pittsburgh (North Side), County of Allegheny and State of Pennsylvania
, on the 5th day of January, 19.18, at ten o'clock in the forenoon, for the purpose of electing Directors and 
Officers and for the transaction of such other business as may properly come before said meeting. 

W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary. 


Because of the unusual interest in the ensuing Annual 
Meeting of the Watch Toweb Bible and Tbact Society, as 
per the foregoing notice, it is deemed proper that we here give 

[6161] 


The Watch Toweb readers a brief resume of the organization 
and operations of the Society. 

As is well known, Pastor Russell began his religious 


(327-328) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


activities about 1875. In 1884, together with six others, he 
formed a corporation under the name and style of Zion's 
Watch Tower Tract Society, incorporating it under the laws 
of the State of Pennsylvania. In the Lord's providence a 
body corporate is essential to the work of the harvest until it 
is completed. We have no doubt that the Lord directed the 
organization of this Corporation for the purpose of carryiag 
on his harvest work. Brother Russell was the Servant of 
the Laodicean period of the church, and organized the work 
under the Lord's direction. In 1896 a petition was presented 
to the Court of Common Pleas, at Allegheny County, Pennsylvania
, and the corporate name was changed to Watch Tower 
Bible and Tbact Society, by which name it has ever since 
been known. The Articles of Incorporation are as follows: 
AETICLES OF INOOBPOBATION 
"Be it known that the subscribers, having associated 
themselves together for the purpose of the dissemination of 
Bible Truths in various languages, and being desirous of 
becoming incorporated agreeably to the provisions of the 
Act of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of 
Pennsylvania, entitled 'An Act to provide for the Incorporation
 and Regulations of certain Corporations/ approved the 
twenty-ninth day of April, Anno Domini, One Thousand Eight 
Hundred and Seventy Four, and its supplements, do hereby 
declare, set forth arid certify that the following are the purposes
, objects, articles and conditions of their said association
 for and upon which they desire to be incorporated: 

"I, The name of the Corporation shall be Zion's Watch 
Tower Tract Society. 

"II. The purpose for which the Corporation is formed is, 
the dissemination of Bible Truths in various languages by 
means of the publication of tracts, pamphlets, papers and 
other religious documents, and by the use of all other lawful 
means which its Board of Directors, duly constituted, shall 
deem expedient for the furtherance of the purpose stated. 

"III. The place where the business of the said Corporation
 is to be transacted, is the City of Allegheny, in the 
County of Allegheny, and State of Pennsylvania. 
"IV. The Corporation is to exist perpetually. 
"V. The Corporation has no capital stock. Bach donation
 of Ten Dollars to the funds of said Corporation shall 
entitle the contributor, or his assigns, to one non -forfeitable 
non-assessable, and non-dividend-bearing share, and to one 
vote for every such share in said Corporation. Certificates 
o| membership so acquired shall be issued by the Secretary, 
countersigned by the President, to the persona entitled thereto
. 

"VI, The Corporation is to be managed by a Board of 
Directors consisting of seven members, and the names of 
those already chosen Directors are as follows: — 
President, Charles T. Russell, Wm. C. MacMillan, 

Vice President, Wm. I. Mann, Simon O. Blunden, 

Secy, and Treas., Maria F. Russell, J. B. Adaznson, 
Joseph F, Smith. 
"VII. The said Corporation by its Board of Directors, a 
majority of whom shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
 of, business, shall have full power and authority to 
make and enaot by-laws, rules, and ordinances, which shall 
be deemed and taken to be the law of said Corporation, and 
do any and everything useful for the good government and 
support of the affairs of the said Corporation; provided that 
the said by-laws, rules and ordinances, or any of them, shall 
not be repugnant to this Charter, to the constitution and laws 
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the Constitution 
of the United States. 

"VIII. The said Corporation shall have as officers a 
President, who shall preside at the meetings of the Board of 
Directors; a Vice-President, who shall preside in the absence 
of the President; and a Secretary, who shall also be Treasurer
; and these officers shall be chosen from among the members
 of the Board of Directors annually, on the first Saturday 
of each year, by an election by ballot, to be held at the principal
 office of the Corporation m Allegheny City, Pennsylvania. 
"The members of the Board of Directors shall hold their 
respective offices for life, unless removed by a two-thirds vote 
of the Shareholders; and vacancies in the Board occasioned 
by death, resignation or removal, shall be filled by vote of a 
majority of the remaining members of the Board, who shall 
meet for the purpose within twenty days from the time when 
such vacancy or vacancies shall occur, and in the event of 
failure to fill such vanacy or vacancies in the- manner aforesai
4 within thirty days from the time when such vacancy or 
vacancies shall occur, then the said vacancy or vacancies shall 
be filled by the appointment of the President, and the person 
or persons so appointed shall hold his or their office or offices 
until the next annual election of officers of the Corporation, 
when such vacancy or vacancies Bhall be filled by election, in 


the same manner as the President, Vice-President and Secretary
 and Treasurer are elected. The persons entitled to vote 
at annual elections of the* Corporation shall be those who 
hold certificates of membership acquired in the manner aforesaid
. 

"IX, The said Corporation, under the name, style and 
title aforesaid, shall have full power and authority to make, 
have and use a common seal, with such device and inscription 
as they may deem proper, and the same to alter and renew at 
their pleasure; and by the name, style and title aforesaid, 
shall be able in law and equity to sue and be sued, plead and 
be impleaded in any Court or Courts, before and Judge or 
Justice of the Peace, in all manner of suits and complaints, 
pleas, causes, matters and demands whatsoever, and alt and 
every matter or thing therein to do in as full and ample a 
manner, and as effectually, as any other person or persons, 
bodies politic or corporate, within the Commonwealth of 
Pennsylvania, may or can do. 

"X. The said corporation, by the name, style and title 
aforesaid, shall have the right, power and authority to take, 
receive and hold in fee simple, or any less estate, all such message
, lots, lands, buildings, tenements, rents, annuities, franchise
 and hereditaments as may be necessary and proper for its 
purpose; and to sell, lease, mortgage, or otherwise dispose of 
the same or any part thereof; and it shall have the same right, 
power and authority to take, receive and hold, and to sell, 
lease or dispose of any and all kinds of personal property 
and money." 

OTHEE COBFOBATIONS 1EGAXLY NECESSARY 
In 1909, the chief point of activity in the Harvest work 
was removed from Allegheny, Ta., to Brooklyn, New York. 
It became necessary to have a New York corporation to carry 
on the work in a legal manner in the State of New York ; 
hence the Peoples Pulpit Association was organized under 
the Membership Corporation Law of New York State. 

For a number of years the work has been generally known 
as the International Bible Students Association, and in 
1914, the same identical work was incorporated under the 
laws of Great Britain, under the name and style of International
 Bible Students Association. All three of these 
Corporations were organized for purposes identical, and work 
together harmoniously. 

The officers of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society
 must be elected annually. At present the officers are as 
fpllows: — 

President, J. F, Rutherford. 
Vice-President, A. N. Pierson, 
Secy, and Treas., W. E. Van Amburgh, 
The officers of the Peoples Pulpit Association are as follows
: — 

President, J. F. Rutherford, 
Vice-President, A. H. Macmillan, 
Secretary, W. F. Hudgings, 
Treasurer, W. E. Van Amburgh. 
The President of this Corporation, according to the terms 
of the Charter, holds his office for life, the other officers being 
elected by the Board of Directors annually. 

The officers of the International Bible Students Association
, are 

President, J. F. Rutherford, 
Vice-President, J, Hemery, 
Secretary, H. J. Shearn. 
Treasurer, Wm. Crawford. 
Each one of these Corporations has a separate and distinct 
Board of Directors. The Board of Directors of the Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society, is, at present, as follows: — 
J. F. Rutherford, A. H. Macmillan 

A. N. Pierson, W. E. Spill, 

W. E. Van Amburgh, J. A. Bohnet, 

George H. Fisher. 
The law requires that the Board of Directors be elected annually
 at £he Shareholders* meeting. 

The Board of Directors of the Peoples Pulpit Association
, as at present constituted, are: — 
J. F. Rutherford, W. F. Hudgings, 

At H. Macmillan, A. E. Burgess, 

W. E. Van Amburgh, J. A. Baeuerlein, 

R, J. Martin, 
Members of this Board are elected at the annual meeting of 
the members of the Corporation, held in Brooklyn, New York. 
The controlling body of the International Bible Students
 Association is designated as a Council. The original 
Council was composed of Charles T. Russell, J. F. Rutherford
. J. Hemery, H. J. Shearn, W. Crawford. This Council, 
by the terms of the Act of Incorporation, elect their successors 
as well as the officers of the Corporation. 

All three of these Corporations are religious associations 


[6162] 


November 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(328-329) 


or institutions, incorporated, as provided by the terms of their 
respective Charters, for the purpose of dissemination of Bible 
Truths. The creed or belief of each, is the same; namely, the 
teachings of Jesus ami the Apostles. 

SOCIETY'S CHARTER ANALYZED 

There seemingly has been some misunderstanding about 
the Charter of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society; 
hence we here give a brief analysis thereof. 

The purpose of the corporation is set forth in plain terms 
in paragraph II. The domicile of the corporation is designated
 in paragraph III as Allegheny County, Pennsylvania. 
It is strictly a Pennsylvania corporation. Paragraph V of the 
Charter expressly provides that the Society has no capital 
stock. It has, however, voting shares which grant merely a 
personal right to each person to cast one vote for every ten 
dollars contributed at any one time by such person. 

Paragraph VI states that the corporation is to be managed 
by a Board of Directors consisting of seven members, and 
specifically names the first Board of Directors as follows, 
to wit: 

President, Charles T. Russell, Win. C. MacMillan, 

Vice-President, Win. I. Mann, Simon O. Blunden, 

Secy, and Treas., Maria F. Russell, J. B. Adamson, 
Joseph F. Smith. 

Thus it will be seen that the persons elected to the respective
 offices of President, Vice -President, Secretary and 
Treasurer, were, and are, by virtue of the terms of the 
Charter and their election, members of the Board of Directors, 
and any person elected as successor to such, offices, would 
thereby become members of the Board of Directors. Instead 
of the shareholders first electing Brother Russell each year 
as a Director and then electing him as President, they voted 
for him but once, and his election as President constituted 
him a member of the Board of Directors. And so it would 
be with his successor in office or with the other officers. There 
would seem to be no necessity for taking the two votes, although
 technically that would be the proper course. 

Strictly speaking, there has never been a legal election of 
a complete Board of Directors since 1885, for the reason that 
the law requires the Directors to be elected annually. At each 
annual election only the three officers were elected ; hence they 
alone constituted the legal members of the Board of Directors. 

Paragraph VIII of the Charter provides that the Board 
of Directors shall hold their respective offices for life, unless 
removed by a two-thirds vote of the Shareholders. This provision
 of the Charter, however, is directly contrary to the 
law of the State of Pennsylvania under which the Society was 
incorporated and hence that provision of the Charter is null 
and void. The law provides that the Board of Directors shall 
be elected annually by the shareholders. The Charter of a 
corporation cannot grant greater powers than the law under 
which it is created; hence this provision of the Charter must 
yield to the provision of the law. Where a vacancy occurs 
in the Board of Directors, the Charter provides that such 
vacancy may be filled by the remaining members of the Board 
of Directors, provided such vacancy is filled within thirty 
days; and if not so filled within that time then the President 
shall appoint a proper person, or persons to fill such vacancy 
or vacancies. (Art. VIII.) The Charter expressly provides 
that those selected or appointed to fijl such vacancies shall 
hold office only until the next annual election of officers of the 
corporation, at which time a full and complete Board must 
be elected by the shareholders. This provision of the Charter, 
however, was never complied with in the selection of the successors
 of any of the original seven Directors, except in the 
case of the three officers, who have been elected annually. 
Hence, according to the terms of the Charter itself, as well 
as the laws of Pennsylvania, four vacancies have existed in the 
Board of Directors until in July of this year, at which time the 
President appointed four members to hold office until January, 
1 DIB. in harmony with Paragraph VIII of the Charter. 

The persons named in the Charter as the original Board of 
Directors would hold office until their successors were elected. 
This rule applied to Brother Russell, and he was therefore 
always a legal member of the Board for this reason, and for 
the additional reason that he was elected annually to the 
office of President. The six others named in the Charter as 
members of the Board of Directors severed their connection 
with the Society by resignation or otherwise, at the dates 
named below: — 

W. I. Mann — April 11, 1&92 

J. F. Smith — April 11, 1892 

J. B. Adamson — Jan. 6, 1895 

W. C. MacMillan — May 13, 1898 

Mrs. M. F. Russell — Feb. 12, 1900 

S. O. Blunden — Jan. 6, 1908 


Successors to- these six original Directors were never elected by 
the shareholders, as the law expressly requires; hence for 
more than twenty years there was not a full and complete 
legal Board of Directors. Since Brother Russell, as President
, and two others as Vice-President and Secretary -Treasurer
, were legal Directors by virtue of their annual election 
as officers, and since Brother Russell controlled the Society by 
reason of having a majority of the voting shares, the fact 
that there was not a complete and legal Board worked no 
injury to the Society. 

Prior to 1908 Brother Russell held a majority of the voting
 shares by reason of the fact that he had contributed the 
major portion of the money to the Tract Fund. Thereafter 
the donations increased until within a short time Brother 
Russell held approximately one-third, and by 1916 he held 
only about one-fifth of the voting shares. The law requires 
the annual election to be held in Pennsylvania, hence after 
1908, when the headquarters were located in Brooklyn, most of 
the voting was done at Pittsburgh by proxy. Brother Russell 
always received all the votes that were cast. For the years 
1914 to 1916 inclusive, his shares were not voted at all. Fot 
the election of January, 1917, the proxies were sent out according
 to the custom that had been in vogue since 1909; 
hence most of the voting at the 1917 election was done at 
Pittsburgh by proxy. 

The provision of the law requiring the Directors to he 
elected annually by the shareholders is a wise one. If the 
Directors were permitted to hold office for life and to elect 
their successors, then it would be possible for seven men to 
absolutely and perpetually control the affairs of the Society 
in utter disregard of the wishes of the shareholders. This 
the law will not permit. 

WHO ARE ENTITLED TO VOTE 

The shareholders, in fact, constitute tjic corporation, or the 
constituent body. The shareholders are those who have contributed
 money to carry on the work of the Society. Every 
ten dollars contributed at one time, counts for one vote. Paragraph
 V of the Charter provides for issuing certificates of 
membership covering such contributions. This certificate of 
membership is purely a personal right to vote and cannot be 
transferred. When a person holding a certificate dies, the 
value of such certificates likewise dies. No one else could 
vote such certificates of shares. Many of the brethren have 
donated money to the Society, and have never received any 
certificates and are wondering why this is so. In 1894 Brother 
Russell issued this statement concerning these certificates: — 
"We have regularly printed certificates which for a time 
were sent out to those who contributed $10.00 or multiples
 thereof; but they made trouble and extra letter-writing 
because many of the Lord's sheep have little knowledge of 
business. Some supposed that the certificates were appeals 
for money; others could not tell what to make of them, and 
wrote for full particulars as to how they should vote, etc.; 
others feared that the owning of the certificates brought them 
into liability for any debts which the Society might contract
. It required patience and took time from more important
 work to answer scores of such letters; and we concluded 
that we had made a mistake, as far as the certificates were 
concerned. However, a full record is kept of all donations and 
of voting-shares." 

It has been difficult to keep track of the contributors because
 of the frequent change of address and many times 
change of name, as where a sister, having donated money, 
subsequently marries. At annual elections the Society has 
faithfully endeavored to locate more than a majority of the 
Shareholders*and send them notice by mail of Buch meeting. 
This year, the notice of election being published in The 
Watch Toweb, all who have contributed will have the opportunity
 of taking advantage o£ the voting privilege. The 
By-law of the Society now in force governing certificates of 
voting shares and the voting of same, is as follows, to wit: 

"1. Certificates of membership may he issued to any one 
entitled thereto, and shall be signed by the President and the 
Secretary and sealed with the corporate seal. Every person 
contributing ten dollars or more at any one time to the 
funds of the said Society shall be entitled to one vote, at 
any annual or special election held by the corporation, for 
every ten dollars so contributed. And the following words 
endorsed upon the Proxy when signed and sealed by the Secretary
 shall constitute a certificate of authority to vote the 
number of shares named therein, to wit : 

"I hereby certify that of 

is entitled to cast votes at the annual election of the 

Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, to be held on the 
day of January, A. D., 191 . .. 

"2. Certificates of stock are not subject to transfer, the 


[6163] 


(329-330) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyk, N. Y. 


right to vote being a personal right, which ceases with the 
death of the party having such right, or when such person 
becomes opposed to the work or policy of this Society. Any 
person making contributions to the funds of the Society may 
at the time of making such contribution request that the voting
 share be granted to some other person or persons named at 
the time." 

Pursuant to the above notice the next annual election will 
be held at Pittsburgh, January 5th, 1918, in Carnegie Hall, at 
which time and place any shareholder may appear in person 
and cast his vote, or he may appoint some one else as his 
proxy to vote in his place and stead. 

Ilie legal form of proxy for such an election is as follows: 
FORM OF PROXY 

I, > of 

(Your came) 

, do hereby make, 

(Your address) 

constitute a-nd appoint of 

(Name of proxy) 

my lawful proxy and at- 

( Address) 
torney for me and in my name, place and stead to appear at 
the meeting of the Shareholders of the Watch Tower Bible 
and Tract Society to be held at Pittsburgh, Allegheny County, 
State of Pennsylvania, on the 5th day of January, 1918, at 
ten o'clock in the forenoon, and at any adjourned or subsequent
 session of said annual meeting, and then and there to 
cast the number of votes to which I shall be entitled, in the 
election of Directors and Officers of said Society, and for 
the transaction of any other business that may require the votes 
of Shareholders; and my proxy shall have and exercise all the 
powers that I have or could exercise if personally pTesent. 

WITNESS MY HAND AND SEAL this dav 

of 191.. 

( Sign Here) 

ENDORSEMENT: 

I hereby certify that of 

is entitled to cast 

votes at the annual election of the Watch Tower Bible anp 
Tract Society to be held on the 5th day of January, A. D. 
1918. 

(SIGNED) 

[Seal.] Secretary. 

The foregoing endorsement is a form of certificate. When 
the proxy is duly signed and presented to the Secretary, he 
will ascertain from the hooks the number of votes the person 
signing the proxy is entitled to vote and will endorse the authority
 of the shareholder or his proxy to cast such number 
of votes at the election. 

Every proxy with the certificate endorsed thereon must 
be presented to the Secretary and signed and sealed by him 
before it will constitute an authority to vote at the election. 

A proxy is a general power of attorney, whereby the shareholder
 delegates to another the power and authority to vote 
in his name, place and stead. Hence, it is not proper to 
write on the proxy the name of the person or persons for 
whom votes shall be cast. However, the one holding the 
proxy would desire to respect the wish of the shareholder; 
and that he might know that wish, it would be proper that 
the shareholder attach to his proxy a letter of instruction, 
advising his proxy or substitute as to the person or persons 
for whom he may desire such votes cast — provided, of course, 
such person or persons .are nominated. It would not be reasonable
 to expect that every one who holds such instruction 
would be required to nominate any such person named— for 
this reason: Brother A may hold proxies from a dozen different
 persons, each of whom instructs him to vote those proxies 
for as many different persons, and it would be inconsistent 
for him to nominate opposing candidates. The obligation of 
the one holding a proxy is to. vote for those who are placed 
before the convention. 

We are inserting a loose leaf, which is an exact replica 
of the above proxy, and which each person may use to fill 
out, sign and return to Brother W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
, 13-17 Hicks Street, Brooklyn, New York. He will place 
the proper endorsement thereon and deliver the same either 
to the shareholder or to his proxy in ample time to vote at 
the election. 

OKDBB OP BISECTION 
At the ensuing annual election, a Board of Directors of 
seven members will first be elected. The present members of 
the Board are: — 

J. F. Rutherford, A. H. Ma cm il Ian, 

A. N. Pierson, W. E. Spill, 

W. E. Van Amburgh, J, A. Bohnet, 

Geo. H. Fisher. 


The following persons also claim to be members of the 
Board: — 

A. I. Ritchie, I. F. Hoskins, 

R. H. Hirsh, J. D. Wright. 

The shareholders may vote for any of these or none of them, 
as they choose; they may vote for any shareholder they desire. 
After the Board of Directors is elected, then from amongst 
their number the officers of the corporation will be elected, 
It is the desire that all shareholders attend in person it 
possible; but since many of them live at a long distance, it 
will probably be necessary for many to send their proxies 
to other persons. Proxies, of course, should be given only 
to those who are fully consecrated, who are in harmony with 
the Society, and who also hold voting shares and have the 
best interests of the work at heart. A shareholder can give 
his or her proxy to any person who possesses the above qualifications
. (A proxy should be given only to one who i3 expected
 to attend the meeting in person.) In addition to the 
officers and members of the Board of Directors of the Society
 who will be personally present at the annual meeting, 
we are advised of the following persons who expect to be 
there, to wit: C. H. Anderson, Baltimore, Md., C. H. Ward, 
Cumberland, Md., A. M. Zimmerman, Lancaster, Pa,, B. 0. 
Rutledge, New Brighton, Pa., and E. 0. Chambers, Butler, 
Pa. We merely name these for the convenience of any who 
might not know to whom they could give a proxy. 

It is desirable that all of these proxies be in the hands of 
the Secretary on or before the tenth day of December, in 
order to afford ample time for him to ascertain from the 
books the number of votes each person is entitled to cast, 
and to endorse the same upon the certificate attached to the 
proxy, and thus to have it ready for the annual election, 

VOIOB OF THE CHURCH— THE WILL OF GOD 

It has been suggested that only a small portion of the consecrated
 of the International Bible Students Association 
are in fact shareholders of the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society. Many of the Lord's dear children are poor in 
this world's goods, yet they have given all their time for 
several yaars to faithful service in the harvest field. Unless 
one is a contributor to the Tract Fund he is not entitled to 
a vote. The following letter very well expresses the situation : 
"Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

"Pardon me if I am obtruding, but I feel constrained to 
offer the following thoughts and suggestions which have been 
upon my mind of late: 

"Don't you think that, with the present mode of electing 
officers and servants of our Society, there is a possibility of 
a few of the large shareholders controlling the election and 
the Society against the approval of the large majority of its 
members? Would this not be Lucre speaking for the Lord? 
Might it not be the manifested will of the adversary instead 
of the manifested will of God? In my opinion, some change 
should be made, throwing the election of officers in the hands 
of all its members as it now prevails in our ecclesias, giving 
each one an equal voice, and imposing equal responsibility upon 
all. As it now is, some brother possessing the money talent 
could have 5,000 votes, while many others have none. While 
it was right for THAT SERVANT, who was the largest contributor
, organizer, and charterer, to control in his lifetime, 
it doesn't seem right for any one, or for a minority, to control
 after his death. And again, we must remember that his 
votes were always on the side of the majority. 

"As our dear Brother Russell advocated that the largest 
MAJORITY should be accepted as the expressed will of the 
Lord, I would suggest your advocacy of all the classes throughout
 the land indicating their choice for officers and servants 
of the Society by vote, and the result be sent to some designated
 brother, and a committee be appointed to act with him 
to carefully canvass the votes and make a report to the 
annual meeting, thereby showing the sentiment of the friends 
throughout the land. 

"Surely all faithful, voting children of God would wish 
all other members of the body to have an equal voice in the 
selection of its official members, and would be thankful for 
just such an opportunity to properly use their money talent 
in casting their votes for the majority's preference; thereby 
relieving themselves of the great responsibility that now rests 
upon them. The spirit of the faithful is an acquiescing one 
to the majority's opinion, a submission of personal preference, 
will, judgment, etc., to the manifested choice of the Lord; 
while the refusing to do so indicates a self-opinionated, selffilled
, self-judgment condition. 

"I make these suggestions because I recognize the majority 
rule to be the expressed will of the Lord in such matters, 
and think that we should be submissive to the results even 
though the Lord may see fit to permit the adversary to con- 


[6164] 


Nov*MBMt 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(330-333) 


trol for the time, which would evidently be for the purpose 
of testing and trying our hearts and wills, to see whether or 
not our hearts are right, and our wills submissive. It does 
seem that our final trials will NOT be along doctrinal lines 
as in the past, but will be along the line of the WILL, the 
foundation of our consecration. 

"Hoping you will not think me presumptuous in expressing 
the above thoughts, and assuring you of my heartiest cooperation
, I remain, 

"Yours in the love and service of our Redeemer." 

"A. B. Dabney." 

A SUGGESTED METHOD 

The Board of Directors and officers of the Society desire 
to have a full and fair expression of the church as to who 
shall constitute their servants in an official capacity. The 
sentiment expressed in the above letter seems to be very 
just. We therefore make the following suggestions: that 
every Ecclesia of the International Bible Students Association
 to whom this notice goes, hold a general congregational 
meeting for the purpose of voting upon their choice for members
 of the Board of Directors and Officers of the Society. 
Tn order that this might be carried out in a uniform manner, 
we outline the following method of procedure, to wit: 

That on Wednesday, November 21st, at 7:30 p. m., all the 
ecclesias assemble at their usual meeting place; that every 
member of the class that is known to be fully consecrated be 
permitted to cast one vote in the class, of which he or she 
is a member; that the vote be first taken as to who shall 
constitute the members of the Board of Directors for the ensuing
 year, and then that another vote be taken as to who 
should constitute the officers ; and that full report of the result 
of this vote be made to a person designated to receive the 
same. That such person may be entirely removed from the 
influence of the officers of the Society, we name Brother 
Eliot H. Thomson, 1357 Oak Street, N. W., Washington, 
D. G., as the one to whom all reports or results of class votes 
shall be made, and Brothers General W. P. Hall and J. T. D. 
Pyles, of Washington, D. C, as two other members of a 
committee who, together with Brother Thomson, shall carefully
 canvass the vote and report the result to the Secretary 
of the Society, which report shall be read by the Secretary 
before the annual meeting for the information of the shareholders
 prior to the casting of the legal vote. 

Of course, we all understand that this vote taken by the 
classes will not constitute a legal election, but may be considered
 as advisory, or in the nature of instructions to the 
Shareholders as to what is the will of the church at large. 
We believe that this would be the better way of ascertaining 
the Lord's will; and since all the Shareholders will desire 
to do the Lord's will, they would doubtless desire to be governed
 by the expressed wish of a majority of the members 
of the Ecclesias. We cannot see that any one could have 
an objection to this method of ascertaining the Lord's will 
and it would be entirely fair to all. 

We submit the following form of report which can be 
made out and signed by the Chairman and the Secretary 
of each congregation and mailed to Brother Thomson, Washington
, D. C, as above suggested, to wit: 


CHURCH'S REPORT 

At a meeting of the Ecclesia at 

held on the 21st day of November, 1917, at 7:30 p. m., at 
the usual meeting place, for the purpose of ascertaining and 
expressing the will of the members as to who shall constitute 
the officers and servants of the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society, we report the following result: 

We first voted upon who shall constitute members of the 
Board of Directors, and the vote stood as follows: 
Name Votes received 


The vote for Officers was as follows: 
For President Votes received . 


Vice-President 
Secy. & Treas. 


We hereby certify that the above and foregoing is a true 
and accurate record of the vote of said ecclesia as taken at 
the time and place above mentioned: 

SIGNED 

Chairman of meeting. 


Secretary of meeting. 
EXPLANATORY 

The purpose of the above arrangement is that every consecrated
 Bible Student may have an opportunity to express 
his or her choice for members of the Board of Directors and 
also for the officers. Therefore at each meeting each and 
every one should be privileged to vote for whomsoever they 
desire and the record should be made; for instance, if John 
Doe Teceives one vote, his name should be put down and his 
vote recorded, and if Richard Roe receives 100 votes, his 
name should be recorded and the number of votes he received. 
The names of the present Board of Directors, also four who 
claim to be Directors, and the names of the present officers 
of the Society are given above. No one is bound to vote 
for either of the persons named; he may vote for whom he 
desires, the purpose of this arrangement being to ascertain 
the will of the Lord through the expression of his people. 

At each ecclesia it should be well noted that no one is 
permitted to participate in the voting unless he is both fully 
consecrated and a member or regular attendant of that particular
 ecclesia. It is therefore decidedly important that each 
ecclesia meet and cast their votes the same day; hence, we 
have named Wednesday, November 2 1st, at 7:30 p. m. 

The Secretary of the ecclesia should mail the report to 
Brother E. H. Thomson, 1357 Oak St., N. W., Washington, 
D. C. immediately after the vote is taken. 


NEHEMIAH'S PRAYER ANSWERED 

[The first and ninth paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled "Colaborers with God," published in issue 
of November 1, 1911. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled "Nehemiah's Faith and Works," 
published in issue of November 1, 1899. Please see the articles named. 1 

while seeking to restrain this quality of our being as respects 
evil doing and injury to others, learn to exercise it kindly, 
lovingly, in opposing wrong, in "earnestly contending for 
the faith once delivered to the saints." And so with all the 
so-called baser organs of our fallen, unbalanced humanity. 
They may all be turned to usefulness and helpfulness if but 
rightly directed by our wills and by the spirit of a sound 
mind — "the mind of the Lord." 


In our experience in character building, the same lesson of 
turning everything to good account mav be profitably applied. 
For instance, if by nature we are quick and impulsive, let 
U3 seek not only to restrain such impulsiveness from speaking 
evil and wrong, but to exercise it in the speaking of that 
which is good and profitable for edifying, gradually accustoming
 ourselves to use this talent in a favorable manner, not in 
an unfavorable one. Have we large combativeness, let us, 


A PSALM OF THANKSGIVING 

[ Excepting the paragraph below, this article was a reprint of that entitled ' ' Praise Ye the Lord, ' f published in issue of May 

1, 1892, which please see.] 


Gratitude is one of the divinely implanted instincts of a 
soul bearing the image of God, and one which therefore should 
be carefully cultivated. It is this element of character in man 
which makes fellowship and communion with God possible. 
If the goodness of God could awaken in us no sense of grateful
 appreciation, if we were wholly dead to such sentiments, 
there could be no pleasure on God's part in manifesting his 
goodness to us, and there, would be nothing in ua to call out 


his love or to inspire love in us. But since it is for the 
divine pleasure that we are and were created, God has endowed 
his intelligent creatures with this element of character which, 
being responsive to his own goodness, institutes a lively and 
delightful fellowship with himself; and this fellowship is 
the chief end of existence, both on the aide of the creature 
and on that of the Creator. — Revelation 4:11. 

Viewed from this standpoint, thankfulness of heart is a 


[6165] 


(333-326) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


very sure sign of the character which God is seeking, especially
 in matters pertaining to our great salvation. Yet 
amongst all those who have been justified by faith — cleansed 
from their iniquities and covered with the robe of Christ's 
righteousness-^how few, comparatively, there are who carry 
out in full their consecration of themselves to God — their 
reasonable service. Only the truly thankful are constrained 
to do so — only the truly appreciative. Let us each and all 
seek to cultivate more and more the spirit of thankfulness, 
the "reasonable" spirit or disposition. Thankfulness will 
make every trial and sacrifice on our part seem small and 
proportionately easy to be offered; and it will make all of 
God's mercies and favors toward us proportionately grand, 
great and inspiring. 

Today's study expresses the heart sentiment of every truly 
consecrated child of God. The more we come into possession 
of the spiritual blessings which the Lord has promised us, and 
which we have accepted by faith, the more need shall we 
have of humility; and our humility will be proportionate to 
our appreciation of divine goodness and our thankfulness 
therefor. The grateful, thankful heart may go on from grace 
to grace, from strength to strength, from knowledge to 
knowledge, from attainment to attainment; but if gratitude 
begins to wane and if our advantages are accepted either as 
matters of our own attainment or of good luck, in that same 
proportion we shall find ourselves growing cold spiritually. 
Moreover, with unthankfulness will come unholiness, spiritual 
pride and self-conceit; and all of this will lead to spiritual 
dearth and, if persisted in, to spiritual death. 

FRIOE DEPOSITED WITH DIVINE JUSTICE 

Ever since Jesus died, the ransom-price has been in the 
hands of divine Justice — in the Father's hands, where our 
Lord placed it at the time of his death. But it is there only 
as a deposit; for the time has not yet come for it to be paid 
over oifltcially for Adam and his posterity. If the divine 
plan had been for Jesus to take possession of the world and 
to set up his kingdom at Pentecost, then it wouuld have been 
proper for him to pay over to the Father the ransom-price 


fully and completely — appropriating it as the offset to father 
Adam's sin and sentence on behalf of all his raae. If that 
Price had been formally paid over, the proper and logical 
thing would have been for the Father to put the whole world 
immediately into the hands of our Lord Jesus, and for the 
Millennial age to begin. 

God did not wish, however, to turn the kingdom over 
to our Lord until the great seventh day, the Millennium; 
for he had another feature of his plan to be worked out 
rirst. He purposed that during the intervening more than 
eighteen centuries a church class should be called out from 
amongst mankind, to be the bride and joint-heir of his iSon 
in, the kingdom. Hence the ransom-price for the sins of the 
whole world Was merely left unappropriated, while he dealt 
with the church. And since the Father's plan for the church 
was that they should sacrifice or surrender their earthly 
interests and receive instead heavenly interests and the divine 
nature, therefore it was not necessary to give the church 
restitution — the thing which the ransom-price will secure for 
the world of mankind. Hence, instead of giving the church 
a share in the ransom blessings, which would mean restitution
, the divine provision for them is different: namely, an 
imputation of merit covering their blemishes, so that they 
might present their bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable
 to God. 

All, therefore, that our Lord Jesus has done with the 
ransom-price is to impute the value arising therefrom to 
cover the shortcomings of those who desire to become his 
disciples and joint-heirs. The benefit to them is the same as 
though they had full restitution, for they are fully justified 
from all sin, and are thus permitted to be accepted of the 
Father as members of the house of sons, by the begetting 
of the holy Spirit. Shortly the church shall be completed, 
and later presented before the Father blameless and unreprovable
, without any of our present mental, moral and physical
 diseases and weaknesses, and in the full possession of 
the new life and the new resurrection bodies. 


BEREAN STUDIES IN VOLUME VII. STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

IAs these questions are to be had in book form we do not reproduce them here.] 

IF THEY ONLY KNEW 


Jerusalem, Jerusalem, hadst thou but known 

Thy day of visitation, hadst thou recognized 

Messiah in thy midst, would not tny Pharisees, 

With scoffing priests and populace, have vied to do 

Him homage! Dost thou think the Master e'er had been 

Footsore and weary! Would there not have stood by day, 

By night, full threescore chariots ready at his call! 

Ah, me! If they had only known, dost thinje the feast 

At Simon's house had been the only one thus spread; 

Or would He e'er have need to say, ''The birds have nests, 

The foxes of the earth have holes, but I, the Son 

Of Man, no place to lay my head!" Jerusalem, 

Would not thy palace gates have opened wide to him, 

The Alpha and Omega, Prophet, Priest and King! 

Ah me! Had they but known, in all the centuries since, 


The chosen few who bravely followed in his steps, 

Dost think earth's great ones would have left them lonely, 

poor, 
Despised? Would they have driven proudly by in state, 
The while "his feet" pressed wearily the wayside dust? 
All ye who often long, like Mary, to have poured 
The precious ointment on his head, remember this: 
His words are true today as then, that, "Inasmuch 
As ye have done it unto one of these, the least 
Of mine, it hath been done to me!" Ah, yes! and e'en 
A cup of water shall not fail of its reward, 
Because 'twas given in* the name of Christ, the Lord, 
Then, let us ever seek to find and humbly serve 
His "little ones"; for thus we do it unto him." 

