Distribution of Memorial Invitations Starts April 2
 1. When will we distribute Memorial invitations this year, and what is the value of this annual campaign?
1 From April 2 to April 17, we will distribute invitations to the most important event of the year—the Memorial of Christ’s death. In the past, many interested ones have responded to this annual campaign. For example, on the day of the Memorial, a woman called the branch office and said: “I just came home, and there was an invitation under my door. I want to go, but I am not sure of the time.” The brother explained where this information could be found on the invitation. The woman concluded her conversation by promising, “I am going to your event tonight!”
 2. What could we say when presenting the invitation?
2 How We Will Do It: Since we have a limited time to cover the territory, it is best to be brief. We might say: “Hello. We want to give your family this invitation to an important annual observance that will be held worldwide on Sunday, April 17. [Hand the invitation to the householder.] That date is the anniversary of Jesus’ death. A free Bible talk will be given that explains how we can benefit from Christ’s ransom. This invitation shows the address and time of the meeting being held in our community.”
 3. How can we invite as many people as possible?
3 If the congregation has a large territory, the elders may direct you to leave the invitations at not-at-homes, provided that they can be placed completely out of sight. Be sure to invite your return visits, relatives, workmates, schoolmates, and other acquaintances. When sharing in the distribution on the weekends, offer the magazines whenever appropriate. Could you auxiliary pioneer during April and have a greater share in this enjoyable campaign?
 4. Why do we want interested ones to attend the Memorial?
4 What a powerful witness interested attenders will receive! They will hear of Jehovah’s great love in providing the ransom. (John 3:16) They will learn how God’s Kingdom will benefit mankind. (Isa. 65:21-23) They will also be invited to approach the attendants and request a Bible study to learn more. It is our prayer that many honesthearted ones will respond to this campaign and join us for the Memorial!

