Let Us Show Our Appreciation
Memorial to Be Observed on April 17
 1. What sentiment of the psalmist is especially appropriate during the Memorial season?
1 Moved by Jehovah’s many acts of mercy and deliverance, the psalmist asked: “What shall I repay to Jehovah for all his benefits to me?” (Ps. 116:12) Today, God’s servants have even more reason for gratitude. Centuries after these inspired words were penned, Jehovah gave mankind its greatest gift—the ransom. As we prepare to commemorate Christ’s death on April 17, we have good reason to show ourselves thankful.—Col. 3:15.
 2. What are some reasons why we appreciate the ransom?
2 Ransom Blessings: By means of the ransom, we are able to receive “the forgiveness of our sins.” (Col. 1:13, 14) This enables us to worship Jehovah with a clean conscience. (Heb. 9:13, 14) We can enjoy freeness of speech with Jehovah when we approach him in prayer. (Heb. 4:14-16) Those who exercise faith in the ransom have the grand prospect of everlasting life!—John 3:16.
 3. How can we show our appreciation to Jehovah for the ransom?
3 Demonstrate Appreciation: One way to show our deep appreciation is to consider the Memorial Bible reading each day and meditate on it. The February 1, 2011, Watchtower article entitled “Are You Prepared for the Most Important Day of the Year?” was designed to help us do this. We can also tell Jehovah through heartfelt prayer how much we value the ransom. (1 Thess. 5:17, 18) Our being present at the Memorial observance in obedience to Jesus’ command shows thankfulness. (1 Cor. 11:24, 25) Furthermore, we can imitate Jehovah’s expansive love and invite as many as possible to attend with us.—Isa. 55:1-3.
 4. What should be our determination?
4 Appreciative servants of Jehovah will not treat the Memorial observance as just another meeting. It is the most important meeting of the year! As the Memorial approaches, may our determination be like that of the psalmist who wrote: “Bless Jehovah, O my soul, and do not forget all his doings.”—Ps. 103:2.

