Were You Once a Regular Pioneer?
 1. What privilege have many enjoyed, but what has become necessary for some?
1 Over the years, thousands have enjoyed the privilege of “teaching and declaring the good news” as full-time ministers. (Acts 5:42) Some, however, have had to discontinue pioneering for various reasons. If you were once a regular pioneer, have you examined your present circumstances to see if you can rejoin the pioneer ranks?
 2. Why should those who pioneered in the past consider their present circumstances?
2 Circumstances Change: It may be that the situation that caused you to stop pioneering no longer exists. For example, if you discontinued pioneering because you could not meet the requirement of 90 hours a month, could you resume now that the requirement has been reduced to 70? Have your employment needs or family responsibilities lessened since the time you left the pioneer ranks? One sister who stopped pioneering for health reasons was able to resume at age 89. She had not been in the hospital for over a year and felt that her health would allow her to pioneer again!
 3. How may family members cooperate to help someone in their family to pioneer?
3 Perhaps you are not a former pioneer, but someone in your family stopped pioneering to provide care for a family member, such as an aged parent. (1 Tim. 5:4, 8) If so, could you or others in the family do more to assist? Why not discuss matters together? (Prov. 15:22) When family members cooperate so that one of them can pioneer, all can rightly feel that they are having a share.
 4. What if you are unable to rejoin the pioneer ranks at this time?
4 Do not be discouraged if your present circumstances do not allow you to start pioneering again. Your readiness to do so pleases Jehovah. (2 Cor. 8:12) Use the skills you acquired as a pioneer in your present ministry. Make your desire a matter of prayer, and be alert for opportunities to adjust your circumstances. (1 John 5:14) Perhaps, in time, Jehovah will open to you “a large door that leads to activity” so that you can once again experience the joys of regular pioneering!—1 Cor. 16:9.

