VOL. XXII. OCTOBER 1, 1901. No. 19. 



CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 307 

The Jews and their Prospects 308 

Hatred Against Jews in Gt. Britain 309 

To Abolish Prayer Meetings 310 

The Costly Pearl 310 

Cleveland Convention Echoes 31 1 

The Impending Industrial Crisis 31 1 

Momentous Project of Men Arming 312 

In the School of Adversity 313 

"For God was with Him" 315 

Words of Cheer and Encouragement 318 

Motto Cards for Home Embellishment 306 

page 306 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



MOTTO CARDS FOR HOME EMBELLISHMENT. 



For several years we have realized the blessing accruing 
to the Christian home from a liberal supply of Scripture Text 
Cards and mottoes displayed upon its walls— as reminders of 
faith and patience and love and perseverance in the narrow 



way of life. They should greet the eye in the parlor, dining-room 
and bed-room as Holy Spirit messages. 

We have supplied these to the friends practically at cost 
for several years— from time to time reducing the price as our 
purchase of larger quantities enabled us to secure lower prices 
from the publishers. Very generally our supply has been short 
of the demand, so this year we have ordered early and in large 
quantities from the London publishers and have secured prices 
which will permit us to supply our subscribers below American 
wholesale rates. 

These are mostly printed in silver on dark red and green 
glossy cards with cord hangers; but some are on light cards 
embellished in choice colorings and designs. The majority of 
course are such as are usual and never grow old; but each season 
adds a few new and choice ones and these we have up to 
date. In ordering state if you have had any of our $1.00 packages 
and how many. Then we can know about what assortment 
you already have, and can pretty surely supply you such as 
you have never yet had. 

This year we will put up $1.00 packages such as ordinarily 
would amount to $2.00 purchased elsewhere: and we will prepay 
postage. We aim to do all in our power for the spiritual 
strengthening and encouragement of the Lord's flock. These 
prices are open to all. 



R2881 : page 307 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



ECCLESIASTICAL FEDERATION. 



THE EVIDENCES looking toward a federation 

of the various Christian sects are multiplying; 

—city federations, county federations, and state federations 

are announced from time to time in 

the daily press, and thus the way is being prepared, 

the idea is being hatched. In England the movement 

seems fully as far advanced as here; there the Church 

of England is the preponderating power, and, as the 

Scriptures indicate, will have much to do with effecting 

the union whenever it comes. 

The Protestant Episcopal Church has always 
held aloof from other Protestant bodies; claiming (as 
do the Catholics) that there can be no true and authorized 
ministers competent and authorized to 
preach the Gospel without Episcopal ordination;— that 
all others are fraudulent pretenders. They are willing 
to fellowship as "clergymen" any Protestant ministers 
of good character who will submit to re-ordination 
at the hands of an Episcopal bishop, but no 



others. 

In the light of these facts the following cablegram 
will be read with interest:— 

"WAITS ON ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY." 

ENGLISH ARCHBISHOP HESITATES IN SENDING 
DELEGATES. 

"London, August 29.— Will the Archbishop of 
Canterbury, officially or otherwise, send a representative 
to the Ecumenical Methodist conference which 
opens Wednesday? This question, according to 
Bishop J. W. Hartzell, is attracting the attention of 

R2882 : page 307 

many of the delegates who are in London to attend 
this most important church meeting. 

"The question is important," said the bishop, "because 
of the meaning which the outside world will 
place on the archbishop of Canterbury's action. Invitations 
were extended to all the churches to attend. 
Acceptances have been received from the Baptists, 
Congregationalists, Presbyterians and the Salvation 
Army. The primate of all England, alone, has not 
been heard from. We anticipate that the conference 
will have an important bearing upon the future growth 
of the church. It ought to tend to increase fraternity, 
dissipate the remnants of antagonism and organize 
into unions the smaller bodies of the different 
continents. The aggressive propagation of Methodism 
will be carefully considered by the gathering." 

The conference will sit for 12 days, and Bishop 
C. M. Galloway will preach the opening sermon. 
The American and Canadian delegates, who are here 
to attend the conference, number 300, while the English 
delegates number 200. Chile, Brazil and Mexico 
are represented in the conference for the first time. 

On September 5th, the Archbishop of Canterbury 
replied to the invitation to the effect that he 
hoped soon to see all Methodists united to the Episcopal 
Church. The Conference refused to take any 
notice of the reply, or even to permit it to be read in 
conference; the reason assigned being that the Archbishop 
had ignored the Council in toto, in that he addressed 
his reply not to it, but to a newspaper editor. 
No doubt this was intentional— the Archbishop's position 
is such that to address the Council would be to 
recognize Methodism as "branch" of the Church of 
Christ, a thing which Episcopalianism has never yet 
done officially. However, this may raise a point to notice 
the settlement of which will solve the federation 
problem. 



SCIENTISTS DUPED BY CLEVER TRICK PLAYED YEARS AGO. 



MYSTERY OF FAMOUS PLIOCENE SKULL CLEARED BY 
PREACHER'S CONFESSION-BURIED AS A HOAX. 

Los Angeles, CaL, Aug. l.-The Rev. W. H. 
Dyer, an Episcopal clergyman of this city has confessed 
that the celebrated mystery of the human skull 
found in a gold mine in Calaveras County, CaL, in 
1866, about which antiquarians have wrangled for 35 
years and which inspired Bret Harte's poem, "To 

R2882 : page 308 

the Pliocene Skull," was buried as a joke to puzzle 
the men of science. Dyer says he was one of a 
coterie of jokers who knew of the scheme and who 
were greatly astonished at the noise it made in the 
scientific world. According to the story, R. C. Scribner, 
who kept a store in the camp, now Los Angeles, 
got an old Indian skull, went to the bottom of the 
shaft while the miners were away and buried the skull 
deep in the auriferous gravel. It was soon found and 
he assisted in having it sent on East to be submitted 
to geologists and authorities on the birth of the human 
species. 

The result of the examination of the skull at 
Harvard University caused a great stir in the scientific 
world. The problem it presented was taken up 
by the Government, through the geological survey, 
and all the scientific publications gave columns of 
space to the speculations of the scholars. 

Bret Harte declined to regard the discovery as a 
serious matter, and wrote the famous poem ridiculing 
the craze it had caused. 

Scientists deserve our pity if not our sympathy. 
They have established scores of theories relative to 
the formation of the earth and of man upon it; and 
of course reject totally the Bible account of the creation 
of Adam in God's image six thousand years ago. 
They are on another track; they will read only the 
rocks, etc., and from them will get the truth. And 
they will accept as truth only such things as agree 
with their preconceived opinion, viz., that God did 
not create man in his own image— that he was evolved 
from a monkey by a "law of nature" which operates 
whether there is a Creator or overseer or not; 
and they greatly doubt if there is a personal God, and 
of course there could not be an impersonal one. 

God's people need continually to remember the 
Bible's testimony, that although all the upward tendencies 
operating in the world to-day are of God and 
through more or less godly channels, yet "The world 



by wisdom knows not God." "The ox knoweth his 
owner, and the ass her master's crib,"— but the natural 
man, if a "scientist," seems to know not his 
Creator. His self-confidence hinders his seeing 
the truth. Only "the meek will he guide in judgment 
and teach his way"— "the wise are taken [entrapped] 
in their own craftiness"— they are too wise to learn, 
too great to be "taught of God" through his word. 
Psa. 25:9; 1 Cor. 3:19. 

The finding of an old bone some time ago created 
quite a stir. It was surely a proof of pre-adamite 
man— so gullible do scientists become in their search 
for the proofs to contradict the Bible. Of course a 
scientist with keen imagination could allow for certain 
abrasions and erosions, and could proceed to 
make an entire anatomy to conjecturally fit with the 
wonderful bone. The matter was quickly dropped 
afterward when the explanation came that it was 
found in a long abandoned wooden sewer leading 
from a butcher's place, and that it was the bone of an 
old sheep. 

Likewise the finding of the skull above referred to 
was "wonderful!" Its owner must have lived thousands, 
if not millions of years before Adam's day; and 
this skull found embedded in the gravel of the Pliocene 
division of the Tertiary Period was absolute proof 
sufficient to tickle scientists. Surely if these great 
men could and would search as diligently and reason 
as astutely to uphold and corroborate the Bible's simple 
statements, they would be taught of God. 

But their school will open by and by— during the 
Millennial reign of Christ and the church, who will be 
their instructors. Mark the great teacher's words: 
"I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, 
that thou hast hid these things from the wise and 
prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes: even 
so Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight." Let 
us, as the Apostle urges, "humble ourselves under the 
mighty hand of God that he may exalt us in due 
time. "-Luke 10:21; 1 Pet. 5:6. 

THE JEWS AND THEIR PROSPECTS. 



Mr. Zangwill, a Jewish writer of note, forecasts 
the future of fleshly Israel in considerable harmony 
with the prophetic delineation; but he fails utterly to 
recognize the divine power which, operating in and 
with Messiah's Kingdom, shall take hold of "Jacob" 
and lift up that people and use them as beacon-lights 
for the world. "Thus all Israel shall be delivered 
[from blindness], as it is written: There shall come 
out of Zion the Deliverer [the Christ— Jesus the head 
and the church his body] and shall turn away ungodliness 
from Jacob. For this is my covenant unto 



them when I shall take away their sins. ...For 
God hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he 
might have mercy upon all."— Rom. 11:26-32. 

Mr. Zangwill says in part:— 

"I am not a prophet with a definite vision of the 
future of the Jews. No man can forecast the precise 
directions their activity will take in the twentieth century. 
I can only point out what the position of the 
Jews has been for the last nineteen centuries and 
some powerful forces which have just arisen and 
which will undoubtedly mold them during the present 
century. 

"One thing seems increasingly probable— that 
the Jews will return in increasing numbers to Palestine, 
their old and never-forgotten home. By the year 
2000 A.D. I don't see why there shouldn't be 2,000,000 
Jews inhabiting the land, transforming it into a 
garden of beauty and fertility and supplying it with 
harbors and railways, with a government of their 
own, which will be the model government of the 
world. I am firmly convinced that the mission of 
the Jews is this: To be a people set on a hill— Zion's 
Hill— whose social, political, agricultural and religious 
condition will be the moral beacon light of the 
world. From the laws of that community other nations 
will learn to govern wisely. From her social 
condition other nations will learn the science of sociology. 
From her spiritual supremacy other nations 
will learn the real meaning of religion. In 
short, I believe the hope of humanity lies in the development 
of the Jewish race after its return to 
Palestine. 

"From the time of Christ until about this generation 
the outside world knew practically nothing of 
the life and work of the Jews. For long centuries the 
Jew was persecuted by Christian and Pagan in every 
country, and this very fact led to the preservation of 

R2883 : page 309 

his individuality. Frowned upon everywhere, the 
Jews grew closer to one another, intermarried among 
themselves, and had comparatively little intercourse 
with the outside world. And this was their salvation. 
"Recently, however, the absolute freedom granted 
them in almost all civilized countries has tended to 
destroy their identity as a race. They are no longer 
bound to one another by the strongest ties in the 
world— those of persecution— but have mingled with 
the general community, and the Jew is to-day seeking 
his own interests, financial or social, largely forgetful 
of his fellow Jews. The common idea that all 
Jews work unselfishly for each other is no longer 
true. They have imbibed the paganism of your so-called 
Christian nations, and every man is trying to 
get the better of the other. Five years ago this condition 



was absolutely alarming. It appeared as 
though the Jewish race would shortly become merged 
with other races and disappear altogether, after its 
wonderful preservation during 3,000 years. 

"My hopes for the race lie largely in the Zionist 
movement, whether in its direct or indirect effects. 
Under the enthusiastic guidance of Dr. Herzl, it is 
making steady progress. Its first object is to raise 
sufficient money to obtain the Land of Palestine from 
the Sultan, under whose suzerainty the movement 
would be carried out. Already about a million dollars 
has been contributed to this fund, and every city 
and almost every village in the world has its band of 
enthusiastic Zionists. 

"This money has not been contributed by the 
rich Jews generally, but by the poorer classes of Jews. 
The rich take little interest in the scheme. They are 
often men who have the bent for mere money-making 
and have largely lost their patriotism. They stand 
at the top of the social ladder in the world's chief centers 
of activity; their position is secure; they have 
nothing to gain by reclaiming Palestine, and seem to 
care little for the plan. This, however, does not in 
the least dampen the enthusiasm of the ardent Zionists. 
Money is fast coming in from every quarter of 
the globe, and it is believed that in a few years there 
will be a sufficient sum to accomplish our desires. 
Then, having gained possession of the land, we should 
not be so foolish as to rush great numbers of uneducated, 
unskilled Jews into the country, but would use 
Jewish shrewdness in sending skilled agriculturists, 
carpenters, merchants and men and women generally 
who, under the guidance of practical idealists, would 
form a sound basis of the model community that is to 
be. 

"Finally, I think the world is daily coming round 
to the Jewish conception of life. Christianity has 
proved a failure. Look at the Christian nations to-day 
warring against one another like savages. What 
a spectacle is presented by the allied armies in China! 
The battle of the future is between the old Judaism 
and the new paganism. A sense of justice is what 
the world needs to-day— such justice as was preached 
and foretold by the great Jewish prophets; and I believe 
it will be left to the Jewish race— whether as a 
model community in Palestine or as a spiritual army 
scattered over the world— to supply this need and to 
make justice supreme in the hearts of men." 

HATRED AGAINST THE JEWS IN GREAT BRITAIN. 



In every nation of Europe except Great Britain 
the Jews have suffered persecution, and labor under 
more or less restriction of privileges. As we have already 



pointed out from the Scriptures, fleshly Israel 
is to suffer yet more— "the time of Jacob's trouble" 
is to last up to the very close of the "day of 
vengeance" when they shall be delivered by the setting 
up of the Kingdom. This persecution, we believe, 
will extend to all nations— our own included— 
and will tend to still further cause the Jews to long 
for the Land of Promise and the good things foretold 
for them under Messiah's Kingdom. We quote 
a cablegram as follows:— 

"London.— Anti-semitism is on the verge of 
open and widespread outbreak in England, according 
to Isaac Suwalsky, editor of 'The Jew,' an influential 
East End Yiddish newspaper. He asserts that daily 
attacks are made on poor Jews in the streets of the 
Whitechapel district, and that symptoms of hatred 
toward the Jews exist even among the highest political 
and social classes in the kingdom. 

"He says that unless this feeling is promptly and 
forcibly bridled Judaism in Great Britain is threatened 
with persecution outrivaling anything in Russia, 
France, Austria or Germany. 

RACIAL PREJUDICE PLAIN. 

"The symptoms to which the editor refers have 
become alarmingly common in the London Ghetto. 
During the last three months the Whitechapel police 
courts have been regularly called upon to punish 
persons for assaults on Jewish peddlers and householders. 
Several 'Jew hunts' have lately occurred 
on the highways in this district. Testimony in most 
of the cases proved that racial prejudice was the sole 
cause of attack, the victims being industrious, law-abiding 
residents, frequently inoffensive youths. 

"When the outbreaks fail to take the form of injury 
or robbery the persecution assumes a terrorizing 
character. The policemen who guard the crossings 
are kept busy rebuking truck drivers and 'busmen 
guilty of hounding Jews with brutal taunts and of 
making deliberate attempts to run them down. 

BOTH PARTIES ACCUSED. 

"Anti-semitism is aggressively intrenched in the 
United Kingdom. It reaches from the slums to the 
Whitechapel office of the prime minister. Both political 
parties are deliberately pledged to it. The conservatives 
espouse it under the guise of immigration 
reform. The liberals employ it when they persistently 
and venomously charge that the Boer war is being 
waged at the behest of Hebrew capitalists. Jewish 
candidates belonging to both political parties in all 
parts of London were fought throughout the late 
general election by means of placards petitioning the 
people, 'Don't elect a Jew.' 



'"When anti-semitism gains full momentum in 
England there will be sad hours for the Jews in this 
country, where liberty of action and speech are so 
pronounced that the passions of the populace can 
only be controlled with difficulty. 

R2883 : page 310 

SENTIMENT OF RICH AND POOR. 



"There is at present more hatred of Jews in the 
West End of London than in the East End. The 
roughs of Whitechapel are Jew baiters for amusement. 
The cultured people of Downing street and 
Park Lane are anti-semites by conviction. 

'"Down here the Jews are suffering from the 
country's excessive patriotism. Because most of us 
wear beards we are called 'Kruger' by the Hooligans 
of the neighborhood. I am ashamed to confess that 
some highly placed personages of our own faith are 
largely responsible for the coming crusade. They 
are so wrapped up in the pursuit of titles that they 
have little time for and less interest in the amelioration 
of the condition of their pauperized brethren in 
the East End. 

'"There has as yet been no bloodshed in Whitechapel 
on account of the race animosities inspired at 
present by distinguished supporters. However, anti-semitism 
in London may soon reach that stage.'" 

TO ABOLISH PRAYER MEETINGS. 



The pastors of the Christian churches of Kansas 
City, at a meeting recently, adopted a resolution, 
declaring it to be their sense that the mid-week prayer 
meeting, as it is conducted in a majority of Protestant 
churches, has outlived its usefulness, and appointed a 
committee to prepare and report a program for such 
meetings which shall be more modern in its character 
and better calculated to meet the needs of present day 
church people. 

Dr. George H. Combs, pastor of the Prospect 
Avenue Christian Church, who brought the subject 
up, and at whose suggestion the committee was appointed, 
declared that he thought the age had outgrown 
the old-fashioned prayer meeting. He said: 
"The prayer meeting was perfectly adapted to the 
needs of the time which brought it into existence, but 
that time has long been past. The best men's lives 
have now become so full of other things that they 
cannot be induced to come out and spend an evening 
in prayer." 



No minister who took part in the discussion that 
followed this somewhat advanced statement dissented 
from any part of it. The remarks of each indicated 
that he had only been waiting for an opportune moment 
to so express himself. 

The above is a significant sign of the times. The 
Christian that neglects prayer cannot live the 
Christian life— cannot "walk as He walked"— the narrow 
way to glory, honor, and immortality. And 
congregations composed of praying people could 
neither desire nor afford to abandon prayer meetings, 
which perhaps more than any other kind of meetings 
have been blessed of God to the keeping alive of the 
spiritual few among the cold and dead nominal professors 
of Babylon for lo these many years. 

Yet it is a good movement— it will work out 
blessings for those who really love the Lord; for it 
will open their eyes to the deadness of Babylon and 
lead them to give closer ear to the Lord's message, 
"Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers 
of her sins and receive not of her plagues"— soon to 
come in a great time of trouble.— Rev. 18:4. 

On the contrary we urge that amongst those 
who read this journal and are interested in the harvest 
message, prayer and testimony be given an increasingly 
prominent place— such as it held in the 
primitive church. The injunction to watch and pray 
lest ye enter into temptation, is applicable to each individual 
Christian, but specially applicable to them as 
a company, as a church, as we are entering the hour 
of temptation that shall test all that dwell upon the 
whole earth.— Rev. 3:10. 

The Allegheny church has six such meetings 
every Wednesday evening in the homes of the friends 
in different parts; and it is specially noticeable that 
those who love and attend these meetings, while probably 
no less tempted and tried than others, are much 

R2884: page 310 

less likely to fall into the snares of the Adversary than 
those who neglect them. Usually at least four prayers 
are offered and most of the time devoted to hearing 
testimonies respecting the Lord's providences 
and their experiences during the week (up to date 
testimonies) especially along the lines of the previous 
Sunday afternoon's discourse at Bible House chapel. 
These are so profitable that we wish all might enjoy 
them. They are open to all, but though none are 
urged, nearly all take part and thus both give and receive 
a blessing. 

Recently we have adopted the plan of having one 
meeting each month devoted almost exclusively to 
prayer and praise— voluntary prayers being called for 
by the leader, two at a time, until all present have had 
full opportunity to address the throne of grace— interspersed 



with praise, and with opportunity for two 

or three short testimonies in the middle of the meeting. 

The results are excellent. Whoever addresses 

the Lord from a sincere heart is sure to have a 

blessing. 

Brethren, let us watch and pray, in the congregations 
of the saints and in private, more zealously 
than ever, as we approach the dark hour of earth's 
great trial. No other ground is safe. This has the Master's 
approval and example. 



R2890 : page 310 

THE COSTLY PEARL. 



The pearl of greatest price I sought. 

Alas! I sought, but found it not. 

The hours of work and sleep were wasted, 
The fruits of pleasure passed untasted, 
And still with eager zeal I hasted, 

The charms of fortune to entice 

With some new gift or sacrifice. 

Until, one sad, discouraged day, 
A spirit, meek and quiet, lay 

Upon my brow a hand restraining, 
It smoothed away my lips complaining, 
Upon my brow a hand restraining; 
And while I joyed in perfect rest, 
I held the gem, of all the best. 

R. B. Henninges. 



R2884: page 311 

CLEVELAND CONVENTION ECHOES. 



EVEN AT the risk of seeming repetition we must 
say that this last General Convention quite 
surpassed all of its predecessors;— in numbers, interest 
and enthusiasm. 

About 500 WATCH TOWER readers met, many for 
the first time, and the feast of soul was delightful. 
Nine of the "Pilgrim" brethren were present and, with 
the Editor of this journal, delivered most of the fifteen 
addresses, to most attentive hearers. The Convention 
was in constant session from 8 A.M. to 10 P.M., except 
intermissions for refreshments, from Thursday 
noon, Sept. 12, to Sunday night, Sept. 15. It closed 



with a love-feast at which seven Pilgrims and five brethren 
representing the Cleveland church in one hand presented 
a broken loaf, shared symbolically, while with 
the other they received and gave parting greetings as 
the congregation filed past them. 

It was good to be there. Those present will probably 
never forget its spiritual joys and uplifts. The 
principal attendance was at the Sunday afternoon session, 
when some one who counted reported 823 in attendance. 
The next largest attendance was on Saturday 
at 3 P.M., when after a discourse on baptism— its 
proper form and real significance— twenty-five brethren 
and forty-one sisters (total 66) symbolized full consecration 
by water immersion;— the ages of the participants 
ranging from 22 to 70 years. The occasion 
was a deeply impressive one, both to participants and 
witnesses. 

Those in attendance came from every quarter;— 
from Nova Scotia, Ontario and Montana on the north, 
to Florida, Tennessee and Arkansas on the south, and 
especially from the intermediate States— about sixteen 
in all being represented. 

A colporteurs' meeting showed 23 in attendance, 
while about 30 new ones expressed the intention of 
giving all, or a portion of their time hereafter to colporteuring, 
and took lessons from expert brethren and 
sisters in an ante-room. This is one of the features 
of this harvest work which the Lord has been pleased 
to specially bless in leading his people out of darkness 
into his marvelous light. The meeting indicated a 
renewed zeal along this line of the service. Others 
may be contemplating such service and we invite correspondence 
respecting methods and territory; say 
what territory you would prefer. 

Our hope is that the considerable expense entailed 
by such conventions (railway fare, etc.) will 
be more than compensated for in the spiritual blessings 
which will surely go with those in attendance to their 
neighborhoods, and especially to the various smaller 
congregations of the saints. May the Lord add his 
blessing to the efforts put forth by the Cleveland 
Church and by all in attendance. 



R2884: page 311 

THE IMPENDING INDUSTRIAL CRISIS. 



JOHN SWINTON, widely known as a writer upon 
labor conditions and prospects, sums up his recent 
cogitations in an article in the New York Herald. 
We make some quotations that will be of interest to 
all who have read Millennial Dawn Vol. IV. He says, 



under the above caption:— 

"We may have stormy times in our country before 
the twentieth century has gone far. We may 
see some apocalyptic illustrations of the workings 
of that industrial Revolution which is now transforming 
our body politic into "something new and 
strange" and which is bringing about organic changes 
in our Republic, our Commonwealth, and our social 
system, by means both visible and invisible, 
through agencies containing the 'promise and potency' 
of a kind of development not to be foreseen. We 
may yet see that gigantic modern power called Capital 
and those immeasurable latter day forces 
grouped under the name of Labor engaged in performances 
of large interest and concern to the American 
people. 

"Already there are signs and omens not to be 
disregarded, and more of them are coming in sight 
all the time, as we whirl along. 

"There are other things than the great labor revolts 
of our time, so numerous, so continuous, so disquieting 
and so portentous, which prompt me to 
write these words. 

"Those of the readers of the Herald who can recall 
the years that immediately preceded the election 
of Mr. Lincoln will be able here to make comparisons 
of a suggestive character. They do not 
need to be told in how far the passions, the contentions 
and the menaces of that portentous period resemble 
those that have come into existence of late 
years through the discord between the great wielders 
of capital and the millions of workers for wages, and 
through the ceaseless strain of both parties in the 
strenuous struggle. As forty years ago each party 
declared that it would 'never submit or yield,' so now 
again the defiant words are heard in the contentious 
camps. 

"But I shall refrain from further suggestions in 
this line, as I recall the passions and the events that 
stirred our country forty or more years ago and that 
led up to the other years, never to be forgotten. Let 
warning be taken while yet it may. And let it be 
said of the present writer in days to come that he was 
an 'alarmist' at the opening of the twentieth century, 
as was another man in the year 1859, when he 
wrote 'The Impending Crisis,' a crisis for slavery 
which came so unexpectedly in less than two years 
after Mr. Helper's book was printed. 

"The magnitude of the labor revolts that have 
broken out within a year has never been paralleled 
in any other time or country. I need not speak of 
those of the many building trades, the coal miners, 
the machinists, the San Francisco unions, the factory 
hands, the clothiers, the steel workers, or a hundred 
lesser industries. By the estimate of an expert, 
who has kept count as nearly as possible, it would 



seem that not far from a million wage workers have 
'gone on strike' during the last twelve-month; and 

R2884: page 312 

this, of course, signifies that a much greater number 
of other people have been disturbed or have suffered 
in consequence. 

"No wonder that a foreign writer, in reviewing 
the situation, gives his essay such a headline as 'The 
Industrial Anarchy in the United States.' The importance, 
the gravity, the passionateness and the significance 
of some of the strikes have been very great. 
They have affected business, trade, Wall street, the 
markets, politics, and the daily life and welfare of 
large masses of our people. They have brought 
heavy losses to many of the parties concerned in 
them; they have rent many schemes and crippled 
many enterprises; they have caused bankruptcies; 
they have been the source of woes unnumbered; they 
have wrecked lives and broken hearts; have sent 
men and women to the poorhouse, the madhouse 
and the graveyard.... 

"Notwithstanding the magnitude and the multitude 
of the convulsing strikes, it is altogether likely 
that they will become yet greater, more numerous 
and more convulsing as the industrial and financial 
powers advance in their development. The forces 
now in operation by which they are promoted are 
very sure to increase in strength and momentum as 
time goes on. A generation ago but a few hundred 
men used to take part in a strike; some time afterward 
thousands of men would go out on strike; nowadays 
hundreds of thousands of men join in a strike, 
and, moreover, a score of different trades in as many 
States sometimes 'back up' one trade during a strike, 
while the great body of organized workers sympathize 
with the strikers, even if they do not always 
enter into a 'sympathetic strike.' Looking at the 

R2885 : page 312 

growth of labor unionism everywhere, and in nearly 

all industries, it is not difficult to make forecasts, applicable 

to the years that are not far off. 

"The domination of unlicensed capitalism and 
the existence of labor unionism are at stake in these 
contests. 

"It is to be remarked here that the many and 
great strikes of recent times have been almost wholly 
free from violence or riotous conduct on the part of 
the workmen, though the militia have sometimes 
been called out in the name of the law, as at Buffalo 
and Troy. The strikes may be properly characterized 
as 'peaceful revolts.' Passion has run high in 
some cases at times, but self-restraint has kept it 



within safe bounds. Every organization, when its 

members go on strike, always declares that its desire 

is to secure success in a peaceful and orderly 

manner; and there can be no doubt that this desire 

is sincere, for its sincerity has been made manifest 

by circumstances beyond enumeration. Any suggestion 

of offering resistance to law is sure to be denounced, 

as are any unlawful means of gaining an 

object. Were this otherwise the formidable labor revolts 

of our day would be a terror indeed. 

MOMENTOUS PROJECT OF MEN ARMING. 

"A short time ago, however, when the great 
strike of the steel workers got under headway, the 
Herald startled the country by printing a despatch 
from West Virginia that the first military company 
ever formed by a labor union had been organized at 
Wheeling by Crescent Lodge, Amalgamated Association. 
Here, at last, it looked as if there were occasion 
for both alarm and amazement. One seemed 
to catch sight of armed and uniformed hordes of steel 
workers in full array, stalwart men, twice a hundred 
thousand of them, three times stronger than the regular 
army of the United States. It is true that the 
report, after telling that the labor soldiers were 'not 
to be in any way under the control of the State,' said 
that they were organized only for self-defence and the 
protection of property; but that could hardly be regarded 
as consoling by those people who hold their 
property under the protection of the State which the 
Amalgamated Military Company had refused to recognize. 
There seemed to be something like amalgamated 
humor in the Crescent report from Wheeling. 
But soon after the appearance of the first despatch 
the Herald printed another, which gave the 
information that, on account of the excitement created 
by the first report, Crescent Lodge had resolved 
to postpone the organization of the military company 
till the steel strike was ended. 

"The interest in the original report, however, 
has not been diminished, for it is now known that the 
Crescent Lodge, at Wheeling, is not the only one 
that has taken the subject under consideration, and 
that other labor organizations in different parts of 
the country have done likewise. They claim that the 
'right of the people to keep and bear arms' is guaranteed 
by the constitution, and that, as the working-men 
are the 'bone and sinew of the country,' the constitutional 
right cannot be denied to them. 

"It would be foolishness to ignore such things, 
since the publication of the startling Wheeling despatch 
in the Herald. The news, however, does not 
convey a menace to any man's rights. It is quite 
undisturbing; not at all dangerous in a democratic 
republic. 



"The members of workingmen's organizations 
are often trained and disciplined to some extent, after 
the manner of the militia, as may be seen on Labor 
Day. They drill for their parades; they are proud 
of their appearance on the march; they follow their 
flags; they pay honor to the union that makes the 
best show, and they are also to have experience in 
athletic exercises. 

"At this point it may be mentioned that a good 
number of trade unions, especially of those in the 
Western States, have recently prohibited their members 
from joining the regular State militia, under pain 
of expulsion, and the reason given for this action is 
that the State troops are used 'in the interest of capitalism,' 
against the labor element, and in the suppression 
of justifiable strikes. It is a fact, nevertheless, 
that, at least in Pennsylvania and Illinois, the 
State militia have, on several occasions, suffered from 
the charge of being unduly sympathetic with labor 
in the case of a strike.... 

"Before closing my remarks, I would make note 
of one thing that undoubtedly has an influence in 
disturbing the mind of the commonalty in these 
times. I refer to the oft repeated public reports of 

R2885 : page 313 

the stupendous incomes of certain great trusts, flamboyant 

millionaires, banking institutions, big corporations, 

stock speculators, market riggers and indescribables. 

To go no further back than the current 

month, we have had in August such figures of the 

dividends of the Standard Oil Company, and the revenues 

of the billion dollar Steel Trust, and the 'earnings' 

of at least one of our banks, and the incomes 

of some of our heavy investors or operators; such 

figures, I repeat, as might well 'make humanity stagger' 

and cause Croesus to take to the woods. 

"To the ordinary mind, these reports, even when 
trustworthy or official, are inexplicable, incomprehensible 
and bewildering. Never before, in all time, 
did the golden stream, the millions and the billions, 
roll so rapidly as now, rolling into treasuries so vast 
that they could not be compassed in a day's march by 
all the labor unions in America. The ordinary mind 
is apt to become excited in reading about them every 
day, and to ask why it is necessary to cut down anybody's 
wages, even if he gets two or three dollars a 
day, and joins a union to keep them up. 

"The news of the latest dividend of the billion 
dollar Trust was printed simultaneously with other 
news of strikes, more strikes, and yet other strikes. 
Can any one be surprised that even thoughtless people 
are led to indulge in thinking? 

"I am asked to make a guess as to the outcome 
of all these big passionate and ominous labor revolts, 



which are constantly growing in magnitude, momentum 

and force. I can't do it. I cannot see how they 

are to be prevented or put down without a change of 

circumstances so great as to be unthinkable, or without 

a change in bodies of men who are beyond reason, 

or without some kind of change in the relation 

between capital and labor. It is possible that there 

may be something in the theory of 'spontaneous generation,' 

and that it will work out all right in the end, 

regardless of the lesser movements of either of the 

belligerents. I can't tell, nor can Mr. Morgan. It 

would certainly be bad business to use the regular 

army or the State militia against masses of men striking 

for life. It would certainly be poor policy to carry 

'government by injunction' further than it can be 

enforced. It is surely folly to abuse and threaten organized 

labor in the interest of organized capital at 

periods of storm and stress consequent upon an industrial 

and social transformation, when our country 

is passing out of the old into the new and the 

unknown." 



R2885 : page 313 

IN THE SCHOOL OF ADVERSITY. 

--GEN. 39:20-40: 15.-OCT. 13.- 

"For God was with Joseph, and showed him mercy." 

AS THE FAVORED child of his beloved wife, 

Rachel, Joseph was no doubt esteemed by his 

father as the special inheritor of the Abrahamic 

promises. He remembered his own experiences, 

and how the divine favor had come to him, making 

him an heir of that promise; and doubtless he had, to 

a greater or less extent, communicated these hopes 

and promises to all of his sons, and especially to Joseph, 

his favored one. Joseph's dreams, which so angered 

his brethren, must have appealed to him and to 

his father as rather an intimation on God's part of his 

pre-eminence. It must therefore have caused great 

disappointment and chagrin to Joseph, first to find 

himself in the pit, and his strong cryings and tears unheard 

both by his brethren and the Lord. It must 

have been a source of bitter disappointment and chagrin 

when he found himself sold to the Ishmaelites, 

to be a slave. But however disappointing these circumstances 

we can see that they were profitable experiences, 

tending to develop in him a proper character, 

if rightly accepted— to develop patience, obedience, 

trust. 

There are good lessons in Joseph's experiences 
for all who are hoping to be heirs of the spiritual features 



of this same Abrahamic covenant,— joint-heirs 

with Jesus Christ our Lord. (Gal. 3:29.) The promise 

is sure, and the privilege of inheriting is ours; but in 

order that we may be prepared for that service and its 

responsibilities it is needful that we should learn lessons 

of humility, patience, faith, endurance. Our 

Lord, the head of this "Seed of Abraham," endured 

such contradiction of sinners, and trials and testings, 

and learned obedience to the Father's will even unto 

death,— although he was perfect, holy, harmless, undefiled, 

separate from sinners. Much more does it 

seem necessary that we who are called to be "members 

of his body" should pass through severe testings 

and trials, to be fitted and prepared for the glory that 

shall follow. 

Arrived in Egypt, the Lord's blessing was upon 
Joseph in a remarkable manner, in that he was sold 

R2886 : page 313 

as a slave to a wealthy master. We have little insight 
into Joseph's previous history, but apparently he 
was a remarkable boy when he entered Potiphar's 
house at seventeen years of age. His manliness and 
sedateness and faithfulness to duty and quick intelligence 
were a good inheritance from his father, who 
had earnestly desired his birth;— which was, indeed, 
in answer to prayer. He evidently inherited considerable 
of his father's faith, benevolence and executive 
ability, and as a result rose rapidly in Potiphar's 
house to a position of great responsibility, to have 
charge over all his master's affairs. We cannot doubt 
that the boy's mind frequently reverted to his father 
and brethren, and his dreams, and to the Abrahamic 
covenant. Unquestionably he believed in those 
promises, and doubtless often wondered how they 
would be fulfilled,— what would be the leadings of 
divine providence in his affairs. His faith in God, 
his trust in the promises, served to separate him from 
the evil influences connected with that sudden transfer 
of his life from the pasture fields of Canaan to the 
busy scenes and luxuries and pleasures and sins of 
one of the greatest cities in the world at that time, a 
capital of the most renowned nation in that day. 

So it is with every life; there is need of an ideal, of 
a hope, of a good ambition, to act as a ballast and to 
keep the life steady in the midst of the divers winds 

R2886 : page 314 

and currents of the present evil world. The boy or 

the girl who has had a proper training by godly parents, 

especially in respect to the hopes set before us 

in the gospel, has much advantage every way over 

youthful companions who have no specific object and 

motive in life, who lack the ballast of the divine promises, 



and are driven hither and thither by the changing 
winds of time, generally into folly and often into 
sin, in search of satisfaction, which all crave. Christian 
parents who have been derelict of duty toward 
their children cannot too quickly correct the fault and 
help them to settle their minds upon the only things 
that can bring them true peace and joy and satisfaction, 
and balance, in the storms of life. 

But if Joseph thought he had learned all the necessary 
lessons of experience, and that his course 
henceforth would be one of prosperity, he was mistaken. 
Divine providence had marked out for him 
a higher station than that of chief overseer of the 
household affairs and business of General Potiphar; 
and if his station was to be a higher one, likewise also 
he must receive further lessons in a still severer 
school, in order to be prepared for the still greater exaltation 
in due time. Suddenly, while evidently enjoying 
his master's confidence and his mistress' favor, calamity 
came upon him, and that through no fault of 
his own, but really because of his faithfulness to his 
master. He was falsely accused by Potiphar's spited 
wife. He was cast into prison; and this expression, 
"prison," meant and still means something entirely 
different in Egypt and all eastern countries from what 
it means in Europe and America. There prisons were 
dark, loathsome, terrible places; and prisoners were 
frequently horribly mistreated, bound in iron fetters, 
etc. That this was Joseph's treatment, at first, seems 
evident from a reference to the matter in Psalm 105: 18: 
"Whose feet they hurt with fetters; he was laid 
in iron." This must have been a severe trial to Joseph, 
a doubly bitter experience by reason of the 
hopes he had been entertaining respecting divine favor 
and future exaltation. 

And so it is with the spiritual heirs of the Abrahamic 
promises: sometimes, while in the discharge 
of duty to the best of our ability, and when apparently 
we have the Lord's blessing and favor upon us and 
our affairs in a most marked degree, suddenly trouble 
may arise, adversity come, the powers of darkness 
seem to triumph, and for the moment we may be apparently 
culprits in the judgment of our fellow-men, 
and apparently forsaken by divine providence. The 
only consolation in such conditions is that we have 
suffered wrongfully— "as deceivers, yet true." Such 
experiences, doubtless, are needful to us; for though 
we may sing:— 

"I would rather walk in the dark with God, 
Than go alone in the light," 
yet this might be but an empty boast unless we were 
put through the trying experiences which would develop 
such faith, such a trust, as would hold to the 
Lord's hand, and trust divine providence in the darkest 
hour. We are to learn to walk by faith, and not 
by sight, to trust our Lord where we cannot trace 



him. 

Joseph's faith evidently stood the test, and his 
nobility of character shone out even under those adverse 
conditions; and this became a sign to the master 
of the prison that the Lord was with Joseph, that 
he was a peculiarly exemplary and wise young man- 
now twenty-seven years old. The warden of the prison 
was anxious to have such a faithful servant to 
assist him in his work. Indeed, there is always room 
in this world for efficient men and women, and the 
most efficient are those in whom is the spirit of the 
Lord, and who have "the wisdom which cometh from 
above— first pure, then peaceable, easy to be entreated, 
full of mercy and good fruits." (James 3:17.) 
The prison keeper doubtless was actuated by selfish 
motives to favor Joseph and put him in charge of the 
prisoners. But no matter for this; it was the operation 
of divine providence, nevertheless, and not merely 
Joseph's abilities that secured for him the position. 
However, we are to note that those whom God specially 
favors, and specially uses, must have character. 
A rough diamond may not look better than an ordinary 
pebble, but it has something of firmness 
and purity about it that ordinary pebbles do not 
have, that justifies the cutting and polishing 
and ultimate mounting as a gem. So we are 
to remember that while all our blessings are 
of the Lord and through Christ, nevertheless we have 
something to do in the matter of "making our calling 
and election sure"; we must have the love, the devotion, 
the zeal for God and for righteousness; and not 
only must we have this character, but we must have 
the submission which will enable us to accept and 
profit by the various trials of faith and patience which 
divine providence sees proper to permit us to experience 
for the trimming and polishing of the jewel. 

Not only were Joseph's experiences as a slave 
and as a prisoner calculated to give him a sympathy 
for those in adversity, but additionally he was learning 
lessons of experience and wisdom, educational 
in their character, which would prepare him in time 
to stand before King Pharaoh and to be made his 
Prime Minister. Some of these experiences he gained 
in the prison, as related in this lesson. The prisoners 
at that time were not all culprits, but sometimes 
the subjects of the king's displeasure. Two such persons 
high in Pharaoh's household (the "butler" or 
cup-bearer to the king, being one of the highest officers 
in honor and trust, and the baker, the manager of 
the king's culinary department, and general steward 
of the household) were cast into the same prison with 
Joseph because of having in some manner offended 
the king; and as Joseph had by this time chief charge 
of the prisoners he must have come frequently and 
into intimate contact with these men, so well versed 
in the affairs of the kingdom. And under the circumstances 



they would undoubtedly be communicative to 
Joseph, as we may be sure he was receptive to all the 
information obtainable. They must have thought 
him a very different sort of prisoner from others of 
that time when he even noticed so small a matter as 
sadness upon their faces, and enquired considerately 
respecting the same. So all of the spiritual heirs of 
the Abrahamic promise, while passing through the 
trials and difficulties needful to their preparation and 
polishing for the future glory, must learn to be compassionate. 
"Blessed are the merciful; they shall obtain 
mercy." Their own experiences help to mollify 

R2886 : page 315 

their hearts, and make them tender-hearted toward 
all who are in trouble. All of the Lord's people should 
be peculiar in these respects— "full of mercy and good 
fruits." 

Joseph's expression of sympathy soon brought 
from the prisoners an explanation of their sadness— 
they had each dreamed on the previous night, and 
each was troubled, thinking that his dream foreboded 
evil. Joseph was blessed by the Lord with some intuitive 
understanding of dreams, and promptly gave 
their interpretation— one of the officers would in a 
short time be released, while the other would be executed; 
and having sympathized with the one who 
would suffer, and having congratulated the one who 
would be released, Joseph made request of the latter 
that in his coming days of prosperity he would remember 
him and his kindness, and if possible secure 
his release through the king's mercy. 

Joseph's two dreams, and now these two dreams 
of the butler and baker, and two subsequent dreams 
by Pharaoh, all give evidence of having been in some 
manner divinely inspired, and intended to exercise 
certain influences and to bring about certain results. 
In our accepting these for all that they were, we are 
not to be understood as endorsing the thought that 
every dream is of the Lord, or is to have a special 
prophetic or providential fulfilment. Quite to the contrary, 
we believe that the majority of dreams are mental 
fictions, the result frequently of disordered stomachs 
and of the brain being partly asleep and partly 
awake, producing often unreasonable and absurd images, 
without special meaning except as warnings for 
better care in respect to our eating. We may even 
go further than this, and say that we feel sure that 
there is still a third kind of dreams,— dreams of a still 

R2887 : page 315 

different origin— neither inspired by the Lord nor by 
indigestion, but by evil spirits, for the purpose of 
misleading the dreamer. To make sure that our 



dreams are not the inspiration of evil we must make 
sure that we are not the children of the Evil One, but 
that having renounced sin and fled for refuge to the 
hope set before us in the Gospel, we have, through 
the redemption that is in Christ Jesus our Lord, obtained 
adoption into the family of God, and thus obtained 
relationship to him and protection from the 
power of the Evil One, and his delusions as respects 
our affairs; and come under the gracious promise that 
"all things shall work together for good" to us because 
we love God and have been called according to 
his purpose. In the dreams mentioned in this connection 
we are to notice that those of the butler and 
baker and Pharaoh were not the dreams of God's 
people, but nevertheless were evidently inspired of 
him, and that the purposes of these dreams were not 
specially in the interest of the dreamers, but largely 
in the interest of Joseph. 

As respects the Lord's people of to-day, there is 
much less necessity for dreams than in olden times. 
We have the Word of God— God's testimony bearing 
upon every subject needful to us. This message is 
so complete that the Apostle could say that by it the 
man of God might be thoroughly furnished unto 
every good word and work. (2 Tim. 3:16,17.) This 
should not hinder us from recognizing a dream as 
from the Lord, provided it would stand the tests of 
the written Word— provided the dream was not in 
any sense in conflict with God's revelation in the 
Scriptures. If the dream be in conflict with the 
Scriptures we are to reject the dream. If we find it 
in harmony with the Scriptures we are to accept it 
because of that harmony, and merely allow it to draw 
our attention more particularly to the Scriptures with 
which it accords. But whether by dreams or walking 
by faith entirely, and not by sight or dreams in 
any particular, the true child of God, the heir of the 
spiritual promises to Abraham, is to look for, to expect, 
to find, to realize, more fully even than our 
Golden Text says of Joseph, that "the Lord was with 
him, and showed him mercy." If the Lord be with 
us and show mercy toward us, no matter how he may 
do this, we are to take his favor with grateful hearts, 
and to show forth the praises of him who hath called 
us out of darkness into his marvelous light, and who 
eventually will bring us out of the prison-house of 
death into the glories of the everlasting Kingdom, to 
joint-heirship with his Son. 



R2887 : page 315 

"FOR GOD WAS WITH HIM. 
GEN. 41:38-49.-OCT. 20. 



"Them that honor me, I will honor."— 1 Sam. 2:30. 

DIVINE FAVOR was the secret of Joseph's 
success, as it has been the secret of the success 
of all who have attained true greatness 
in the world. In previous ages true success was more 
or less identified with earthly prosperity, riches and 
power; but during this Gospel age— the spirit dispensation 
—true success and divine favor stand related to 
spiritual prosperity, attainments and usefulness, as 
exemplified in our Lord Jesus, in the Apostles, and 
in the less prominent servants of the Cross from their 
day until now. The principle is the same, though the 
mode of operation is different. Adversity is still the 
school in which the chief lessons in character-building 
are to be learned— in which the correct ideals of life 
are to be formed, and ultimately to be crystalized into 
fixed character. The story of Joseph's experiences, 
which in this lesson culminate in great advancement 
and blessing, illustrates the fact that God has to 
do not only with the shaping of national affairs, but 
also with the individual affairs of all who are "called 
according to his purpose," and who are seeking to 
live up to the requirements and conditions of that 
call. 

It was probably because Joseph had some basis 
of character that the Lord chose to use him to prepare 
the way for his family to come into Egypt, etc. 
And we may be sure that had he proven neglectful of 
the lessons and experiences through which he passed 
the Lord would have changed or modified his dealings 
accordingly. As it was, the Lord's favors and 
blessings were evidently bestowed upon a worthy 
character, which, so far as we may judge from the 
record, responded obediently and trustfully in every 
trial. That Joseph's faith in the Lord was the basis 

R2887 : page 316 

of his strength of character, fidelity to duty and to 
principle, there is no reason to question. Had he 
doubted the Lord's providence in his own case, as 
foreshadowed in his own dreams, he would have been 
inclined to say to his two princely prisoners, when 
they related their dreams, as recorded in the last lesson, 
that they should have no confidence in dreams, 
for he had proven their unreliableness to his own bitter 
chagrin, having dreamed of power and influence, 
and having received, instead, degradation, slavery, 
and imprisonment. But he evidently still believed 
in his dreams, still expected release in some manner, 
and believed that the Lord was overruling in his 
affairs. 

Such a trust and confidence in the Almighty 
Ruler, as our Heavenly Father, is still more appropriate 



in us, the spiritual heirs of the Abrahamic promise; 
because we have much advantage every way over 
Joseph and others of our predecessors, who were 
heirs of only the natural blessings. Those who lived 
before Christ, no matter how high their station, at the 
very most were members of the "house of servants," 
while we of this Gospel age are freely recognized of 
God as sons, members of the "house of sons," of 
which our Lord Jesus is the Head. The sons not only 
are granted, through the holy spirit, deeper and clearer 
insight into the divine plan, but much advantage 
every way over the house of servants and over the 
world in general. Yet as with Joseph and the typical 
throne of Egypt, it is not sufficient that we should be 
favored of God and called to joint-heirship in the 
Kingdom of earth; but it is necessary that we shall 
prove submissive and tractable under his disciplines 
and instructions; that we may be "meet for the inheritance 
of the saints in light." It is necessary especially 
that our faith should be strong, and to this end 
that it should be tried, that it may be to the praise 
of his glory who has called us out of darkness into his 
marvelous light. 

Joseph's confidence in his ultimate deliverance, 
and the fulfilment of God's promise, did not hinder 
him from doing all he could in a proper manner to 
effect his own deliverance. We notice how, after 
kindly treating the imprisoned butler, explaining his 
dream for him, and rejoicing with him in the prosperity 
intimated, he solicited that when the prince would 
again be in royal favor he would kindly remember 
that his comforter, Joseph, was still in prison, and if 
possible secure the royal pardon for him. It was 
proper that he should thus take reasonable steps toward 
his own liberty, and no doubt the two years 
longer that he remained in prison brought testings 
of his faith, of his trust in the Lord; for the butler 
seems to have forgotten him entirely when his prosperity 
returned. However, in all this, as we can now 
see, the Lord was caring for him. He was learning 
the lessons of patient endurance, of suffering for 
righteousness' sake, of faith in the Lord. Had he 
been released by royal decree and set at liberty, he 
might have gone back to hunt up his father and his 
brethren in Palestine; or he might have gotten immersed 
in business of some kind in Egypt; but under 
divine providence he was kept safely in prison, learning 
necessary lessons, until he was thirty years of age; 
and it was at this time that Pharaoh the king, having 
had two remarkable dreams, which seriously impressed 
themselves upon his mind, and having consulted 
the wise man of Egypt, could find no satisfactory solution 
for them. It was then that the butler bethought 
him of his own dream while in the prison, 
and of the wonderful young man there who had interpreted 
it so accurately, and whose kindness he had 



so quickly forgotten. Here was an opportunity of 
serving the king and serving his prisoner-friend; so 
he mentioned Joseph to Pharaoh in most complimentary 
terms. Thus we see illustrated the fact that 
kindnesses done to others, even though they seem to 
be quickly forgotten, may possibly return in blessing 
on our own heads later on, and be used of the Lord as 
channels of blessing. 

Pharaoh called for the prisoner, and the explanation 
of his dreams was so thoroughly satisfactory 
that he could not doubt their truthfulness, and corroborated 
by the testimony of the butler, he concluded 
that Joseph's ability as an interpreter resided in the 
fact that God was with him; that God was using him; 
and that in some manner or other the God who had 
given these dreams, and such an interpretation to so 
remarkable a young man, would be pleased to bless 
and to use his servant still further in connection with 
the precautions to be taken to avert the severity of 
the famine predicted. Pharaoh was possessed of autocratic 
power, and was at liberty to exalt whom he 
would to authority in his kingdom, and very wisely 
he concluded that none could be more safe to trust 
than the one whom the Almighty trusted and made 
his friend;— the one to whom and through whom he 
revealed the secrets of knowledge. There is a lesson 

R2888 : page 316 

of wisdom here for the Lord's people and for all— to 
the effect that although the Lord's people may not 
be perfect, it is safer, in an emergency, to trust those 
whom the Lord has trusted than any others. 

Joseph was at once made what we to-day would 
call Prime Minister of Egypt. He was the representative 
of Pharaoh, and as such had greater power 
than any monarch or Prime Minister of Europe, except 
the Czar of Russia and the Sultan of Turkey or 
their representatives. Many have inclined to doubt 
the possibility of such an exaltation from prison to 
second place in the throne; but such are not sufficiently 
familiar with the customs of eastern countries. 
A story, for instance, is told of the Sultan of Turkey, 
that one day having a severe toothache, and his usual 
dentist being absent from the city, his servants 
were sent to get any dentist they could find. They 
found one in comparative poverty, clothed him suitably 
to be presented to the Sultan, who, after he had 
performed the service, gave him the title and emoluments 
of Pasha, with both a city and a country residence, 
wealth, etc. Joseph's experience was not 
much more extreme than this. Doubtless, though 
the narrative does not show it, some explanations 
were offered respecting his previous character as 
Potiphar's servant, and as the trusty overseer in prison; 
satisfying Pharaoh's mind that he was an honorable 



man, worthy of confidence and trust, besides the 
attestations of divine favor. So there is likely to be 
in all of our affairs a time of change, in which, if we 
have been misunderstood and misrepresented, the 
truth will ultimately be brought forth, as the Lord 

R2888 : page 317 

declares, "He shall bring forth thy righteousness as 
the light, and thy judgment as the noonday." (Psa. 37:6.) 
We are to wait patiently for the Lord, and to 
take patiently such experiences as his providences 
may mark out for us, questioning not the wisdom, the 
love and the power of him with whom we have to do 
—of him who has promised that all things shall work 
for our everlasting welfare, if we abide faithful to him. 

Pharaoh's ring was a signet ring. In ancient 
times royal commands were not signed and sealed, 
as at present, but sealed only, the monarch having a 
peculiar seal which, wherever it went, was recognized 
as his, and to have counterfeited which would have 
been gross felony, punishable with death. It was this 
seal that was given to Joseph, that by and through 
the authority expressed in it he might issue such 
commands as he pleased in respect to the accumulation 
and building of granaries and storing in the same 
part of the surplus crop of the seven years of plenty. 

The honor and distinction of Joseph as next to 
Pharaoh seems well to illustrate the glorious exaltation 
of our Lord Jesus (in which the church, as his 
body, will soon share). Our Lord was tested, yet 
notwithstanding his faithfulness he went into the 
great prison-house of death; on the third day was delivered 
and raised up to power and great glory, and 
to be next to Jehovah God in the throne of the universe. 
The divine signet was given to him, and the 
proclamation was that "All men should honor the 
Son, even as they honor the Father," and that nothing 
should be done except at his command— that all power 
in heaven and in earth was committed unto him. 
(John 5:23; Matt. 28:18.) The faithful members of 
the elect body of Christ, the Church, the overcomers, 
must also be tried in various ways, and for righteousness' 
sake must suffer in the present time, be misunderstood, 
misrepresented, etc. These also must go 
into the prison-house of death, and be therein parts 
of three great days (thousand-year days), a part of 
the fifth thousand, all of the sixth thousand, and early 
in the seventh thousand years, or third thousand-year 
day, their resurrection is due; that they may become 
joint-heirs with Christ their Lord and Head, in the 
glorious things of the Kingdom. All this was well 
marked by the parts of three years which Joseph 
spent in prison, and his subsequent exaltation. 

The meaning of the new, Egyptian, name given 
to Joseph is rather in dispute, Canon Cooke claiming 



that it means "Bread of Life." It was appropriate 
in view of the great work which Joseph accomplished 
—the accumulation of a great store of wheat during 
the years of plenty,— sufficient to supply the necessities 
of the whole people during the seven years of 
famine. In this respect again we are reminded of 
Christ, who called himself the "Bread of Life." We 
are reminded, too, that it was through a work which 
he accomplished that the living bread is provided, for 
the whole world of mankind typified by the Egyptians; 
and that through him also the bread of life 
comes to his brethren, typified by Joseph's brethren 
and Jacob. As there was no life for all the people 
there except through Joseph and his work, and as 
Joseph did his work as the agent or representative of 
Pharaoh, so we see, as an anti-type, that there is no 
life for anyone of the world except in and through 
Christ Jesus our Lord, and that his work is accomplished 
in the name of, and as the representative of 
our Heavenly Father, the supreme ruler of the 
universe. 

Some are always ready to make objection and to 
find fault, rather than to make reasonable explanations, 
and some such object to Joseph's course in collecting 
one-fifth of the harvest of the plentiful years, 
and using it later on to strengthen the authority of 
Pharaoh and his control over all the people of his 
realm. We might say that even the one-fifth of the 
crop increase might not be considered an unreasonable 
tax, as it is the usual amount of rental charged 
in that vicinity to-day, and even more than that is 
frequently charged here and elsewhere in civilized 
countries; but we do not know that the one-fifth was 
exacted from the people as a tax. We do not know 
that Pharaoh's purse and bank account were not 
drawn upon for the purpose of this storage-wheat at 
the low price which would prevail during a period of 
such great surplus. We shall presume the latter, in 
the absence of any information to the contrary; and 
as for using this to strengthen the authority of the 
throne, and the contrariness of this from all democratic 
ideas, we have nothing to say except that it 
remains to be proven that a republican form of government 
is in all respects the best for fallen humanity. 
The Lord does not propose as a remedy for present 
ills, social, political, moral, etc., to introduce a Millennium 
along the lines of a republic; but he does propose 
its introduction along the lines of a monarchy— 
an absolute monarchy, in which his Son, who redeemed 
the world, will reign to bless the world by the exercise 
of autocratic power; for the subjugation of evil; 
for the bringing of all mankind into full appreciation 
of the principles of righteousness, and, so far as they 
will, into full accordance with the great supreme ruler, 
Jehovah— that they shall be his subjects forever, as 
the people of Egypt typically became the perpetual 



servants of Pharaoh. 

As Pharaoh gave to Joseph a wife, named 
Asenath (signifying "Favor"), and she became Joseph's 
associate in honor and dignity, and co-laborer 
and helpmate with him in his work of blessing Egypt, 
so Jehovah God proposes a bride for his exalted Son, 
our Lord, and she also will be a favorite. It has required 
all of this Gospel age for her betrothal and 
preparation for the marriage, and the time is now 
nigh at hand when she shall be brought near to the 
King, as the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, adorned in the 
glorious linen robe of her Lord, fitly embroidered with 
the elements of character which he can approve.— 
Psa. 45:13,14. 

Joseph's head was not turned by the prosperity 
which came to him; he showed himself worthy of it— 
that he had profited by previous experiences, so as 
to know how to use the prosperity wisely. He was 
not slothful in business, but fervent in spirit; and seeing 
that the Lord had opened the way before him we 
find him immediately taking steps to carry out his 
mission. His first move was to travel throughout the 
lengths and breadths of Egypt, to determine the most 
eligible sites for the building of granaries, or storehouses; 
and the Lord's blessing continued with him 
and prospered him in the work thus given him to do. 

R2888 : page 318 

So it should be with us; in whatever department of 
the Lord's service he is pleased to open the door of 
opportunity to us, we should enter it promptly and 
with energy— with zeal for him and for the cause to 
which he has called us. This is one condition of our 
acceptableness with him. If we are slothful, inattentive 
to opportunities, undoubtedly they will be removed 
from us, and given to others, for the Lord is 
abundantly able to raise up one or another to serve 
his cause without interfering with, or overruling our 
free moral agency. Let us more and more appreciate 
what a privilege we enjoy in being co-laborers 
together with God, and especially in connection with 
this great service which our Lord and Master Jesus 
is executing, and to fellowship in which we have been 
called, as his bride and joint-heir. 

They that honor God he will honor, in his own 
way; and his way will always be found eventually to 
be the best way. We not only are to honor the Lord 
by word of mouth, but especially are we to show forth 
his praises in the affairs of life— in connection with 
home duties, business duties, service of the truth: in 
all things we are to glorify him in our bodies and 

R2889 : page 318 

spirits which are his; and those who thus do shall be 



blessed indeed of the Lord and be used of him. The 
slightest service here permitted us is an honor indeed, 
and faithfulness in these slight services of the present 
time are eventually to be blessed and rewarded with 
the greater and grander service of the Kingdom. 



R2889 : page 318 

WORDS OF CHEER AND ENCOURAGEMENT. 



Dear Brother Russell:— After a thankful and (to 
me) blessed perusal of the last issue of Watch 
Tower, I want to state that I have truly come out 
of Babylon, since I read the very first Tower that 
ever came into my hands— March 15 and April 1, 
1900. So powerful was the impression made upon 
me by it that I was then, and have been ever since 
convinced of these great truths, and all my former 
doubts are satisfied forever. Now I realize what the 
blessed Master meant by the words, "The truth shall 
make you free." Regarding churches in general, 
when I think of the good, conscientious Christians, 
many of whom I would fain emulate; and think of 
seeming to be better than they, I feel very much 
troubled and very humble. Nevertheless, I can never 
believe their way again. I often think of the church 
at Allegheny, and wish I might enjoy the blessing of 
meeting with you all at times. 

The lesson on "Patient Endurance," and that on 
"Duty-Love" in May 1 Tower, are my constant study. 
I was a member of the Episcopal church. Our minister 
has called time and again and kindly solicited 
my return. I have deferred telling him of my change 
of views only out of consideration for him, as he has 
been deep in affliction the past year, and when I look 
at his kind face and think how I may hurt him, I cannot 
but forbear. This is my standpoint at present. 
Do not think I am ashamed to own my Lord; O, 
no ! I am watching my opportunity, which will be 
soon, I believe. I have distributed tracts to many, 
having myself enjoyed the blessed truths revealed 
in them; truly God assisted you to write them. I 
thank you for their precious lessons. When I think 
of my unworthiness, and humble station, and realize 
what great things the good Lord has called me to, 
can I do aught but press onward to the attainment of 
the high "mark"? 

May God bless and strengthen you in preparing 
the marginal references you contemplate for the new 
Bible! Pray for me that I may do all for Him that I 
can find to do. Yours in the Master, 
Mrs. R. L. Jones,-Ohio. 



[I am glad, dear Sister, to note that you are 
"tender-hearted" and trust that when, in withdrawing, 
you announce your present position to the minister 
and members of the church, it will be worded 
kindly, inoffensively. See the "Withdrawal Letters" 
which we supply free for this purpose,— sufficient for 
all the church membership. But, dear Sister, when 
you feared to cause pain and disappointment to an 
earthly minister and friend, did you forget the Friend 
above all others— the Lord— and his smile of approval? 
Remember the poet's words,— 
"O, let no earthborn cloud arise, 
To hide thee from thy servant's eyes." 

Let us see to it, dear Sister, that the Lord's approval 
has first place in our hearts.— Editor.] 



Dear Brother Russell:— Our "Volunteer Rally" 
yesterday was a success every way respecting the 
amount of work done and the spiritual blessings received. 
The Lord was evidently with us paving the 
way, and the interest manifested by the friends from 
surrounding towns who came to help in the Harvest 
work was certainly strengthening and encouraging 
to us here, and the meeting together of all after the 
day's work was edifying in the extreme. That our 
hopes and aims are one, was beautifully brought out 
in the testimonies, praise, prayers and thanks; and 
it was manifest that the Holy Spirit was in our midst. 
It was "spontaneous combustion," so to speak, and 
the afternoon was not half long enough to give all 
an opportunity to voice their gratitude for blessings 
received, and for being privileged to do something 
for Jesus in the "Volunteer" work. We realized how 
we had been called and thus far led; and that if we 
continue to walk faithfully nothing will be able to 
separate us from the love of God. Bro. Russell and 
his helpers, and all of the Lord's children everywhere 
were remembered in our prayers. 

The number engaged in tract distribution was 
seventy-nine, as follows: From Tiffin, 19; Ft. Wayne, 
6; Auburn, 1; Ypsilanti, 3; Battle Creek, 1; Pt. Clinton, 
5; Detroit, 3; Fostoria, 2; Bowling Green, 1; 
Ottawa Lake, 1; Findlay, 1; Toledo, 36; total, 79. 
Tracts distributed about 5,000; churches served, 
about 55. The weather was extremely hot,— harvest 
weather— just the sort to ripen wheat, and the volunteers 
proved themselves veterans, and turned up smiling 

R2889 : page 319 

and content, receiving ample pay in the mysterious 

blessing that comes over one when handing 

out tracts. Certainly the Lord is our strength in all 



our ways! 

We feel satisfied so far as the day's work went, 
and know the Lord will bless it in his own time and 
way. Praying that the Lord will further bless us with 
his grace, we are, dear brother, 
In the "Harvest" work, 

The Toledo Class,— Ohio. 



Dear Brother Russell:— Just a line to thank you 
for the Gospel Truth as I believe Christ would have 
us know it, and which I have received at your hand. 
I think I have made good use of the tracts sent me 
a few months ago; since that time I have learned of 
the meeting-place of the brethren in Liverpool and 
got a blessing. My family are members of the Methodist 
church, to which I am attached, but now I see 
the Gospel in a different light, thank God! With the 
help of prayer I am trying to do a little of the Lord's 
work among my shipmates, many of whom are skeptics; 
I am trying to convince them of a living God 
and a future judgment. Please let me know if there 
is a meeting-place in or around Boston that I can 
attend while my ship is in port. I am willing to be 
at your service in delivering God's Word, in the shape 
of tracts or magazines at church doors or meetings 
of any kind in Liverpool or Boston. 

God bless you in the work of spreading the true 
gospel throughout this wicked world. I pray his 
Kingdom come and his will be done on earth as it is 
done in heaven. Your loving brother in Jesus, 
James H. Wallace,— England. 



My dear Brother:— I have at last decided to give 
up all, and I have prayed earnestly for help to make 
the surrender complete; God forbid that it should be 
otherwise! 

My contract in the business indicated above (insurance) 
will expire in November next; but I want 
to be wholly occupied in a better work long before 
that time. In fact, I can't hold my tongue now, I 
must declare the light I have found (through your 
help) in the Scriptures; these are now my delight, 
where before they were uninteresting, though I have 
been a member of the Missionary Baptist church for 
twenty-three years, and a deacon fourteen years, but 
I will send in my letter of withdrawal soon. 

I have been a leader in the Reform Party in 
politics, in this State, for ten years, and have held 
many positions of trust; but have found that a failure, 
and will give it up. Have been a drawing speaker, 
but my voice is nearly gone, hence I will have to 
supplement it with literature in spreading this "good 



news" so little known in these parts. I am willing 
to take a very humble place in the ranks because of 
my extreme unworthiness and the lateness of the 
hour. 

I have seen in some of your literature that you 

have colporteurs for Millennial Dawn, and other 

works. Write me terms and full particulars, also 

any help you can give me on my spiritual condition. 

Yours thankfully, H. L. Brian,— Texas. 



R2890 : page 319 

THE ASSASSINATION AND ITS PROBABLE RESULTS. 



It is difficult to account for the peculiar operation 
of the brain of the anarchist who shot the noble 
President of this nation,— William McKinley. What 
could he, or the class he is supposed to have represented 
in the act, hope to gain by such an act? What 
motive of any kind could inspire such a deed? It is 
most charitable to view the assassin and his accomplices 
as mentally unbalanced to a greater degree than 
are the majority of the human family; so that to their 
view the essential of peace and blessing is less law: 
whereas those who are directed by the Word of the 
Lord know that the world needs yet more stringent 
laws for the correction of evil-doers. How blessed the 
assurances of the Scriptures that the great reign of 
righteousness— law and grace— is near at hand. That 
the Millennial Kingdom will not only effectually restrain 
such unbalanced creatures, but by restitution processes 
will lift them up toward soundness and righteousness. 

A cypher letter has just been found and interpreted. 
It announces that the anarchists have plotted 
the assassination of President Roosevelt, Senator 
Hanna, the governors of all the States and the financial 
princes— J. D. Rockefeller, J. P. Morgan and C. 
M. Schwab. It seems difficult to suppose that the 
anarchists hope to terrorize the people so that no one 
would accept office. Do they not know that there are 
several millions of men anxious for a chance at these 
offices and willing to brave every risk? Anarchists are 
comparatively few in these days of prosperity: not 
in prosperous times,— not until "trouble like a gloomy 
cloud" shall have gathered world-wide and shut out 
the light of hope, need we fear that the insanity of 
anarchy will prevail to the extent predicted in the 
Scriptures— the overthrow of the entire social fabric. 

We see no special significance in the assassin's 
deed as respects the peculiar times in which we are 
living— the "harvest"— except that it will probably 
lead to stringent repressive laws against anarchists. 



Such we would approve, but opine that a restriction 

of liberty in this approved direction might soon lead 

to an abuse of power and a restraint of proper liberties; 

—an attempt to restrain any and everything not 

favored by general public sentiment. For instance 

WATCH TOWER publications have thousands of enemies 

who would not hesitate to misrepresent its teachings 

as anarchistic, and in doing so think they did 

God service;— after the example of Saul of Tarsus. 

We are expecting some such violent interruption 

of the "harvest" work within a few years now; but 

will conclude then that "the door is shut." Meantime 

let us each and all "labor while it is called day; 

for the night cometh wherein no man can work." 



page 321 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 