From Our Readers
Special “Awake!” on Evolution
Your very comprehensive series of articles in “Awake!” of September 22, 1981, has finally prompted us to send you our favorite cartoon. [The cartoon showed two cavemen. One is saying to the other: “Well, we’ve finally evolved into men . . . What’s keeping the women?”]
I. K., California
Hurrah for your wonderful “Awake!” You have proved beyond sensible doubt that evolution is at least as unlikely as what one scientist termed “the likelihood that a dictionary was the result of an explosion in a print shop.”
A. M., Louisiana
The graphic impact of the cover alone is enough to recommend the magazine to potential readers, without any reference to the superb content. My wife and I have no trouble placing copies​—the problem is that of demand exceeding supply. Can we get 40 or 50 more?
A. T., England
You talk about no fossil evidence of amphibians becoming reptiles, or reptiles becoming mammals, of reptiles becoming birds, and of apes becoming man. That is because you do not understand how evolution occurred. Now if you are really interested, I will explain it to you. Evolution is not an accident. It is a necessity. The best example I can give you is the example of the Schnauzer, a breed of dog that did not exist 600 years ago. We have a historical record of the breeding of the Schnauzer in Munich less than 600 years ago. They took two existing breeds, and then bred that offspring with a third breed to produce the Schnauzer. The same thing occurred when man developed as a result of multiple cross-breeding of apes, except that in the case of man it occurred in nature rather than through the intervention of man. Evolution, therefore, is not the result of mere mutation. The real impetus for evolution is crossbreeding.
G. M. B., a lawyer, California
A new variety of dog from dogs is still ‘after its family kind,’ as Genesis 1:24 says. Man from apes is quite a different matter.​—ED.
The issue on evolution was excellent. The beauty of it is that you don’t have to be a lawyer or a scientist to understand it. My son plans to use it in his science class.
E. J., Canada
The September 22 issue of “Awake!” was superb from start to finish, both in selection of material and logical arrangement. The complexity of the simple cell emphasized the argument against its formation by chance. The fossil record, the theory’s “strongest evidence,” was smashed to smithereens. The article on Design was one of my favorites in showing the magazine in the house-to-house work. All in all, there is a wealth of facts and arguments that makes this issue a milestone in the fight to uphold Bible truth against its evolutionist detractors. [This writer has a Ph.D. and many years’ employment in atomic physics research.]
D. H., California

