A Searching Look at Revelation
IF YOU were to list the things that could make you happy, would you put the Bible book of Revelation on your list?
Most people likely would not. Yet everyone who has a fair understanding of Revelation can agree with the apostle John’s words in the opening of this book: “Happy is he who reads aloud and those who hear the words of this prophecy, and who observe the things written in it.”​—Revelation 1:3.
‘But,’ you may say, ‘it is so hard to make sense of what I read in Revelation.’ One reason is that much of the book is in symbolic language. To grasp the meaning, we need knowledge of the Bible as a whole as well as of God’s dealings with his people over the years.
You may have found another obstacle in understanding Revelation. Since it contains so many different visions or descriptive pictures, many people tend to miss its overall flow. They, as it were, concentrate on individual trees and fail to step back to see the overall forest. With this in mind, let us scan the book of Revelation in a way that shows how its different parts or visions interconnect. As a clue, note that one sequence, such as the seven seals, leads into another series, the seven trumpets. The picture on page 30 should help you. As we go along, we will add only a few comments of interpretation, more being available in the books mentioned below.a
The Revealing Begins
The book of Revelation is in letter form, written about 96 C.E., by the apostle John to “seven congregations” in Asia Minor, representing all the congregation of spirit-anointed Christians. (1:4) The introduction (1:1-3) identifies God as the source of and Jesus as the channel for the Revelation. It assures happiness for those who hear and observe the words of the prophecy.
After mentioning Jehovah and Jesus, the apostle introduces himself and indicates that what follows pertains particularly to “the Lord’s day” (since 1914). He has a vision of the glorious appearance of the resurrected Jesus, through whom the book was presented to John. Letters are to be written to seven congregations. (1:4–3:22) Knowing the spiritual condition of the Christians involved, Jesus provides commendation, counsel and warning. This should give us confidence that God has been training those who will be in heaven as kings over the earth.
Having seen the One who is the channel of the revelation, John next has a vision of its Author. (4:1-11) God is glorious and awe-inspiring, deserving our admiration and worship. Around God’s throne are living creatures that emphasize his qualities. Twenty-four older persons (Christians reigning in heaven) both worship the Creator and acknowledge that all creatures should do likewise. Jehovah has a sealed scroll, but who can open it?​—5:1-4.
John sees the Lamb, Jesus, take the scroll. Chapter 5 explains that Christ is worthy of this honor. So we should ascribe honor to him and be interested in the scroll’s message about God’s purpose affecting heaven and earth in our day. Instead of just reading the scroll, John sees it in action. Christ begins to open its seven seals.
The first reveals Jesus as a kingly ruler going forth to the final conquest. The second through the fourth depict by other horsemen extraordinary war, famine and death (such as we have seen since World War I) that send vast numbers to Hades, the grave. With the breaking of the fifth seal, assurance is provided that God will avenge persecuted and martyred Christians. What John sees when the sixth seal is opened shows that there will be heavenly and earthly changes and that men will seek to be hidden from the coming wrath of God.​—6:1-17.
During an interval before the seventh seal is opened, John sees what work has to be done before God allows the destructive storm of tribulation to come. (7:1-17) The completion of the work of sealing the 144,000 has to be accomplished. (Later [14:1-3], it is shown as accomplished.) The angels’ holding back the destructive tribulation allows the “great crowd” to gain God’s approval and to worship him along with the 144,000. Now the seventh seal is broken and there is a brief period of prayer and preparation for what is to come.​—8:1-6.
Seven Trumpets
Seven angels are to sound seven trumpets. (God’s earthly servants began to deliver judgment messages at their conventions in 1922-1928). So, in the opening of a series of seven seals, the final one widens out into a vision of seven other things, trumpets. Five trumpetlike messages about elements of Satan’s organization are sounded. The fifth involves a plague of locustlike preachers; it is also said to be the first of three woes. When the sixth trumpet is sounded, comment is made about the releasing of those bound at the Euphrates, where ancient Babylon sat. (In modern times some Christians were released from Babylonish captivity after World War I.) The vision also shows an army of 200,000,000 cavalry.​—8:7–9:21.
There is an interruption of the sixth trumpet; John sees an angel with a little, eatable scroll. (10:1-11) The apostle learns that in the days of the sounding of the seventh trumpet the mystery of God will be finished. Then he gets the scroll to eat and is told of additional prophesying work to be done. He must also measure the (spiritual) temple. John is told about witnesses who prophesied for a time (1914-1918), were killed by the wild beast and finally revived. Note that a wild beast is brought into the picture but not yet explained. The standing up to life of the witnesses precedes an earthquake in apostate Jerusalem, bringing to an end the sixth trumpet and the second woe.​—11:1-14.
At the sounding of the seventh trumpet an announcement is made about the established Kingdom (the “third woe” to God’s enemies). This results in wrathful persecution from the nations. (11:15-19) The next chapter explains more fully what has happened. John sees a glorious woman (God’s heavenly organization) give birth safely to a son (the Kingdom) despite the Devil’s opposition. Following war in heaven, Satan is cast down to earth, where he persecutes the Christian remnant because of their faithfulness. (12:1-17) This gives warning of the chief enemy, Satan. But other enemies come into view. One is a beast (the Devil’s beastly political organization) out of the sea. It wars against Christians, who thus need endurance and faith. (13:1-10) Another beast, with two horns, that encourages worship of the image of the sea beast, well depicts the powerful Anglo-American political combine that has dominated the world scene in recent times.​—13:11-18.
Will these enemies block the sealing of the 144,000? No! John sees the 144,000 happily singing on Mount Zion. (All of this is still under the seventh trumpet.) Then three angels in particular give notice of trouble ahead for the enemies. One angel declares that God will execute judgment. Hence, he commands: “Fear God and give him glory.” The second announces that Babylon the Great has fallen. The third promises torments for worshipers of the beast or its image. Other angels foretell a reaping and announce a crushing at Armageddon.​—14:1-20.
Seven Bowls and Babylon the Great
After these judgments and preliminary announcements, John sees seven angels with seven plagues. (This also is under the sounding of the seventh trumpet; so, again, one series merges into the next.) Despite the persecution, many come off victorious and sing praises. The seven angels will pour out seven bowls of anger, which point out God’s view of various world conditions and the results, or effects, of his judicial opinion. As with the sixth trumpet, the sixth bowl involves the Euphrates (Babylon). Mention is made also of the gathering to “the war of the great day of God the Almighty” (Armageddon), but details are not yet given. With the seventh bowl a voice says, “It has come to pass!” and Babylon the Great is shaken apart and falls.​—15:1–16:21.
Revelation next explains the destruction of modern Babylon, which calls to mind ancient Babylon’s being a wellspring of false religion. The Babylon in Revelation is likened to a harlot riding upon a scarlet-colored beast with seven heads representing kings​—an eighth king springing from the preceding seven. (This aptly depicts the League of Nations, replaced later by the UN​—both of which have been made up of many nations.) An angel says that in time the beast’s militarized horns will battle with the Lamb. But first the 10 horns will turn on the harlot and destroy her. (17:1-18) Individuals are urged to get out of religious Babylon the Great before that happens. After she is destroyed, kings and merchants miss her, but heaven rejoices over her complete and final destruction. (18:1-24) God is to be praised for executing this judgment. It is especially a source of joy to the Lamb’s bride of “holy ones,” for she has proved victorious over the harlot.​—19:1-10.
Now the thread of the war of God and those who fight against the Lamb is taken up again and expanded. Opposed organizations and individuals meet their end. (19:11-21) What about bad spirits? Satan is next cast into the abyss for a thousand years. For that period Christ and the 144,000 will be kings and priests in a special sense. Jumping quickly to the end of the thousand years to show Satan’s complete end, the vision depicts his loosing and the rebellion of some humans. Together they are cast into the lake of fire. (20:1-10) Moving back to describe events during the Millennium, the vision shows the dead as resurrected and being judged as worthy of eternal life or of destruction.​—20:11-15.
Since the old heaven and earth have fled away, John sees a new heaven and earth, as well as the blessings that these bring to humankind. He also sees a city, not Babylon, but Christ’s bride. It is holy and perfect, with a river of life flowing from it. Abundant provisions are made for healthy life. The series of visions of Revelation draws to a close with this glorious, climactic picture of the governing organization of the new system of things.​—21:1–22:7.
John is overwhelmed emotionally and wants to worship the agent who communicated the vision; but he is reproved. The prophecy is not to be sealed. Hearers of it are to invite others to take “life’s water free.” No one should add to or take away from the scroll. Jesus again reminds readers that he is coming quickly. John responds and concludes with a benediction upon the holy ones.​—22:8-21.
Looking at the accompanying chart, can you now say that you have a better grasp of what Revelation contains and how the elements in it are connected? More, though, is needed. We ought to study and understand fully the symbolic meaning of the visions in this inspired book and apply its message to our own life. Then we will be in line for blessings, including the happiness that John mentioned in the opening verses.
[Footnotes]
Jehovah’s Witnesses find much help in two Bible study aids that discuss Revelation verse by verse, “Babylon the Great Has Fallen!” God’s Kingdom Rules! (1963) and “Then Is Finished the Mystery of God” (1969), both available from the publishers of this magazine.
[Pictures on page 30]
The opening of seven seals leads to the sounding of seven trumpets
As the last three trumpets are sounded, woes are pronounced. The third woe leads to a series of seven bowls
Seven angels pour out bowls of God’s anger, seven plagues on the earth

