Announcements
BEING WEALTHY IN GOOD WORKS
On reading the title to this short article do you say: “I am poor, or have just a modest income, so how can I be wealthy in good works?” The answer is a simple one. Regardless of a person’s circumstances he can be wealthy in good works by acquiring a real appreciation of the truth about God’s wonderful kingdom and then helping others also to learn about it. (1 Tim. 6:18, NW) The Watchtower magazine is intended to aid all who want to do this. It instructs them, builds them up, shows them how to find the true riches. Then it is their privilege to pass these good things on to others by telling them about the Kingdom and obtaining subscriptions for The Watchtower at the very reasonable rate of $1 for a whole year. During the present campaign (January through April) three fine Bible studies in booklet form are given free to each new subscriber.
“THE WATCHTOWER” AIDS TO MATURITY
The Watchtower has increased from its initial printing of 6,000 copies over seventy-five years ago to 2,300,000 copies today. More than that, due to increasing light of truth from God’s Word reflected through its pages, its vision and message are clearer and sharper with each passing year. Faithful Christians who seriously read and study The Watchtower have likewise grown in spiritual understanding and appreciation of Bible truth. They urge you and all others who desire to live to seek God’s way of spiritual advancement through a careful and systematic study of the Bible. Start with this copy of The Watchtower in your hand and continue enjoying the magazine’s benefits regularly by sending $1 for a year’s subscription. It is published twice a month. Write at once and you will also receive three inspiring Bible sermons in printed form.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
February 26: “The Table of Demons” versus “The Table of Jehovah,” ¶1-19, Page 44.
March 4: “The Table of Demons” versus “The Table of Jehovah,” ¶20-38. Page 50.
March 11: “One Body” of Partakers. Page 55.

