From Our Readers
What Has Happened to Love? (March 2006)  The world warps the meaning of love, and Satan wants to destroy it completely. Material such as this helps us to express love both actively and unselfishly. Thank you for sharpening my understanding of how Jehovah wants us to use this powerful force.
Y. B., United States
I felt lonely when two very close friends moved away to serve in a foreign-language congregation. However, just when my loneliness peaked, I received this magazine. Thank you for the reminder, “If you want to be loved, show love.” From now on, I plan to “widen out” and show heartfelt love so that I can cultivate new friendships.—2 Corinthians 6:12, 13.
M. T., Japan
Old Age—Meeting the Challenge (February 2006)  I sometimes feel that the elderly are left behind. I have been caring for my invalid husband for 11 years now. I still feel lonely at times. I reread the articles in this Awake! many times and listened to the audiocassette many times as well. This magazine was just what I needed. Thank you very much.
S. T., Japan
Artificial Limbs (February 2006)  Thank you very much for your article on artificial limbs. When I was four months pregnant, we were told that our baby would be born without arms and legs and that he could be fitted with artificial legs when he reached one year of age. The article arrived the very month Daryl turned one year old. He is now learning to stand and to walk. My husband and I look forward to enjoying the time when Daryl “will climb up just as a stag does.”—Isaiah 35:6.
Y. A., France
Life Is Worth Living (October 22, 2001)  I’ve read the Awake! of October 22, 2001, over and over again, especially when feeling discouraged. Such information is like medicine to me, with the difference that it never goes out of date. The counsel and solutions to our problems it gives are really helpful. Awake! lifts my spirits, making me feel that you care for individuals like me. I am so happy and thankful that you are there to remind me that “life is worth living”!
P. T., Madagascar
Pilgrims and Puritans—Who Were They? (February 2006)  I was aghast at the misrepresentation of the facts in this article. There is a fundamental reason why North American Indians don’t celebrate Thanksgiving, and you just glossed over the facts.
Name withheld, United States
“Awake!” responds: Please note that the purpose of this article was not to discuss the detailed history of Thanksgiving Day. Several reference works, including the “Encyclopædia Britannica,” report that in the fall of 1621, the Pilgrims celebrated for three days with their Indian friends. This is described in a letter by Edward Winslow, dated December 11, 1621. However, in the years that followed, thanksgiving holidays were kept to celebrate all kinds of events besides the harvest. The most infamous “thanksgiving” was proclaimed in 1637 by Governor John Winthrop of the Massachusetts Bay Colony after the massacre of hundreds of Pequot Indians. Therefore, we can appreciate why some readers may be offended by Thanksgiving Day.

