The Life He Makes Possible
“LOOK! A king will reign for righteousness itself.” Inspiring promises like this one regarding the Kingdom rule of Jesus are a feature of the Bible. Another such promise says: “He will deliver the poor one crying for help, also the afflicted one and whoever has no helper. He will feel sorry for the lowly one and the poor one, and the souls of the poor ones he will save. . . . Their blood will be precious in his eyes.”—Isaiah 32:1; Psalm 72:12-14.
Can anyone deny that people worldwide need such a righteous rule? Jesus urged his followers to keep the Kingdom of God close in mind. “Let your kingdom come,” he taught them to pray. “Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.”—Matthew 6:9, 10.
Evidence God’s Kingdom Is Near
How can we know when that Kingdom will come in answer to that prayer? Jesus’ early followers were curious and asked: “What will be the sign of your presence [as ruling King] and of the conclusion of the system of things?” Jesus answered: “Nation will rise against nation . . . , and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another. All these things are a beginning of pangs of distress.” Also, he warned: “Because of the increasing of lawlessness the love of the greater number will cool off.”—Matthew 24:3-12.
Another Bible prophecy says that “in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here. For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, self-assuming, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal, having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness, betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with pride, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God, having a form of godly devotion but proving false to its power.”—2 Timothy 3:1-5.
You may agree that this description of “the last days” fits exactly the times in which we live. Evidence is abundant that now is the time for the fulfillment of the following Bible prophecy: “The God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”—Daniel 2:44.
The Kingdom rule exercised by the “Prince of Peace” will remove everything that would interfere with the peace of those who survive this world’s end. (Isaiah 9:6) Bible prophecy promises: “The world is passing away and so is its desire, but he that does the will of God remains forever.” (1 John 2:17) This world’s end will make way for doers of God’s will to enjoy what was lost for the human family when our original parents, Adam and Eve, rebelled against God.
The Life Near at Hand
“In the re-creation,” Jesus explained, “the Son of man sits down upon his glorious throne.” (Matthew 19:28) What is this “re-creation”? Another translation uses the expression “the renewal of all things.” (New International Version) A parallel Bible account calls it “the coming system of things.” (Luke 18:30) At that time Jesus will exercise his God-given authority as the Prince of Peace by imparting everlasting life to all who exercise faith in his ransom sacrifice.—John 5:21.
In God’s new system of things, people will enjoy the kind of life that God provided Adam and Eve when he put them in the earthly Paradise. Recall that God instructed them to have children, yes, to “fill the earth and subdue it.” Their assignment was to extend their Edenic Paradise earth wide! (Genesis 1:28) Similarly, in the re-creation the earth will be filled with survivors of this world’s end, their children, and those who have died but have returned to life in the resurrection. The assignment of such ones will be to share in making the earth into a paradise, as God originally purposed.
Consider some of the blessings the Bible indicates people in that new world of righteousness will enjoy.—2 Peter 3:13.
While the promises illustrated on these pages may seem too good to be true, they are certain to be realized in “the coming system of things.” Jesus, in prayer to God, described what is required for people to enjoy these blessings, saying: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) May you be among those who humbly seek this life-giving knowledge.
[Blurb on page 7]
“His name will be called . . . Prince of Peace. To the abundance of the princely rule and to peace there will be no end.”—Isaiah 9:6, 7
[Box/Pictures on page 8, 9]
Homes and Work for Everyone
“They will certainly build houses and have occupancy . . . They will not plant and someone else do the eating.”—Isaiah 65:21, 22.
Plenty of Food for All
“The earth itself will certainly give its produce.” “There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth.”—Psalm 67:6; 72:16.
Global Peace Will Affect Even the Animals
“The wolf will actually reside for a while with the male lamb, and with the kid the leopard itself will lie down, . . . and a mere little boy will be leader over them.”—Isaiah 11:6.
War Eliminated, Peace Forever
“Nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.” “To the abundance of the princely rule and to peace there will be no end.”—Isaiah 2:4; 9:7.
Dead Loved Ones Resurrected
“The hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear [Jesus’] voice and come out.”—John 5:28, 29.
No More Sickness or Death
“No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’” “Death will be no more . . . The former things have passed away.”—Isaiah 33:24; Revelation 21:3, 4.

