From Our Readers
Flirting  The article “Young People Ask . . . What’s the Harm in Flirting?” caught my interest. (May 8, 1991) I have a friend that is always flirting with those of the opposite sex, and it often looks like fun. I was relieved to learn that ‘it’s only natural to want to be liked.’ But I realize now that flirting is dangerous, and I instead want to show a genuine interest in people in general.
S. I., Japan
Man and Beast  I want to express my heartfelt appreciation for the subject “When Man and Beast Live in Peace.” (April 8, 1991) I have been a student of the Bible for a year now, and I have learned about Jehovah’s purpose to make the earth an eternal paradise. The article greatly increased my love for Jehovah and my desire to live in peace with the animals in his new world.
A. S., Brazil
I have always been a lover of animals. I even wanted to enter a university and join their zoological program. What would I have gained, though, to spend a lifetime studying only a few animal species? In Jehovah’s new world, I’ll be able to study all the animals​—forever! Reading the article made me cry tears of joy, knowing that one day that wish will come true.
L. M., United States
Bad Habits  The article “Preventing the Return of Bad Habits” (April 8, 1991) was like a letter directed especially to me. Although the article did not mention my bad habit specifically, I believe the guidelines it gave will be beneficial. With Jehovah’s help I will overcome this habit once and for all!
S. M., United States
About 11 years ago, I successfully lost over 80 pounds [36 kg], only to regain it. I am watching my weight again, and when I begin to weaken, I reread the article. I also used it with two new students of the Bible who are fighting to quit smoking.
E. T., United States
It was such a beautiful article that I shed tears. What touched me most was the part where it says: ‘I failed, so I may as well give up.’ I have always thought that way. But the article helped me to see things in a different way.
S. H. S. N., Brazil
Children of Divorce  Your issue “Help for Children of Divorce” (April 22, 1991) couldn’t have come at a better time. I am currently going through a divorce. The day before this article arrived, I said harsh things to my husband in front of the children. I later apologized to him and gave him this issue of Awake! Thank you for your help and advice.
C. L., United States
When I was nine, my parents got a divorce. Three years later they got remarried. I was very happy. Recently, I found out that they are getting another divorce. Knowing that they love me and I have Jehovah to turn to keeps me from falling apart. Your article came at the time when I needed it most. Thank you for considering the children. We need all the support we can get!
A. J., United States
Sexual Harassment  I am grateful for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Make Him Leave Me Alone?” (May 22, 1991) On the very day my mother gave me that magazine, I received a love letter from a boy in my class. The article taught me that when boys make unwanted advances, we can make our religious beliefs clear. Thank you for providing loving help for us young ones.
M. K., Japan

