Young People Ask . . .
How Can I Resist the Pressure to Smoke?
“It relaxes me, makes me happy and peaceful.”
“It’s kind of something to do.”
“It makes you feel more secure.”
‘It’s something to do with my hands.’
THESE were the reasons some teenagers gave when asked why they smoke. (Teens Speak Out) Yes, in spite of all the warnings about lung cancer, emphysema, and heart disease, smoking still has an irresistible appeal to many youths. Perhaps you have even been tempted to try it yourself.
The media bombard you with the images of attractive, well-dressed men and women who are always smoking. None of them look like cancer patients. Or you may feel under pressure from peers to give it a try. At school you may be harassed with dares, such as: ‘Are you chicken?’ ‘Everyone who’s cool smokes.’ And if you are around youths who smoke, you may feel out of place if you do not have a cigarette in your hand.
Pressure to smoke may also come at home. If one parent abstains but your other parent chooses to smoke, this can be extremely confusing. And if both parents smoke, the pressure may be even greater. ‘My parents smoke about two packs a day, so there are always cigarettes around,’ says 14-year-old Rebecca. Being told by such parents that you shouldn’t smoke may seem like the height of hypocrisy! Complains young Allison: “If we tell parents we care about their health, they don’t listen. So how can they expect us to listen to them?”​—The Private Life of the American Teenager.
Whatever their reasons, many youths decide to give smoking a try and often become addicts for life.a Hopefully, you want something better for yourself. You know the sad consequences of smoking and see no reason to experience them firsthand. Still, you may wonder just how you can stand up to the powerful pressures to smoke.
Social Awkwardness
Let’s first look at some of the reasons youths give for smoking. Like the youths quoted at the outset, many argue that holding a cigarette makes them look more poised and “adult.” Young Oren believed this to be true in his case. Socially awkward to an extreme, he recalls: “I was very uncomfortable, especially at parties. I never knew how to act or what to say. Smoking seemed to be the answer to my problem.”
However, sucking in and exhaling noxious fumes really only makes one look foolish, insecure, and inconsiderate. An increasing number of youths are beginning to see it this way. In a survey by Jane Rinzler, 63 percent of the girls and 73 percent of the boys polled disapproved of smoking! One 16-year-old girl said: “People think it makes them look cool [to smoke], but it really looks like they’re trying too hard.” Even if smoking did make one “look cool,” would it justify taking up a destructive and addictive habit?
Interestingly, though, Maurice Falk, a professor of child psychiatry, notes: “Young people who know what to do in social situations feel less awkward. . . . [They] are less likely to smoke.” This has proved true for many youths among Jehovah’s Witnesses. They develop poise and confidence by speaking to people of all ages in the public preaching work. By taking advantage of the educational program offered at the Christian meetings at the Kingdom Hall, they also learn to speak in a skillful but modest way in front of an audience. This takes away any need for a social crutch.
If you feel unhappy about yourself or feel shy or awkward around people, then try associating closely with a congregation of true Christians. It’s hard to remain shy for long when you are actively involved with others. You can also discuss your concerns with your parents. Remember, though, you gain the respect of others, not by dangling a cigarette from your lips, but by becoming, as the Bible urges: “An example . . . in speaking, in conduct, in love, in faith, in chasteness.”​—1 Timothy 4:12.
“It Relaxes Me”
What about the claim some make that smoking is a pleasant experience? “Some smokers say they can’t relax without a cigarette,” says writer Alvin Rosenbaum, “that smoking relieves tension, anxiety, and anger.” However, instead of being a relaxant, “nicotine is a stimulant,” notes Rosenbaum.
What, then, accounts for the relaxation a smoker feels? Actually, what a smoker feels is the relief that comes from satisfying an addiction! Yes, people become addicted to the nicotine in tobacco. This addiction is very much like heroin or cocaine addiction, and some say it is even harder to overcome.
When a smoker’s body runs out of nicotine, it begins to crave it. He becomes nervous, tense, and irritable until he gets another nicotine “fix.” Temporarily he feels relaxed​—until his body craves nicotine again. Smoking is thus a foolish way of relaxing. Listening to soft music, reading, and taking leisurely walks are far safer ways.
Standing Up To Peer Pressure
Fourteen-year-old George relates: “So many kids offer me cigarettes that I have to ignore them.” Peer pressure appears to be the main reason most youths begin smoking. One survey of teenagers revealed that ‘less than 1 percent of them smoked if none of their friends smoked, while 73 percent smoked if all of their friends did.’ If you are being pressured by your peers, you may ask: ‘What would be so wrong about taking a puff just to get others off my back?’
Some youths raised in Christian homes have reasoned that it wouldn’t be so wrong and have compromised their faith.b A few have admitted to holding a cigarette in their hand or even putting one in their mouth​—just so they could ‘be like the others.’ The Bible, however, says: “My son, if sinners try to seduce you, do not consent.” (Proverbs 1:10) And to their credit, the majority of youths raised in Christian homes are heeding these words. Fourteen-year-old Maribel, for example, was offered a cigarette by associates, and she refused. “They began to withdraw from me,” she recalled, “and they made fun of me.” She reminded herself, though, that ‘it’s better to have God’s approval than the world’s’ and did not give in to pressure!
Really, what kind of friends would urge you to inhale a deadly substance? “He that is having dealings with the stupid ones will fare badly,” warns Proverbs 13:20. If necessary, find yourself some new friends. Why, just being around smokers is a health hazard! Says 15-year-old Brenda: “None of my friends smoke. So I don’t have any problems with peer pressure.”
It may not be possible, though, for you to avoid unchristian youths entirely. You may have to stand up for your convictions and unequivocally refuse to smoke! This does not necessarily mean giving them a sermon on the evils of tobacco. Writer Sharon Scott points out that often a simple “no thank you” suffices. When this fails, she recommends that you state your refusal in stronger terms, “I said NO!”
Other strategies are to leave the scene, ignore the offer, or simply change the subject. You might even try rehearsing in advance how you will resist the pressure to smoke. And if a detailed explanation is requested, you should be prepared to provide one. As the Bible says: ‘Always be ready to make a defense before everyone that demands of you a reason.’​—1 Peter 3:15.c
The Bible education offered at the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses has helped many to break free from smoking. Oren recalls: “The desire to talk to others about living forever in perfect health on a cleansed paradise earth gave me the incentive to quit.” The wise course is never to get started in the first place!​—Colossians 4:5.
[Footnotes]
Three fourths of the smokers in the United States began smoking before age 21. In one survey half of a group of teenage smokers had smoked their first cigarette before finishing elementary school.
If you have secretly experimented with tobacco, please seek help by letting your parents know about your problem. (Proverbs 28:13) They may be upset to learn of your problem. But if they are Christians, after their initial upset wears off, they will focus on helping you avoid a repetition of error. The overseers of the local congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses can also be of much help and encouragement to you along these lines.​—James 5:14, 15.
For information on the dangers of smoking, see the August 8, 1991, issue of Awake!
[Picture on page 17]
Instead of making one look mature, smoking can betray one’s insecurities

