Jehovah’s Witnesses—Faith in Action, Part 1: Out of Darkness
In the Bible, light is associated with truth, whereas darkness is associated with falsehood. (Ps. 43:3; Isa. 5:20) Satan introduced darkness into the world when he deceived Eve, and eventually he plunged mankind into deep darkness. (Rev. 12:9) The video Jehovah’s Witnesses—Faith in Action, Part 1: Out of Darkness chronicles how spiritual light began to emerge from darkness. (Isa. 60:1, 2) After viewing the video, can you answer these questions?
(1) How did deep darkness develop after the death of the apostles? (2) Beginning in the 1100’s, what developments helped people to discern that the church had gone off course? (3) Who were Henry Grew and George Storrs? (4) What events in the life of Charles Russell had a profound effect on him? (5) How did Brother Russell, his father, and a few acquaintances carry out their Bible study class, and what Scriptural conclusions did they come to? (6) How did this Bible study group come to merge with Nelson Barbour’s group, but what caused Brother Russell to withdraw? (7) What occurred in July 1879 that began a new era of spiritual light? (8) Thereafter, what did the growing number of Bible Students do to spread the good news? (9) Years in advance, what did the Bible Students expect to occur in 1914? (10) What challenges did the Bible Students face after Brother Russell died? (11) What did the Bible Students do after Brother Rutherford and his associates were released from prison? (12) How has viewing this video deepened your appreciation for Jehovah’s organization? (13) How has this video strengthened your determination to continue zealously preaching despite obstacles? (14) How could we use this video to help our relatives, Bible students, and others?
What a precious spiritual heritage those early Bible Students left for us! In a spiritually darkened world, they were courageous and zealous light bearers. May we imitate their example and “go on walking as children of light.”—Eph. 5:8.

