Three Tips for Improving Your Teaching
 1. Why should we seek to improve our teaching?
1 All Christian ministers are teachers. Whether we are making the initial call, returning to further the interest, or conducting a Bible study, we are imparting information. And the information we teach is not ordinary. We are shedding light on “the holy writings,” which can make people “wise for salvation.” (2 Tim. 3:15) What an awesome privilege! Here are three tips for improving our teaching.
 2. How can we teach with simplicity?
2 Simplicity: When we know a subject well, it can be easy to forget how complicated the information may seem to someone who does not. So when conducting a Bible study, do not clutter your teaching with a lot of unnecessary details. Instead, highlight the main points. A lot of talking does not necessarily mean better teaching. (Prov. 10:19) It is generally best to read only the key scriptures. After reading a scripture, focus on the aspect under consideration. The Sermon on the Mount, recorded at Matthew chapters 5 to 7, contains very profound truths, and yet Jesus taught with simplicity and an economy of words.
 3. What is the value of illustrations, and what kind are often the best?
3 Illustrations: Illustrations stimulate thinking, stir emotions, and aid in remembering. Do not feel that you must be a storyteller to give good illustrations. Jesus often used short, uncomplicated ones. (Matt. 7:3-5; 18:2-4) Simple pictures drawn on a piece of paper can also be very useful. With a little forethought, you can come up with effective illustrations.
 4. How can we use questions effectively?
4 Questions: Questions require your student to think. Therefore, be patient after you ask a question. If you quickly give the answer yourself, you will not really know what your student understands. If he answers wrongly, it may be better to lead him to the correct conclusion with additional questions instead of simply correcting him. (Matt. 17:24-27) Of course, none of us are perfect teachers. Therefore, the Bible encourages us to pay constant attention to our teaching. Our doing so will bring everlasting benefits to us and to those listening to us.—1 Tim. 4:16.

