Why Envy Celebrities?
DO YOU dream of becoming a famous singer or actor and having people crowd about you for your autograph? This is a very common desire, especially among young people. But does such fame really make life fuller and more enjoyable?
Consider what a celebrity sacrifices for fame. He cannot have the freedom you have to move about inconspicuously in public places. At a party he cannot speak unguardedly, because he is likely to be quoted or misquoted. His being famous makes it difficult for his children to have normal associations with other children. There is also the constant danger of their being kidnapped by people seeking ransom money.
The personal affairs of his homelife cannot be easily kept private. Recently the former personal secretary of Jacqueline Onassis published a book that reveals to the public things that went on in the private life of Mrs. Onassis while she was Mrs. John F. Kennedy. Undoubtedly Mrs. Onassis would prefer that her private affairs were not made public. But since celebrities feel obligated to hire employees it is not easy for them to keep private what occurs within their own home. Their loss of privacy is a high price to pay for fame. Do you really want to live like a creature in a goldfish bowl, one whose every movement is watched and criticized?
Furthermore, celebrities cannot be sure that those who profess to be their friends really are. Such persons might actually be more interested in being seen by the public in the company of a famous person. The professed friendship of another celebrity is also undependable because that person puts first his own position in the public eye. He can become insanely jealous if a so-called friend gets more public acclaim than he does. A true friend, however, sticks “closer than a brother.”​—Prov. 18:24.
As far as morals are concerned, celebrities are certainly not to be envied. Immorality is rampant among them, causing domestic strife, divorces and diseases. An immoral way of life is not a happy one. Regarding this, Maurice Zolotow, a close associate of many famous persons, observed: “For about fifteen years I have been the confidant of Broadway and Hollywood actors and actresses who have opportunities to live a promiscuous sexual life. And some of them live it to the hilt . . . But when they trust you and let down their hair, they will confess how frustrating and unsatisfying it all is.”
Usually a famous person is soon forgotten when he dies. Although his name may be preserved in history books, it ceases to be on the lips of the people. This is particularly so as new generations come and the older ones that knew him pass away. For example, how many great athletes who won fame in ancient Greece do you know by name? How many are acclaimed today?
Did you ever hear of Philonides? He gained fame by running 105 miles in one day, but the public today do not acclaim him. How about Alcibiades? He was famous because he was the only one to have seven chariots in the Olympic games at one time and to carry off the first, second and third prizes. Cities joined together to celebrate his victory; yet he is unknown today by the general public.
The fame of such persons was relatively short-lived. It was not eternal, as some may have thought it would be. The same is true of fame today. Recently a well-known member of a singing trio said: “There we are, fixed in time, forever and ever.” Is this not mere illusion, wishful thinking? The only way anyone can be “fixed in time, forever and ever” is to gain the gift of eternal life that our Creator has promised to those doing his will.​—Rom. 6:23.
A modern-day athlete, a boxer, who became famous in the South Pacific area came to realize that there is something more worth while to be sought than fame. He knew what it was to be famous. People would stretch out their hands to touch him as he passed; he had trophies, publicity and personal glory.
Upon realizing that his fighting was not pleasing to his Creator, he immediately quit. When asked what people would say, especially with a big bout scheduled for the day after he quit and in view of his having been chosen to represent his island in special games in New Caledonia, he gave a short and pointed reply. He said that the praises of men no longer mattered to him. What he wanted was the approval of God.​—2 Tim. 2:24.
Instead of envying celebrities who have a passing name of fame with men, would it not be far more rewarding and satisfying for you to seek a good name with God by good works in harmony with his written Word?
The boxer that gave up fame so as to seek a good name with God chose the better course in life. Now he is having the satisfaction of helping others, the pleasure of being surrounded by genuine friends and the happiness of anticipating an eternal future in human perfection in God’s new order. Is this not more to be desired than the fleeting fame of being a celebrity?

