Life Through Accurate Knowledge
SCHOOLS of today purpose to encourage and broaden the student’s interest in the political, social, economic and scientific problems of our times. They endeavor to develop in the pupil the ability to discuss public questions intelligently and open-mindedly. And, too, an effort is made to enable students to acquire greater knowledge, to understand skills and attitudes, which will prepare them for active citizenship. Briefly, schools are organized to guide students to maturity and to broaden both the skill and intellect of mature men and women, on whom the nation counts for industrial and political leadership.
In contrast with the above, the school of accurate knowledge is neither political nor worldly in any sense, nor is its knowledge based on any worldly textbook. Rather, it finds its basis in the divine Textbook, the Bible. Its objectives are different. Instead of being political in nature it urges its students not to be “fashioned after this system of things,” but to be transformed by making their minds over, that they might prove to themselves “the good and acceptable and complete will of God.” (Rom. 12:2, NW) In fact, it instructs its pupils not to be friends of the world; it cautions that those who are make themselves God’s enemies. (Jas. 4:4) It teaches that this world’s wisdom is “foolishness,” animalistic, demonic. (1 Cor. 1:20; Jas. 3:15, NW) It disagrees with present material trends in that it lays greater stress on mankind’s spiritual needs, stating that “not by bread alone does man live but by every expression of Jehovah’s mouth does man live.” (Deut. 8:3, NW) Its primary objectives are: to train students to become ministers of God, aid them to know who the Almighty is, what his purposes are, how they may appreciate his supremacy, believe his Word, exercise faith in his promises, and to aid them to live lives befitting the New World society.
In addition thereto, the acquiring of accurate knowledge embraces the student’s learning of the one whom Jehovah has sent forth, namely his Son Jesus Christ. This means more than memorizing a few Bible verses. It means to learn why it was necessary for him to come to earth, suffer as a man and die an ignominious death. It means to understand and appreciate the value of his death, what it means to us, why it was necessary for him to become a high priest and king, and how he accomplished all of this.
It embraces the importance of man’s understanding his personal position and purpose in life, his relationship to his Creator, and what is required of him as a worshiper of God. It accents love of God and love of neighbor as the greatest commandments in life.—Matt. 22:37-40.
Those acquiring accurate knowledge from the divine Textbook have found it all-sufficient, because “all Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness, that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.” (2 Tim. 3:16, 17, NW) It has enabled the conscientious student to order his steps aright, according to new-world standards. The Word of Jehovah can do this because, in the words of the psalmist: “The law of Jehovah is perfect, restoring the soul: the testimony of Jehovah is sure, making wise the simple. The precepts of Jehovah are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of Jehovah is pure, enlightening the eyes. The fear of Jehovah is clean, enduring for ever: the ordinances of Jehovah are true, and righteous altogether. More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold; sweeter also than honey and the droppings of the honeycomb. Moreover by them is thy servant warned: in keeping them there is great reward.” (Ps. 19:7-11, AS) Those following this law have been rewarded with the “peace of God that excels all thought.” All who have been enrolled in this school of accurate knowledge and who live faithfully by its principles will be rewarded with life everlasting in God’s new world of righteousness.—Phil. 4:7, NW; Mark 10:30.
OLD WORLD CHOOSES BROKEN CISTERNS
Present world educators have either minimized or totally ignored mankind’s spiritual needs. They have turned away from the Bible as a Textbook of knowledge and, in accord with their own desires, have accumulated “teachers for themselves to have their ears tickled.” (2 Tim. 4:3, NW) They have chosen science, evolution and false religion to point them to the way of life. Their students they have taught to trust in political powers, military might and man-made organizations. As a result the whole world is without faith in God, its peoples have become godless and delinquent.—Amos 8:11; Rom. 1:18-32; 2 Tim. 3:1-7.
Political leaders are perplexed. They grope in darkness and do not know the way out. (Job 5:12-14) Jehovah gives the reason, saying: “For my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water.” (Jer. 2:13) Old-world educators have no place for God, he is not in all their thoughts. They glory in their own conceits. All their boasts, however, of a better world have not materialized. They have been empty promises, broken cisterns without water. The few achievements in recent years in science and medicine are not to be compared with the more devastating problems that have arisen as a result of some of these so-called advances: the possibility of germ warfare, chemical and psychological warfare, the horrors of guided missiles and atomic bombs, to name a few. And still remaining with the old world are its centuries-old woes of sickness, sorrow, disease, oppression, corruption, poverty, crime, wars and death. These her wise men have not solved, nor are they anywhere near solving them. The “mature” men and women to whom the nations look for industrial and political leadership are without a remedy.
Unlike the students of the old world, those who have turned to the divine Textbook have found a remedy. They have anchored their hope in Jehovah as “an everlasting rock.” (Isa. 26:4, AS) They have heeded God’s Word and have turned their backs on this old dying world and fixed their hope in the new world wherein righteousness is to dwell. (2 Pet. 3:13) No longer are they living in idolatry, as they once did. Now with the help of God’s Word they are clothing themselves with a new personality, which, through accurate knowledge, is being renewed according to the image of the One who created it. These take to heart the words of Paul, who said: “Deaden, therefore, your body members which are upon the earth as respects fornication, uncleanness, sexual appetite, hurtful desire, and covetousness, which is idolatry. . . . In those very things you, too, once walked when you used to live in them. But now really put them all away from you, wrath, anger, injuriousness, abusive speech, and obscene talk out of your mouth. Do not be lying to one another. Strip off the old personality with its practices, and clothe yourselves with the new personality which through accurate knowledge is being renewed.” (Col. 3:5-11, NW) With renewed minds and a new hope, these are making new lives for themselves. The Word of God has become a force within their lives for good. It can do this, because “the wisdom from above is first of all chaste, then peaceable, reasonable, ready to obey, full of mercy and good fruits, not making partial distinctions, not hypocritical. Moreover, the fruit of righteousness has its seed sown under peaceful conditions for those who are making peace.”—Jas. 3:17, 18, NW.
Those who have thus ordered their lives are planning to survive the destruction of this old world in the battle of Armageddon and be carried over into the new world, there to enjoy the blessings of Kingdom rule. (Zeph. 2:2, 3) The knowledge that these are acquiring now is equipping them for this very purpose. It strengthens them in their integrity. It makes them to stand up under demon attacks. It gives them faith, hope and courage. It makes them to know that they are right in the course that they have taken.
Following Armageddon “the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of Jehovah, as the waters cover the sea.” (Hab. 2:14, AS) “They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith Jehovah.” (Isa. 65:25, AS) Accurate knowledge will do away with selfishness and greed. People will learn to love God and their fellow man. Neighbor love will eliminate oppression, poverty and wars.
People will be genuinely happy. They will enjoy prosperity and peace. They will desire to live to the glory of their Maker. “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” (Isa. 54:13, AS) The old world views this as a wishful dream, because they are without faith in God. They lack accurate knowledge. “There is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land.” “My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge.”—Hos. 4:1, 6.
The greatest era of learning is before you. Behold it with all diligence and rejoice! Receive of divine wisdom now through the divine Textbook, the Bible. It will make you a better and happier student today and in the years to come bless you with everlasting life.—John 17:3.

