Worshiping Jehovah in Holiness
“ASCRIBE unto Jehovah the glory due unto his name: bring an offering, and come before him; worship Jehovah in the beauty of holiness.” (1 Chron. 16:29, AS, margin)a It was most fitting that King David should thus exultingly call out at the time the ark of the covenant was brought from the house of Obed-edom to Mount Zion. But today, in view of all the momentous events that have occurred since 1914 in fulfillment of Bible prophecy, it is even more fitting that Jehovah’s people worship him in holiness.—Malachi, chapter 3; Matthew, chapter 24; Revelation, chapters 11 and 12.
The vast majority of those professing to believe in the God of the Bible have no desire to worship Jehovah in holiness. Instead of considering his name as holy and making it known to others, their religious leaders are doing all they possibly can to hide it; letting people think that Jehovah is just another master, ruler or nobleman; yes, degrading it by removing it altogether, as they have done in their new Revised Standard Version.
But they cannot destroy the name of the only true God of the universe, Jehovah, from among men. Why not? Because Jehovah’s witnesses are still alive, and they will be busier and more energetic than ever before in making known that name, in calling upon all peoples to join them in worshiping Jehovah in holiness.
While the great majority of the peoples turn a deaf ear to the call to worship Jehovah in holiness, there are some sheeplike persons who are listening and who are joining the praisers of Jehovah in ever-increasing numbers. As foretold, ‘the meek among the nations are turning to the worship of Jehovah’; ‘a great crowd are ascribing salvation to him and to his Son.’—Ps. 22:26, 27; John 10:16; Rev. 7:9, NW.
That his worship in holiness might be carried on efficiently and in unity Jehovah has formed a visible organization on earth, even as he has an invisible organization in the heavens for the carrying out of his purposes. Those of mankind coming to that organization do not make a change in geographical location, but rather become united by reason of their knowledge of Jehovah and their activity in worshiping him. Everyone has his position in this organization, and regardless of what this may be they all work together in joy and gladness, interested only in worshiping Jehovah in holiness, in holy array.—Ps. 29:2, AS.
Some, although learning of Jehovah and his purposes only because of others who are worshiping Jehovah in holiness, fail to see their privilege of doing likewise. Like nine of the ten lepers that Jesus cured, they do not see their privilege of giving glory to God for what he has done for them as the Samaritan back there did. (Luke 17:17, 18) Perhaps you are one of these who feel they cannot worship Jehovah in holiness as do others. But we may not think we cannot do it, for we can if we have faith, and we will gain faith if we study and take in knowledge. Abraham and Sarah were able to do the seemingly impossible because of their faith, and so will you if you avail yourself of the help Jehovah provides.—Rom. 4:20-22; Phil. 4:13, NW.
Will you, during the month of December, show your appreciation for what Jehovah’s truth has done for you by joining with a half million other praisers in worshiping Jehovah in holiness?
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, December 15, 1952.

