VOL. XXIX JANUARY 15 No. 2 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

The Cincinnati, O., Debates 19 

Reports from Harvest-Fields Abroad 20 

Great Britain 20 

Germany 21 

Australasia 21 

Jamaica 22 

Berean Bible Study in Tabernacle Shadows 23 

What Constitutes Teaching? 23 

A Plea for the Sisters 23 

A More Excellent Way 24 

Cleansing the Temple 25 

Regeneration and the Kingdom 27 

An Interesting Letter 31 



page 18 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



FRIENDS USING "MISSIONARY ENVELOPES" will please 
put their return address on corner for return if not called for. 
This will save you and us and the P.O. annoyance. 



THE WOMAN'S NATIONAL DAILY 



The number of the friends subscribing for this cheap 
daily through us was not nearly as large as we had expected. 
Hence Brother Russell's sermons are not appearing in it regularly, 
as proposed. Sorry, for it meant a wide circulation of 
the Truth weekly. A kind card to the Editor of the National 
Daily from each one who has subscribed might help. 

CANADIAN FRIENDS DESIRING SERMONS WEEKLY 



Arrangements have been made for Brother Russell's sermons 
weekly in The Toronto World. We can give a clubbing 
rate of $1.50 per year (or, with TOWER, $2.50), except in the cities 
of Hamilton and Toronto, where the price will be $2.75, 
with TOWER, $3.75. Make up your lists speedily and send to us. 

"STUDIES," INDIA PAPER EDITION 



We now have India STUDIES, Vols. 4, 5 and 6. Back 
orders will have attention at once. Price, 85c each. The 
first three volumes will be announced later— when in stock. 

R4119 :page 18 

NO DEBATE WITH DR. DILLON 



Rev. Wm. Dillon, D.D., found it impossible to keep his 
appointment at Elkhart, Ind., and so notified us in advance 
of the date set. 



R4118 :page 19 

THE CINCINNATI, O., DEBATES 

SOME time ago the Editor of this journal was approached 

by Elder A. A. Bunner, who urged a 

debate on six questions of difference. We replied 

that we were too busy, and, besides, preferred to state the 

Truth and leave it to the people— particularly as we now 

have the eyes of nearly a million readers every week. He 

demurred, and finally we agreed to debate with him if he 

could get the endorsement of the Christian denomination of 

Pittsburgh. He was unable to do this. He explained that 

the "Disciples" hereabouts are known as Progressives, while 

he is attached to the Radical wing of the same denomination. 

The matter was finally taken up by the Editor of The 
Leader and the Way of the same faith. He found in 
Texas Elder L. S. White, supposed to be one of the ablest 
men of their connection. We have mutually agreed upon 
all the particulars for six debates at Cincinnati, O., in which 
we trust the Truth will be vindicated and caused to reach 
new ears and eyes. The entire "Disciple" Church seems to 
be aroused. It is expected that some of the railroads will 
grant concessional rates of fare. Probably some Cincinnati 
newspaper will publish stenographic reports of the debates. 
The following copies of correspondence may be of interest: 

Dallas, Tex., Nov. 15, 1907. 
ELD. C. T. RUSSELL, Allegheny, Pa. 
Dear Sir and Brother:— Our correspondence has 



been delightfully pleasant (for which I am truly grateful), 
and as we are agreed on all details for the coming 
discussion, am sending you copy of all the propositions 
we are to discuss, properly signed by myself, and hereby 
extend to you, as per your request, formal invitation 
to meet me in the discussion of these propositions in 
Cincinnati, Ohio, beginning Sunday evening, February 
23, 1908, and continuing six consecutive evenings, of 
two hours each, with one evening to each proposition. 
I suggest that you make due announcement in your paper. 
I also trust that the discussion may be in the 
same good spirit of our correspondence, and that the 
same may redound to the glory of God. 
Truly and fraternally, (Signed), L. S. WHITE. 



PROPOSITIONS FOR DISCUSSION IN CINCINNATI, OHIO, 
BEGINNING SUNDAY EVENING (7.30), FEBRUARY 23, 
1908, FOR SIX CONSECUTIVE EVENINGS: 

(1) The Scriptures clearly teach that all hope of 
salvation, today, is dependent upon accepting the Gospel 
of Christ as revealed in the Scriptures, and that 

such acceptance is confined to this present life. 
(Signed) L. S. WHITE, affirms. 
C. T. RUSSELL, denies. 

(2) The Scriptures clearly teach that the dead are 
unconscious between death and the resurrection— at 
the second coming of Christ. 

(Signed) C. T. RUSSELL, affirms. 
L. S. WHITE, denies. 

(3) The Scriptures clearly teach that the punishment 
of the (finally incorrigible) wicked will consist of 
conscious, painful suffering, eternal in duration. 

(Signed) L. S. WHITE, affirms. 
C. T. RUSSELL, denies. 

(4) The Scriptures clearly teach that the First 
Resurrection will occur at the second coming of Christ, 
and that only the saints of this Gospel Age will share 

in it; but that in the resurrection of the unjust (Acts 24: 15) 
vast multitudes of them will be saved. 

(Signed) C. T. RUSSELL, affirms. 
L. S. WHITE, denies. 

(5) The Scriptures clearly teach that immersion in 
water, "in the name of the Father and of the Son and of 
the holy Spirit," of a believing penitent is for, in order 
to, the remission of sins. 

(Signed) L. S. WHITE, affirms. 
C. T. RUSSELL, denies. 

(6) The Scriptures clearly teach that the second 
coming of Christ will precede the Millennium; and that 
the object of both— the second coming and the Millennium 

R4119 :page 19 



-is the blessing of all the families of the earth. 
(Signed) C. T. RUSSELL, affirms. 
L. S. WHITE, denies. 



Allegheny, Pa., Nov. 26, 1907. 
ELDER L. S. WHITE, Dallas, Tex. 

Dear Sir and Brother:— I am in receipt of your formal 
invitation to a public discussion of our doctrinal 
differences along Scriptural lines. I accept the invitation, 
with the assurances of the Editor of the Leader 
and the Way, that you are a widely known and highly 
respected representative of the Radical branch of the 
Christian or Disciple denomination, and yourself a 
Christian gentleman. 

I, too, have enjoyed the spirit of Christian courtesy 

R4119 : page 20 

which has pervaded our correspondence, leading up to 
the final statement of the propositions to be discussed. 
I share with you the hope you express, that the result 
of our meeting may be to the glory of God and to the 
enlightenment, and therefore the blessing, of his 
people. 

I might here remark respecting the first proposition, 
that I accept it as you prefer to have it, but only 
with the understanding that it is not two propositions, 
but one; for I would not be prepared to deny the first 
part of the same, "That the Scriptures clearly teach 
that all hope of salvation today is dependent upon the 
acceptance of the Gospel of Christ, as revealed in 
the Scriptures." I continually affirm that, but it is the 
after part of this proposition that I deny, viz., "That 
such acceptance is confined to this present life." 

Your letter makes no reference to chairmen for the 
six sessions. I shall assume, therefore, that you will 
agree to my previous suggestion, viz., that the duties of 
the chairman shall consist in preserving order, and in notifying 
each speaker as to the termination of his limit of 
time; and that, if possible, ministers of Cincinnati, of 
various outside denominations, be secured as chairmen 
—if possible, a different one for each session. Your letter, 
while stating that the discussion shall be limited to two 
hours at each session, offers no suggestion respecting 
the division of the time. I shall assume this to be an 
oversight, and that my previous suggestion on this 
subject has your approval, viz., that the first fifty minutes 
shall be at the disposal of the affirmative; the second 
fifty at the disposal of the negative, to be followed 
by ten minutes for the affirmative and then ten minutes 
for the negative. 

As respects rules for the controversy: I suggest 
that each speaker be allowed full liberty to order his 
subject according to his best judgment, and that it 



shall be in order for him to present his argument as 
may please him best. The language and conduct of 
each of the disputants shall represent to his opponent 
and the auditors in general his conception of the divine 
rules and standards governing Christian courtesy. 

With Christian regards and prayers for divine 
guidance of us both in the interests of truth, 

Yours in the Lord, C. T. RUSSELL. 



R4119 : page 20 

REPORTS FROM HARVEST-FIELDS ABROAD 
REPORT FROM GREAT BRITAIN, 1907 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have now the pleasure of sending the report of the 
British work for the past financial year. You will see that 
this year we are able to show a general increase in the work. 
We are glad to do this, not only because it is more pleasant 
than if we had to report decrease, but because it shows that 
the work of the Lord goes forward, and that there is yet 
much opportunity to work in the Harvest field. A review 
of the work and the prospects show that there is, apparently, 
an almost unlimited field for the "harvesters," and unlimited 
scope for their energies; the fields are "white unto 
harvest," and there are but few months for the reaping. Of 
late we have had abundant proof that the multitudes will 
listen to the message of the Kingdom and to the various 
features of the Plan; they are glad to have the "stones 
gathered out" of the way. The year has been one of continued 
activity, and, with the exception of the shortage of 
books we have experienced, there have been no hindrances. 
When you come next year you will find very much to give 
you cheer and encouragement, and grateful and willing 
hearts who share with you in the joys and sorrows of the 
harvesting. 

This year we are able to report an increase in the circulation 
of the DAWNS and STUDIES. We have sold nearly 
8,000 more books, and this would have been increased to 
nearly 10,000 but for the shortage. The greater portion of 
the increase is in Vol. I., but a good proportion is in Vols. 
II., III., through some of the Colporteurs selling sets of three 
or six. There is a great mining and manufacturing population 
yet in almost absolute ignorance of the Truth, and the 
small towns and villages of England are yet as virgin soil to 
the workers. During the year the possibility of a colporteur 
of good address being able to dispose of the books in difficult 
ground, and that in sufficient numbers as to provide a living, 
has been proved several times; while in the ordinary way 
the average colporteur can always get on. There is no reason 
for a person of good address and a readiness of manner 



failing in the work of a colporteur, nor for thinking that 
there is any part of this country where the work cannot be 
made self-supporting. 

The visit of Brother Williamson was specially enjoyed 
and it did much to cement the already close relationship 
between us and our brethren in America. The Conventions 
were happy and good times, and were surely blessed of the 
Lord. 

You will see that the "Volunteer" work has gone on 
about as usual, and that the British friends show much activity 
in this work. We have yet a good supply of tracts 
upon which the brethren can call, and we shall be glad to 
have them make request. 

The donation to the TRACT FUND is not quite so high 
as last year's total: it is good to share in the joys of the 
dear brethren in their giving to the Lord whether of means 
or of service. I continually thank the Lord for the privilege 
of being used to serve with them in this way. 

The meetings all over the land seem to grow in zeal 
for the work, and we would that this should be the case 
with us all, and that at the same time we may grow in the 
grace of the Lord. While so much waits to be done it is a 
pity to spend any energy of mind or body in that which is 
merely wasted in the doing. The Lord gives us the privilege 
of building up each other, and thus of building up that 
holy city, and also of witnessing to the world, and we can 
do these things only as we are intent upon the work. May 
his grace help us to bind ourselves upon the altar and thus 
to each other and to the Lord. 

With brotherly love and affection, and conveying the 
love of the British brethren, 

I am yours in his grace, J. HEMERY. 

SUMMARY OF THE BRITISH WORK FOR 1907 

Total number of DAWN-STUDIES sold at cost 34,575 

Booklets, Manna, etc. " 7,876 

Tracts distributed free 1,394,500 

" stated in pages 35,933,000 

" Letters received 8,130 

" sent out 6,825 

R4119 : page 21 

FINANCIAL STATEMENT, 1907 

Cost of tracts distributed free, including L. s. d. 

postage, freight, etc 1,564 6 4 

The above, stated in U.S. money $7,556.20 

Pilgrim and Convention expenses 109 2 7 

The above, stated in U.S. money $527.1 1 



Totals $8,083.31, or 1,673 11 

Tract Fund and "Good Hopes" $4,179.77 or 861 4 7 

Deficit for 1907 3,820.13 or 811 4 7 



REPORT FROM GERMANY, 1907 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

By the Lord's grace we have reached the end of another 
year of harvest work in Germany, ending Nov. 1st, and 
it seems only too short a period to have accomplished very 
much. At least we could wish it had been a great deal 
more, but we know it is a day of small things which the 
Lord does not despise. Neither will we think little of the 
possible blessing he is abundantly able to give to the large 
quantities of tracts scattered all over Germany. We no 
doubt see only a small fraction of it in our mails: much of 
it will no doubt be seen later, when the seed sown on the 
"dry land" will be plowed in by the great time of trouble 
impending and afterward caused to sprout by the showers 
of blessings and times of refreshing from the presence of the 

R4120 : page 21 

Lord. We take courage and lift up our heads in rejoicing, 

knowing that deliverance is nigh for the world as well as 

for God's people. The great Adversary seems to be aware 

of it here in Germany, and is stirring up the most religious 

bodies of Christian people and deceiving them with his imitation 

"speaking in tongues," and the secular press is not 

slow to make light of it and to reproach Christianity as the 

source of this unchristian spirit. The intelligent Christian 

public is fast drifting into open infidelity or what they are 

pleased to call a religion— "Monism"— the disbelief of the 

supernatural and of the future existence of the individual. 

An organization under this name has rapidly gained thousands 

of members and is flooding the country with highly 

enticing and well-written leaflets. Surely it seems that the 

devil and his angels are fighting hard, but we have the assurance 

of the Scriptures that our Lord will be victorious, 

and that Satan will be bound for the thousand years. 

Praise God and his well-beloved Son, our Lord Jesus! 

Following is a brief statement of the literature circulated 
during this year, and a financial statement of the Volunteer, 
Tract and Pilgrim Work:— 

DAWNS, BOOKLETS, TOWERS AND TRACTS DISTRIBUTED 

DAWN Volumes, cloth 2,556 

Vol. I., TOWER form 4,000 

Booklets 3,576 

Copies German TOWER, monthly 1,800 

" " " for year 21,600 

8 page Volunteer Tracts 4,000,000 

8-page TOWERS 30,000 

16-page " 16,700 



Total in tract pages 41,521,600 

Letters and cards received 4,254 

" " sent out 2,550 

FINANCIAL STATEMENT OF THE TRACT & PILGRIM WORK 

Printing, postage, freight, etc Mks. 33,340.05 

Pilgrim expenses " 1,524.12 

Rent, light, heat, living expense of office 
force Mks. 4,064.14 

Total " 38,928.31 

Receipts, Tract Fund, from friends in 

Germany " 6,034.80 

Deficiency supplied by the home office, 

Allegheny ($7,832.26) " 32,893.51 

I should remark with regard to the above amount of 
cash received from America in the interest of the Lord's 
work in Germany, that the friends generally are very appreciative 
of this generous help and the self-sacrificing it implies 
on the part of their American brethren. They feel like 
saying: Be assured, your labor of love is not in vain in the 
Lord's cause. 

We notice with gladness your great conventions in 
America, and long for that greatest Convention of all, beyond 
the vail. But while we still sojourn here, we are glad to have 
what seasons of refreshing the Lord sees best to grant us, and 
so we are looking forward with much pleasure to your proposed 
visit in the spring. May the Lord prosper you and all of his 
dear people in his service, and help us all to finish the work he 
has given us to do. And may God, our Father, according to 
his own good pleasure, now in the end of the age, glorify 
his dear Son, our Lord, and with him his Elect, to the end 
that his own holy name may be glorified.— John 17:1-3. 

We all send much love in the Lord to you and your 
co-laborers one and all. 

Your brother in the blessed service, O. A. KOETITZ. 



AUSTRALASIAN REPORT, 1907 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Another year of opportunities and privileges in the Harvest 
service has closed, and the report of the Society's Australasian 
Branch is due. 

As we consider the events of the past twelve months, 
we feel constrained to acknowledge, with gratitude to the 
Lord and appreciation of the zeal and energy of his people, 
that some progress has been made in bringing the Harvest 
message to the attention of God's people in this part of the 
"field;" yet we could wish that more energy had been used, 
more zeal displayed and perhaps more accomplished. The 



time is short and shortening, but the dimensions of the 
"field" show no signs of decrease. 

The Colporteurs have been blessed and a blessing during 
the past year. As shown in the summary, a few hundred 
more cloth-bound volumes were put out than during 
the year before. This increase would doubtless have run 
into thousands, had we not been deprived, during the greater 
portion of the time, of the labors of three very efficient 
workers. There are signs of others about to engage in the 
service, and we may still pray for more laborers. As heretofore, 
a goodly proportion of the newly interested have been 
found by the colporteurs. 

The Volunteers have been considerably more active 
than formerly, in some directions, in methodical free tract 
distribution. Nearly twice as many tracts were distributed 
this year as last, totalling over nine and a half millions of 
pages. Naturally, our figures are small, compared with 
those for other English-speaking countries; at the same 
time, we take a little comfort in the thought that only about 

R4120 : page 22 

one-fortieth (perhaps less) of the total number of Z.W.T. 
readers live in Australasia, and that if we circulate one-fortieth 
of the total number of DAWN-STUDIES and free tracts by 
colporteuring, volunteering and otherwise in this territory, 
we are at least keeping in line with the rest of you in this 
respect. Yet we know that more, much more, can be done 
here, so we feel free to exhort the friends to "work while it 
is called day." The Lord has done much for us; at best 
we can do but little for him. 

There is some increase in the voluntary donations, too, 
yet not sufficient to keep pace with Tract Fund expenditures, 
to say nothing of overtaking our deficit. But as it was in 
former times, so it is now and here— "not many rich" have 
been called. Nevertheless, we are glad to testify to an increasing 
appreciation of this feature of the service of Present 
Truth by those who are able to take part in it, and this 
without exhortation of any sort. 

It was the writer's privilege to visit the brethren in 
Adelaide and Western Australia last June, a journey of about 
5,000 miles, and we hope to make other visits during the 
coming year. 

Desiring a continued interest in your prayers and in 
those of the brethren everywhere in behalf of the work and 
workers in this part of the vineyard, I remain, dear brother, 

Yours in the Redeemer's service, E. C. HENNINGES. 

AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH SUMMARY 

Publications Circulated 

Copies of DAWNS and STUDIES 21,903 

" TOWER-DAWNS 1,220 

" Booklets 1,315 



Total 24,438 

Copies of Tracts and Z.W.T. sent free 418,450 

These represent in tract pages 9,509,000 

Letters and cards received 1,864 

sent 3,843 



Total 5,707 

FINANCIAL SUMMARY 

Expenditures 

L. s. d. 

Deficit from last year 606 17 1 

Printing, paper, postage, freight (in and 

out), rent, gas, etc 161 4 11 

Pilgrim work 43 17 



Total 811 19 

Voluntary donations from Australasia 

Good Hopes realized L. 31 17 11 

From other sources 136 13 2 

168 11 1 



Deficit owing to Head Office 643 7 1 1 



REPORT FROM JAMAICA, 1907 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Once again we have the pleasure of sending you a general 
report of the work— for the year 1907. 

We are glad to note how our hearts are growing in 
thankful appreciation, while the loving kindness of our God 
toward us is ever increasing. Indeed the year's experiences 
remind us of the general conventions— the last is the best. 
And considering that wine (the fruit of the vine) symbolizes 
the spiritual refreshment of the Lord's people on this 
side the vail, as well as the "glory to follow" (Matt. 26:29), 
we are thinking that the incident at the marriage in Cana 
might be a suggestion that we should expect the last to be 
the best until we drink it new. 

The Pilgrim service has been more extensive than last 
year and has done much to establish the Lord's people in 
out-of-the-way places; indeed, we are realizing more and 
more how important a part it plays in assisting us to put on 

R4121 : page 22 

the whole armor of God to withstand the temptations of this 



"evil day." 
The amount of work done for the year is as follows:— 

Total Pilgrim visits 53 

Total miles traveled 2426 

Public meetings 10 

Home meetings 212 

According to the present outlook this will be the most 
important service for the year begun. 

The Colporteur service has circulated over 600 volumes 
more than last year, and this we consider as doing very well, 
when we take into account the earthquake, the eight months 
drought following and the resulting financial depression. 
These have produced much starvation in various parts of 
the island and the scarcity of food is still felt. 

The number engaged in the Colporteur service during 
the year was 24, eight of whom devoted all of their time. 
Some of these and many others who did "sharpshooting" 
were stimulated to enter the service by the hint given out in 
the TOWER that every reader should try to put out at least 
six volumes for the year. These dear brethren and sisters 
are receiving much favor at the hand of the Lord for the 
spirit of self-sacrifice which prompts them. 

The number of tracts distributed was much less than 
last year, owing to the unsettled condition of things, and 
yet these "swift messengers" have done some effective work 
in silence, revealed to us through correspondence. 

Newly interested friends are growing phenomenally. 
The public seems desirous of hearing something better and 
many are in earnest. We believe the recent experiences of 
the island have much to do with the spirit of investigation 
which has become a stimulus to the reapers to thrust in the 
sickle. 

We were unable to hold a General Convention this 
year, but there were three local ones which were sources of 
great blessing to all. Some enjoyed them even better than 
all that went before. 

We think that our TOWER list just now is a fair representation 
of good interest. The Lord is working all things 
after the counsel of his own will to the spiritual advantage 
of his dear children, and in this we rejoice. 

We pray, for you and for all, the Lord's continual guidance. 
Pray for us. 

Yours in fellowship and service, J. A. BROWNE. 

OUTPUT FOR 1907 

Total output of DAWNS, STUDIES, etc 2,823 

Total output of Booklets 1,539 

Tracts, sample TOWERS, etc 16,800 

FINANCIAL STATEMENT 

L. s. d. 

Pilgrim service 96 16 

Freight, etc 43 7 7-1/2 



Sundries, current expenses, etc 119 19 9-1/2 

Total expense 260 3 5 

Voluntary contributions 29 12 9 

Deficit for 1907 ($1,100) 230 10 8 



page 23 
BEREAN BIBLE STUDY IN TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
OTHER SIGNIFICANT TYPES 
FEBRUARY 2 

23. Describe the Mercy Seat and state what it symbolized. 
I Cor. 1 1:3; Psa. 80:1; I Sam. 4:4; 2 Sam. 6:2; 

Isa. 37:16. T.123, par. 3,4. 

24. Can humanity enter Jehovah's presence? I Tim. 6:16; 
T.124, par. 1. 

25. Why was the Mercy Seat called the "Propitiatory"? 
and what particular attribute of God's character 

was represented in it? Psa. 89:14; Job 36:17; 37:23; 
Isa. 56:1; Rev. 15:3. T.124, par. 2. 

26. Is this word "Propitiatory" ever applied to our Lord 
Jesus? and why? Rom. 3:25,26; T.124, par. 3. 

FEBRUARY 9 

27. What was represented by the two cherubim? And 
what was shown by their being of the same piece 

as the "golden slab"? T.125, par. 1. 

28. Was the blood of the sacrifices placed by the High 
Priest on the Cherubim? And, if not, where was 

it placed? and why? T.125, par. 2. 

29. What attribute of Jehovah led to the plan of redemption? 
I Pet. 1:20; T. 126, par. 1. 

FEBRUARY 16 

30. When will love and power act for the accomplishment 
of God's wonderful provision for mankind? 

T.126, par. 2. 

3 1 . How is the relationship and oneness of Christ and 
his Bride to the Father shown in the Ark? and 

how is the supreme headship of Jehovah represented? 
I Cor. 11:3; John 17:9,21; T.126, par. 3. 

FEBRUARY 23 

THE PRIEST UNBLEMISHED 

32. Could a man who had a blemish of any kind fill the 
office of High Priest, in the type? And what was 



prefigured in this? T.126, par. 4; T.127, par. 1, first 
six lines. 

33. What solemn lesson is contained in this for us? 
Rev. 3:11; T.127, par. 1, 6th line on. 

THE MYSTERY HID FROM AGES AND GENERATIONS 
-COL. 1:26- 

34. Why were the beauties and glories of the Tabernacle 
kept so securely hidden from the people? 

What does this mean in the antitype? T.127, par. 2. 



R4121 : page 23 

WHAT CONSTITUTES TEACHING? 
A PLEA FOR THE SISTERS 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Before entering upon this subject, I wish to apologize 
for writing at all. 

This question with the impression to write has haunted 
me with great persistence for many weeks and will not be 
suppressed. I have striven to crush it, to forget it, to relegate 
it to oblivion, arguing that it in no wise concerns me 
anyhow: when "Am I my brother's keeper?" seems to ring 
in my ears, as it were; and it still follows me and will not 
be side-tracked. I have taken it to the Lord and prayed 
him to guide my pen. 

First— There is a tendency (unconscious, no doubt) 
among some to make very frequent mention of the subjugation 
of the wife and the lordship of the husband, enlarging 
greatly upon these points, but utterly failing (at least in my 
hearing) to call attention to the duties of the latter, except, 
indeed, his lordship— always forbearing to point to the command, 
"Husbands, love your wives as Christ loved the 
Church," "giving honor to the wife as the weaker vessel," 
etc. This one-sided application of Scripture leads a certain 
type of man, unfortunately not rare, to become a petty tyrant, 
ever reminding the wife that she must obey him, swelling 
himself that he is lord over somebody, while ignoring 
entirely his side of the question, degrading her, if she be 
degradable, into the position of a slave. Having forced her 
there he ceases to respect her. It is such teaching that is 
developing men of certain mental calibre (and there are 
many) into characters such as "Tennessee" describes in his 
letter in the WATCH TOWER of Nov. 15th. 

Lest it be inferred that I have a grievance along the 
above line, I beg to say I have not. My husband is one of 
the noblest of Christian gentlemen, fulfilling, it seems to me, 
as nearly as is possible for fallen humanity, the conditions 
of a typical head, crowning my life with tenderest love, protection 



and care. 

Second.— All educators, even those of indifferent ability, 
are well aware of, and appreciate the value of questioning 
the students (my husband and I were both in this work 
for upwards of twenty years, he in the medical colleges, I 
in the public schools), yet in a simple class, which meets for 
Bible study with the DAWNS or Tabernacle Shadows, never a 
question is asked a sister. She has toiled, it may be, all 
the week, Sunday included, at tasks that would appal a 
masculine mind— washing, ironing, scrubbing, baking, garment-making 
cooking for husband and children, half a 
dozen of the latter, more or less, and a thousand and one other 
things incidental to housework— with no leisure to read or 
study, yet when she is privileged to attend a Bible class this 
important aid is denied her. Never a question to lead her 
to think, to call out interest, or to draw out her mind and fix 
her attention. Think of it! No wonder the meeting drags 
uninterestingly, as one remarked to me. 

Pastor Russell, I will not believe, unless I see it over 
your own signature, that you approve of thus depriving the 
members (a part of them) of Christ's Body of this valuable 
aid to gaining knowledge. Personally, it is of little or no 
consequence to me whether or not I am ever asked a question. 
I have leisure to think, read, study and pray, and, 
thank God, always have had, but I plead for those whose 
hands are fuller and for the principle involved. 

Again, lest it be thought that I write as above because 
I wish for prominence in our meetings or for display of 
attainments, I beg to state that if I care for those things 
they are within my reach: it is not necessary to look for 
them in our little class. I have never wished for more 
privileges in the Church than are shown in the Scripture. 
Never thought a woman should be bishop or deacon; 1 Tim. 1:13 
excludes her, also many men. There is likewise something 
inherent or God-implanted in the nature of womanly 
women which makes such usurpation repugnant to them. 
My work in the Church in the past, in which I know I had 
the Spirit and God's blessing, consisted in taking part in 
prayer meetings or evangelistic meetings ("praying and 

R4121 : page 24 

prophesying," as I see it) and teaching in the Sunday 
Schools. 

Hoping attention will be called to the above-mentioned 
evils, I am, yours in Christ, M. E. 



IN REPLY TO THE ABOVE 



We must admit that there is much unmanliness and 
tyranny in some men, and much unwomanliness and tyranny 
in some women— as results of the fall. Even amongst those 



favored by the Lord with the High Calling these ignoble 

qualities are manifest; because God is not calling chiefly 

the noble, but the mean. Not many rich, not many wise, 

not many noble hath God chosen, but mainly the mean 

things to confound the mighty, and things that are naught 

to bring to naught the things that are prominent. (1 Cor. 1:26-28.) 

We see the reason to be that the noble and the 

great usually trust too much in themselves and are unready 

to implore and accept forgiveness and aid through the only 

name. Hence the seeing of unmanliness and unwomanliness 

must not offend us, nor hinder our love for the brethren 

—for all whom the Lord has called. 

But, on the other hand, all those accepted to the School 
of Christ have the greatest of all teachers, and should become 
the noblest of the noble in their sentiments; for it is 
written, "They shall be all taught of God." These lessons 
of the Spirit, inculcated through the Word, develop in all 
the Elect the graces of the holy Spirit, namely, meekness, 
gentleness, patience, brotherly kindness, love. Some grow 
these fruits of the Spirit more promptly and more luxuriantly 

R4122 : page 24 

than others, but all must attain them in heart (and 
hence, surely, in some good degree outwardly) ere they can 
be accepted as heirs of the Kingdom. As it is written, they 
must all be copies of God's dear Son, their Redeemer. 

But, how comes it that amongst the more advanced 
there are sometimes acts, such as are referred to in the letter 
foregoing, which seem to some to be tyrannical? For instance, 
the passing by of the sisters in the asking of the 
Berean Study questions. We suggest that this need not be 
ascribed to an ignoble motive so long as we can think of a 
noble one that would meet the conditions. For instance, the 
leader of the meeting may have had in mind as a God-given 
rule the Apostle's words, "I suffer not a woman to teach." 
And possibly he reasoned that to ask a sister a question 
would be inviting her to teach, and hence be on his part a 
violation of the apostolic injunction. Possibly he thought 
that in giving the sisters a chance to answer by saying, 
"Has anyone else an answer to suggest?" he was going 
to the extent of his conscientious privilege— leaving it to the 
conscience of each sister to decide and act accordingly. 
This plan certainly does divide the responsibility. The 
chief difficulty about it seems to be that it implies an impropriety 
on the part of the sisters who answer, in the judgment 
of the more prominent brethren. 

We trust that none of the brethren takes the view that 
the sisters have no good thoughts; nor that they are 
incapable of expressing these; nor that they cannot 
teach well their own sons and daughters. All must 
admit that women have displayed wonderful powers in 
teaching, reasoning, managing, etc. And all noble 
men, and especially all developed brethren, must desire to 
"render honor to whom honor is due"— and therefore must 
greatly honor noble mothers, sisters, wives and daughters, 



and womankind in general, for their many noble and gentle 
traits. This certainly is the writer's attitude of heart. 

As for the noble Apostle Paul, we cannot think of him 
as a woman-hater or as a woman-despiser. Surely his 
epistles clearly show that he, too, honored true womanhood. 
Who ever expressed the esteem for woman more pointedly 
than he, when he wrote, "As Christ loved the Church and 
gave himself for it, so ought men also to love their wives 
as their own bodies"? (Eph. 5:25,28.) His reason for 
writing as he did respecting woman's sphere of activity in 
the Church was undoubtedly loyalty to God— to duty. Our 
Lord declared of his apostles, "Whatsoever ye shall bind on 
earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall 
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (Matt. 16:19.) 
And surely the Lord used St. Paul more than any other 
Apostle to declare the loosing from the Law and the obligations 
and responsibilities binding upon the "New Creation." 

A MORE EXCELLENT WAY 

After giving the subject considerable prayer and meditation 
we feel that a more moderate view than the above 
might be attached to the words, "I suffer not a woman to 
teach." It is as follows: 

Teaching is not within the province of all the brethren, 
either; but only for those specially indicated by divine 
providence. This is shown by several Scriptures. For instance, 
to the Elders of the Church at Ephesus St. Paul 
said: "Take heed, therefore, unto yourselves and to all the 
flock over which the holy Spirit hath made you overseers 
[elders, shepherds, bishops] to feed [teach] the Church of 
God." (Acts 20:28.) Again, note the Apostle's statement 
that God hath set the various members in the Body as it 
hath pleased him, and that amongst those so set he mentions 
"teachers." (1 Cor. 12:18,28.) Again, note St. James' 
words, "Be not many of you teachers, brethren." (Jas. 3:1, 
Diaglott.) Again, one of the qualifications to be sought 
when electing elders was that they should be "apt to 
teach." (1 Tim. 3:2.) Again, respecting the priestly or 
teaching service we read, "No man taketh this honor to himself, 
but he that was called of God, as was Aaron." (Heb. 5:4.) 
The Lord, speaking through the Church his Body (including 
males and females, bond and free— all one in 
Christ), chooses for the eldership certain brethren "apt to 
teach"; and, as the Apostle indicates, there is a special responsibility 
resting upon these as respects the feeding of the 
Lord's flock. Again he asks, "Are all teachers."— 1 Cor. 12:29. 

Now, then, may we not interpret the Apostle's words, 
"I suffer not a woman to teach," to mean— I never sanction 
a female Elder in the Church. If we may, one difficulty 
is removed; and it would be well in accord 
with this view that we read, "If a woman pray or prophesy 
[speak publicly] in the Church. ..let her head be covered"; 
because, in the Church, the woman figuratively represents 
the Church, while the man represents the Lord, the 
Head of the Church. 



This would settle the matter complained of in the 
letter above published. Then it would surely be as proper 
to ask the Berean questions of the sisters as of the brothers; 
because in this view of the matter, none of those answering 
would be a teacher nor considered as teaching, but 
a learner, reciting what he or she had learned or thinks had 

R4122 : page 25 

been learned from the Lord through his instruments or 
teachers. 

To the Editor's mind this is most satisfactory and he 
trusts that it will be so to all WATCH TOWER readers. If some 
of the dear sisters have been pained in the past by a too 
rigid following of the Word, we trust they will be magnanimous 
and credit the strictness not to a lack of love for women, 
but to a greater love for the Lord and his Word. Whoever 
has been "rightly exercised" by the stricter view will, 
we believe, receive a corresponding blessing, for our Lord is 
able to make all things work together for good to each and 
all of his faithful. 

"Let him that is taught in the Word communicate unto 
him that teacheth in all good things."— Gal. 6:6. 



R4122 : page 25 

CLEANSING THE TEMPLE 

-JOHN 2:13-22.-JANUARY 26.- 

Golden Text:— "Holiness becometh thy 
house, O Lord, forever."— Psalm 93:5. 

WE are aware that there are many scholars who 

believe that there were two cleansings of the 

Temple by our Lord. It is admitted by all 

that one cleansing occurred at the last Passover which 

Jesus attended a few days before his crucifixion. This 

is well attested by Matthew 21:12; Mark 11:15; Luke 19:14. 

Our lesson is taken from John's Gospel, and 

because this incident is grouped with others which occurred 

in the beginning of the Lord's ministry it is 

assumed, we believe without sufficient authority, that 

there were two cleansings, the one at the beginning, 

the other at the close of our Lord's ministry. It is 

acknowledged, however, that John's Gospel was written 

long after the others, and apparently with the intention 

of supplying certain details that were overlooked 

by the other historians. To our understanding Jesus 

began his teachings in a rather quiet manner, reserving 

many of his mightiest works for the last, amongst 

others the calling of Lazarus from the tomb, the triumphal 

entry into Jerusalem on the ass, and the cleansing 

of the Temple. This latter act has a peculiar significance 



when we remember that it followed our Lord's 

assumption of the office of King— which he did just 

five days before his crucifixion, when he rode upon the 

ass in fulfilment of the prophecy, "Behold, thy King cometh 

unto thee: he is just and having salvation; lowly 

and riding upon an ass." (Zech. 9:9.) Thus recognized 

by the multitude as the King of the Jews, our 

Lord exercised kingly authority in the cleansing of the 

Temple, and was no doubt backed up in the matter by 

the sentiment of the throng which had just acclaimed 

him the son of David with hosannas. It was under 

these circumstances that none attempted resistance. 

It was a requirement of the Jewish Law that the 
devout of the nation should assemble at the Passover 
season to keep the Feast of Passover in celebration of 
their deliverance from Egypt and the sparing of their 
firstborn on the preceding night. Josephus tells us 
that sometimes the population of Jerusalem on such an 
occasion was swelled to the number of two millions. 
Far more than half of these must have camped outside 
the city, unable to find lodgings within. It was the 
custom on such occasions to offer sacrifices, some representing 
thankfulness, some consecration and others 
contrition. Of course the multitude of strangers from 
afar rarely brought with them the doves or pigeons or 
lambs, etc., which they presented in sacrifice. The 
supply of these animals for sacrifice became quite a 
business on such occasions. Moreover, there was a 
certain Temple tax levied, which must be paid in a 
particular kind of money called the "shekel of the sanctuary." 
The last coinage of these was in B.C. 140, 
hence they were quite scarce in our Lord's day and sold 
at a premium. Roman coin was circulated throughout 
Palestine in general merchandising, so that when the 
time came at the Passover for the paying of the Temple 
tax with the Temple money not only visitors from 
foreign lands needed to purchase shekels of the sanctuary 

R4123 : page 25 

but also the home folk. 

"TAKE THESE THINGS HENCE" 

In consequence of these conditions the Temple area 
became quite a house of merchandise and money-changing, 
and as the necessities of the people were 
taken advantage of and high prices charged, our Lord 
called the place a "den of thieves." (Matt. 21:13.) In 
imagining the scene we are not to think of money-changers, 
sheep and dove-traders, etc., in the Temple 



PLAN OF THE TEMPLE IN OUR LORD'S DAY 



proper, but in its outer courts, the whole of which was 
designated the Temple or the house of God. This trading 
was probably carried on in what was known as 
the Court of the Gentiles. Into the holiest precincts 
of the Temple proper only the priests were permitted 
to enter; into the enclosure where the altar was located 
the Levites were also permitted; outside of this was 

R4123 : page 26 

the Court of the men of Israel, and still further out a 

Court of the women, and beyond this enclosure the 

Court of the Gentiles, provided to the intent that all 

nationalities might there congregate for worship. Our 

Lord referred to this fact saying, "It is written, My 

house shall be a house of prayer for all nations." (Mark 11:17.) 

Probably the Court of the Gentiles was little 

used, as few Gentiles had become sincere converts to 

Judaism. The size of the court apportioned to them 

was probably symbolical of the larger proportionate 

numbers who should ultimately come into the Lord's 

favor and become true disciples and fellow-heirs with 

the Jews of divine favor. 

It is claimed that any Jew under the Law had the 
right to do as Jesus did in the matter of driving out the 
traders, but very evidently no Jew had previously attempted 
it. The scourge of small cords could not have 
done serious damage to anyone, but we do not know 
that our Lord used it upon humanity. He may have 
driven out the animals, whose owners would follow 
them, and it will be noticed that he did not set at liberty 
the doves, which could not so easily have been recovered, 
but permitted their owners to take them away. 
The overturning of the tables of the money-changers 
would not only stop their usurious exchange business, 
but keep them busy looking after their coin. We may 
be sure from the fact that our Lord lived under the 
Law and obeyed it that his conduct on this occasion 
was quite within the recognized proprieties, even 
though it was unusual, and even though he himself had 
visited the Temple time and again as a Jew, and had 
witnessed these same scenes but had not interfered 
with them. This we consider to be a proof that the 
occurrence took place but once, and that after our Lord 
had assumed the office of King— just before his crucifixion. 
Thus the statement, "The zeal of thine house 
hath consumed me," was fulfilled. 

THE CLEANSING IN THE ANTITYPE 

When we remember that the Law was a shadow of 
better things coming, that the Jewish people typified 
Spiritual Israel, and that their Temple typified the 
Gospel Church with its various classes, then we begin 
to see how we may look here for a parallel of that 
cleansing work of the Jewish harvest. Those familiar 



with Volume II., STUDIES, will remember that the Jewish 
dispensation is the parallel to the Gospel dispensation 
in very many particulars, including that of time 
and the fact that it ended with a harvest period, and 
that our Lord at his first advent was the chief reaper in 
the Jewish harvest, as he is to be the chief reaper in 
the Gospel harvest at his second advent. We have 
noted also the fact that the time parallel of October, 
1874, corresponds to the beginning of our Lord's ministry 
at the time of his baptism, and that April, 1878, 
corresponds to the time of our Lord's acceptance of the 
office of King, riding upon the ass and receiving the 
shouts of the multitude, and then proceeding to the 
Temple cleansing work. Our thought is that the antitypical 
cleansing of the Lord's Temple has been in 
progress since the spring of 1878. 

Within the hallowed precincts of the nominal Temple 
of today are many who have long been making merchandise 
of their privileges, opportunities and knowledge. 
All intelligent people well know that religious matters 
are to a large extent made merchandise of. Amongst 
the Roman Catholics everything possible is hedged 
about with penalties and prohibitions and limitations, 
so that the people are led to believe that they can present 
nothing acceptable to God except as they receive 
it through their priesthood. They are expected to pay 
the priesthood for every birth and the baptism of the 
child; they are expected to pay at every service, that 
they may be participants in the blessings of the common 
mass; they are expected to pay for every blessed 
scapular sprinkled with holy water; they are expected 
to pay for every funeral service and for every prayer, 
as well as for the privilege of being buried in holy 
ground. In all this we have a close counterpart to that 
which our Lord denominated a den of thieves, making 
merchandise of divine things. 

As for Protestants, there are many evidences of the 
same spirit amongst them, but as they represent a 
more intelligent class, the exactions upon them by the 
clergy are the more refined. With few exceptions the 
payment for baptisms and funerals and marriages is 
apparently left optional. This is the wisest way with 
this class of worshipers. Neither are there attempts 
made to collect money for saying masses for the dead, 
to exact a specific fee from each one occupying a place 
at a service, though the collection plate is passed with 
regularity, and frequently strong appeals are made for 
money, and sometimes with the announcement that 
nothing inferior to a silver piece will be acceptable. 
It is to the credit of Protestants that they do not tax 
the living for prayers and masses for the dead, as do 
the Roman Catholics. Nevertheless strong impression 
is sought to be made upon all, that membership, either 
in a Catholic Church or in some one of the numerous 
Protestant ones, is necessary to salvation, and that 
liberality to the Church of one's choice is also a necessity. 



Although rarely so stated, it is implied that 

eternal torment is the alternative. We are not inveighing 

against charity and liberality for the spread of the 

Gospel of Christ: neither did Jesus say one word 

against liberal giving on the part of the Jews for the 

support of the Temple. Our Lord's condemnation fell 

upon those who were making merchandise of the opportunity, 

circumstance and conditions. It is our belief, 

indeed, that Christian people have been blessed in their 

response to the numerous demands: nevertheless the 

principle is all wrong. Whatever is given to the Lord 

should be voluntarily done, with love for him, with a 

desire to render unto him the first-fruits, the best of 

all that we possess, time, influence, money, etc. 

"THE TEMPLE OF HIS BODY" 

The Jews demanded of the Lord by what authority 
he set up so high a standard as he required of them in 
the cleansing of the Temple. He answered them, "Destroy 
this temple and in three days I will raise it up." 
Of course they could not understand that it was one of 

R4123 : page 27 

our Lord's dark sayings, which is fully comprehended 
even yet by only a few. The Jews thought our Lord 
spoke slightingly of the Temple of which they were so 
proud, which just recently had been finished, after being 
in process of construction for forty-six years. 
They were incensed at him, and we recall that this was 
one of the charges against him a few days later. When 
he was arraigned before the High Priest it was said 
that he had blasphemed the Temple, spoken slightingly 
of it in declaring that he would raise it up again, if 
destroyed, within three days. "But he spake of the 
Temple of his Body." The disciples evidently got the 
thought that he referred to his fleshly body as the Temple 
of God, and supposed that our Lord's prediction 
was fulfilled three days after his crucifixion. But we 
cannot so view the matter. To our understanding the 
Lord spake of the Temple of his Body— of the Church, 
his Body— of the Temple of which the Apostle Peter 
subsequently wrote, that we as living stones are built 
together upon Christ for a habitation of God through 
the Spirit. To suppose that our Lord spoke of the 
fleshly body as the Temple, and to suppose that that 
fleshly body was raised on the third day, would be to 
suppose that our Lord did not fully pay over the price 
necessary for our redemption. 

Such a view would contradict his own statement, 
"My flesh I give for the life of the world." (John 6:51.) 
He gave his flesh not only for three days but forever, 
and he was raised by the Father's power from the 
grave the Lord of glory. As the Apostle declares, "Now 
the Lord is that Spirit" (2 Cor. 3:17); and again, "He 



was put to death in the flesh but quickened in the 
Spirit" (I Pet. 3:18); and again, "Though we have 
known Christ after the flesh, now know we him so no 
more." (2 Cor. 5:16.) The flesh was consecrated to 
death at the beginning of our Lord's ministry, and this 
great sacrifice was symbolized in his baptism. It was 
the New Creature that was there begotten of the holy 
Spirit (to which fact John bore witness), which grew 
during the Lord's three and a half years of ministry; 
and it was the New Creature, the Spirit begotten, that 
was born of the Spirit on the third day, when our Lord 
arose from the dead. Our Lord's change was but a 
sample of that which is to come to all of his true followers, 
as the Apostle explains, saying, It is sown in 
weakness, raised in power; sown in dishonor, raised 
in glory; sown an animal body, raised a spiritual body. 
(I Cor. 15:43,44.) So, then, our Lord's body of flesh, 
destroyed by the Jews at Calvary, was not restored on 

R4124 : page 27 

the third day. No restitution work was accomplished 
in him, but a complete change, because, as the Apostle 
declares, "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom 
of God."-ICor. 15:50. 

But, on the other hand, we have the Scriptural declaration 
that the Church is the Body of Christ, of which 
the consecrated faithful are "members in particular." 
(I Cor. 12:27.) We see that as human beings our Lord 
the Head, and all the members of his Body, have been 
suffering the destruction of the flesh, have been sacrificing 
their human nature throughout this Gospel Age, 
and we see that in due time this glorious Church, the 
New Creation, will in the First Resurrection come 
forth a glorious Temple of God, composed of living 
stones and filled with the glory of God. This will be 
on the third day also, for if we consider the six thousand 
years past as six days of a great week, and the 
Millennial Age as the seventh or Sabbath day of that 
week, we find that it was early in the fifth of these days 
that our Lord sacrificed, that many of his followers suffered 
likewise during that and the following sixth day, 
and that the seventh day, into which we have chronologically 
entered since 1872, is thus the third day, in 
which, very early in the morning, the entire Body of 
Christ, the King of glory, will be perfected. Then the 
great Temple of God will be complete and ready for the 
great work of the Millennial Age, the blessing of all the 
families of the earth, and through it they all may have 
the opportunity of coming into full harmony with God 
and gaining the blessing thereof— eternal life. 



R4124 : page 27 



REGENERATION AND THE KINGDOM 

-JOHN3:l-21.-FEBRUARY 2.- 

Golden Text:— "For God so loved the world that he gave 
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on him 
should not perish but have everlasting life."— John 3:16. 

THIS lesson well illustrates the wrong, unscriptural 
trend of thought and of Biblical interpretation 
which has come to prevail so generally throughout 
Christendom. The peculiar, the strange thing connected 
with the matter is that people of apparent 
capacity for reasoning on other subjects seem to abandon 
all logic in the study of God's Word. The usual 
interpretation of this lesson is that Jesus taught Nicodemus 
that he was about to establish a Church, which 
he called the Kingdom of God, without its having any 
likeness to the Kingdom or bearing any rule in the 
world. It is claimed that our Lord meant Nicodemus 
to understand that his Church was to be considered the 
Kingdom because eventually it would so prevail 
throughout the earth that God's will should be done on 
earth even as it is done in heaven. Then, to make this 
interpretation the more absurd, they acknowledge that 
our Lord here declared that no one could appreciate 
this Kingdom or enter into it except he were first begotten 
of the holy Spirit. Now note the absurdity of 
all this:- 

After nearly nineteen centuries the total number of 
both Catholics and Protestants in the world is about 
four hundred millions, including the ring-streaked, the 
speckled and the black— the rough, the scuff, the 
tough of all civilized lands— improperly styled Christendom. 
The remainder of the race, twelve hundred 
millions, either never have heard of the Lord Jesus at 

R4124 : page 28 

all or, having heard, repudiated him. The number 
of the heathen, therefore, today is many times 
as large as the entire population of the earth at the 
time when the Lord conversed with Nicodemus. If the 
world is the Kingdom is it conquering itself in any 
sense of the word? Surely not! But now let us look 
at the four hundred millions called "Christendom," and 
judge as best we may be able who and what they really 



DIAGRAM SHOWING PROPORTION OF HEATHEN TO VARIOUS RELIGIONS TODAY 



are, aside from their profession. How many of them 
make the slightest profession of having been born 
again, begotten again, born from above, and to have 
the renewing of the holy Spirit? Practically none— 



surely, as in our Lord's day, only a "Little Flock." 

If any one is in doubt on this subject let him inquire 
amongst his Christian friends and neighbors on 
the subject of the new birth, the begetting of the holy 
Spirit. Let him explain what he means by a full consecration 
or devotion of time, strength and all that we 
possess to God and his service, and the change of heart 
signified by the begetting and anointing of the holy 
Spirit, and then ask how many of his friends and neighbors 
have either made the consecration involved or 
have received the holy Spirit. He will not have gone 
far into this inquiry until he be fully convinced that 
there is a great mistake in this ordinary view of the 
Kingdom— that it is thoroughly untenable and cannot 
be our Lord's meaning. 

Thus satisfied that the general concept of this lesson 
is radically wrong, let us note carefully and prayerfully 
every word of our lesson with untrammeled 
minds, that we may know the truth and the truth may 
make us free from error, from superstition, and may 
bring to us light, joy and assistance. 

NICODEMUS AND THE GREAT TEACHER 

Nicodemus, an influential man amongst the Jews, 
a member of the Sanhedrin, and widely known as a 
professor of holiness— of full consecration to God— a 
Pharisee, came to Jesus by night; not necessarily from 
fear, possibly wisdom guided him, a prudent recognition 
of the interests of others as well as of his own. 
Possibly he came by night because then he might have 
a better opportunity for private conversation with the 
Master. In any event we find him very reverential and 
courteous. He addressed our Lord as Rabbi, or Teacher, 
and declared his belief that he was from God, a servant 
of God, in whom God evidently delighted, as manifested 
by his miracles. Only a mere portion of the 
conversation of the evening is given. We may reasonably 
presume that Nicodemus came to ask questions 
respecting the Kingdom of God, which he knew John 
and his disciples had been preaching, and which Jesus 
and his disciples subsequently also preached. As a 
student of the Scriptures he knew to expect the Kingdom, 
and that it was God's provision for the blessing 
and uplifting of Israel and ultimately the fulfilment of 
a promise to Abraham, "In thy Seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed." Having confidence in 
Jesus he wished to learn particulars respecting this 
Kingdom, for neither John the Baptist nor Jesus had 
manifested anything to indicate how the Kingdom was 
to be brought about— where the soldiers were to be obtained, 
how drilled and officered, where the implements 
of warfare were to come from and the large amount of 
money necessary to equip and provide for an army. 
Such a question is implied by our Lord's statement, 
"Verily, verily I say unto you, except a man be born 



again [anew] he cannot see the Kingdom of God." 

We can imagine the perplexity of Nicodemus, who 
was looking for a King and a glorious retinue, more 
grand than any monarch of the past, inasmuch as the 
Messiah King expected was to represent heavenly 
authority and power amongst men. Judge now of his 
perplexity on being told that no one could see this 
Kingdom unless he were born again— born over. The 
chaos of his thoughts is shown by his rejoinder, How 
can a full-grown man, advanced in years, be born 
again? With our Lord's answer he began to get a little 
light on the subject: Jesus said, "I say unto thee, 
except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he 
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. That which is 
born of flesh is flesh and that which is born of Spirit is 
spirit."* 

Nicodemus got some very "strong meat" in very 
few words. From this statement he would understand 
that the Kingdom would not be a fleshly or earthly one, 
but a spirit Kingdom, a heavenly Kingdom. He could 
perceive that the natural birth of the flesh is a figure 
or symbol illustrative of a new birth, a spirit birth, and 
that our Lord meant that the Kingdom of God would 
be on a higher plane than any earthly Kingdom— it 
would be a spirit Kingdom which mankind in general 
could not see and could not enter into or become members 
of. The only ones who would really see the spiritual 
Kingdom or enter into it would be those begotten 
of Spirit and born of Spirit. But our Lord added, 
"Born of water and of Spirit." The reference to water 
would probably, in the mind of Nicodemus, recall the 
water baptism for the remission of sins, and as a sign 
of repentance which John the Baptist and his disciples 
had been preaching. 

To us who live since Pentecost— and who may, 
therefore, have a clear conception of the deep things of 



*We have quoted this correctly, for the article "the" does 
not appear in the Greek text. 

R4125 : page 29 

God under the guidance and instruction of the holy 

Spirit— our Lord's mention of water may have a still 

fuller significance. We see that symbolical water represents 

Truth, and that our begetting of the holy Spirit 

is said by the Apostle to be also a begetting "through 

the Word of truth." (Jas. 1:18.) We remember also 

that the same thought is expressed by the Apostle 

Paul, who declares (Titus 3:3-5), "his mercy saved us 

through the washing of regeneration and the renewing 

of the holy Spirit." Putting these matters together we 

have the thought that our regeneration or begetting 

again of the holy Spirit and our renewing by it come to 



us in conjunction with the washing or cleansing which 
is effected in us by the operation of the Truth— the 
divine message. This is beautifully symbolized in Israel's 
Tabernacle service, in which the priests, before 
entering the Holy and thus typically becoming New 
Creatures, first washed at the laver which represented 
the Word of God, the Truth, the water of regeneration, 
by which we come into that condition of consecration 
to the Lord in which he is pleased to accept us, to grant 
us the spirit of adoption into his heavenly or spiritual 
family. 

"SO IS EVERY ONE THAT IS BORN" 

Nicodemus was astonished at such a presentation 
of the Kingdom and of the methods and conditions 
upon which it could be seen and entered into. Our 
Lord rejoined, Marvel not at the words, Ye must be 
born again. Then he gave him an illustration of what 
one would be like who would be born of the Spirit. He 
drew his attention to the invisibility of spirit beings 
and yet their reality. He took as an illustration the 
wind— invisible, we know not whence it comes, we 
know not whither it goes; but we do know of its power, 
we can hear the sound, can see its effects. This, our 
Lord declared, would give Nicodemus an illustration of 
those born of the Spirit; they would be intangible, invisible, 
while present and powerful. Such would be 
the Kingdom when it should be established. We must 
notice very carefully our Lord's language, else ere long 
these erroneous thoughts will bring us into confusion. 
We must not allow any of them to twist and turn the 
Scriptures, and to say that our Lord said something 
here that he did not say. We must repel the suggestion 
that he meant that the Spirit of which we would be 
begotten is invisible, for although that is true enough 
it is not what our Lord is saying. Neither must we 
allow our minds to be misled into supposing that the 
Lord means that the holy Spirit passes hither and 
thither throughout the world, begetting some and passing 
others by, and that we know not who may be begotten 
of the Spirit and who not. All this is confusing 
and wholly out of accord with what is written. Whoever 
would have clear, proper conceptions of the Master's 
teaching must give strict heed to the Word. We 
have been in darkness long enough through our inattention 
and through our allowing other people to read 
into the Word of God what is in no sense of the word 
there. We are neither to add to nor to take from the 
Word of God, and whoever does so adds to his own 
confusion, and is as well an unfaithful minister of the 
Truth, and an unfaithful ambassador, spokesman, for 
the Lord. 

Astounded at what he had heard, Nicodemus exclaimed, 
"How can these things be?" Is it possible 
that those who have been studying the Law and the 



Prophets for centuries have erred so egregiously? 
Our Lord replied that as a master in Israel he 
should be able to discern these matters when once 
they were brought to his attention. As a thoughtful 
student of the Law and the Prophets Nicodemus 
should have seen that there were insurmountable 
difficulties connected with the prevailing 
thought that God's Kingdom would be an earthly one. 
He therefore should have been quite prepared for the 
announcement that the Kingdom of God would be a 
spiritual one which, as the Lord on another occasion 
explained, would come not with outward show, and of 
which the people would not declare, "Lo, here it is," or 
"Lo, there it is," but it would be in the midst of mankind, 
invisible but all-powerful. 

We have elsewhere shown* that there is a particular 
fitness to our Lord's words in this connection when 
he declares that that which is born of flesh is flesh and 
that which is born of Spirit is spirit. As there cannot 
be any birth of the flesh without first a begetting of the 
flesh, so there can be no birth of the spirit without first 
a begetting of the Spirit. The begetting of the Spirit 
comes in connection with the washing of regeneration 
through the Word, and belongs to this present life. As 
New Creatures we develop spiritually until we reach the 
quickening stage of activity in the Lord's service; and 
those thus begotten and quickened, in whom the new 
will remains faithful unto death, in the resurrection are 
born of the Spirit— raised from the dead spirit beings. 
Thus our Lord was begotten of the holy Spirit at the 
time of his baptism, but in his resurrection he was 
born of the Spirit— the first-born from the dead— the 
first-born from among many brethren. Similarly his 
brethren and joint-heirs in the Kingdom are now begotten 
of the holy Spirit at the time of their washing 
of regeneration and begetting, and their birth, if faithful, 
will be in the resurrection change, when that which 
is sown in weakness will be raised in power, sown an 
animal body, raised a spiritual body— sharers with our 
Lord in the First Resurrection to spirit nature, glory, 
honor, immortality. It is proper to notice here that 
confusion has come to many because of their failure to 
notice that the same Greek word gennao is used in referring 
to both the begetting and the birth. 

"WE SPEAK THAT WE DO KNOW" 

In answer to Nicodemus' doubts our Lord assured 
him that this testimony respecting the Kingdom, that 
it would be a spirit Kingdom, was no idle speculation 
—that he knew what he testified to be true, that the 
trouble with Nicodemus was that he was not ready to 
be taught. He had called our Lord Master, Teacher, 
and declared that he believed him to be sent of God, 



*DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. V., pp. 189, 192. 

R4125 : page 30 

and yet he was so bound to his preconceptions that he 
was unready to receive the testimony of the only one 
who was capable of giving him the instruction. Our 
Lord intimated that he could tell much more about the 
heavenly Kingdom, but it would not be proper to do so, 
since his hearers were not in a condition to appreciate 
spiritual things. "If I have told you earthly things 
and ye believe not, how could you believe if I explained 
to you heavenly things?" In the light of the Apostle 
Paul's exhortation we see that our Master's words were 
not chiding, but rather a declaration of facts, because, 
as the Apostle declares, it is impossible for the natural 
man not begotten of the holy Spirit to understand 
spiritual things. The most, therefore, that Jesus was 
able to teach either to his disciples or others during 
his ministry were earthly things. He left the explanation 
of the deeper things of the divine plan until after 
his followers at Pentecost received the begetting of the 
holy Spirit and were thus fitted and qualified, prepared, 
enabled to understand the spiritual things, the heavenly 
things. --I Cor. 2:14. 

Undoubtedly this is the trouble with the great majority 
of the people today also— they have not been 
begotten of the holy Spirit, they have not been begotten 
again, and hence are unable to understand spiritual 
things. We reiterate, therefore, our recommendation, 
frequently made, that when any are found who 
have not the hearing ear for the Truth we should not 
seek to pound it into them, but rather should take a 
different tack and seek their consecration— present to 
them the reasonableness of a full consecration to the 
Lord and his service in view of what they have already 
seen and are able to grasp. If they make the consecration 
and receive the begetting of the holy Spirit the 
deep things of the Lord will then be for them and may 
be understood by them. Hence the wisdom of not 
casting the pearls of divine Truth, the deeper, spiritual 
things before the unregenerate— the wisdom, on the 
contrary, of preaching merely the outlines of the divine 
plan of the ages to the world in general, of exhorting 
them to receive not the grace of God in vain, and assuring 
them that wisdom from on high and an ability 
to appreciate the deeper things come only to and are 
only for those who have come into the spiritual covenant 
relationship of the sons of God as New Creatures. 

"NO MAN HATH ASCENDED UP TO HEAVEN" 

This statement by our Lord would cause no particular 
surprise to Nicodemus, for nothing in the Law or 
in the prophets or in the teachings of orthodox Judaism 



ever held to the idea prevalent amongst the heathen 

that the dead were alive— more alive than ever before. 

They knew that the dead were dead and that the hope 

for them lay in the resurrection, when Messiah should 

come forth for the banishing of the curse and the establishment 

of the Kingdom of heaven amongst men for 

their uplift and reconciliation to God. But today the 

heathen error, Plato's philosophy, that the dead are 

more alive than the living, with all the absurdity that 

is implied in such a statement, has fastened itself upon 

Christendom. People otherwise sane and logical will 

tell us that they believe in the resurrection of the dead, 

and in the same breath tell us that the dead are not 

dead. They fail to tell us how the dead could be resurrected 

if none is dead. Let all who study this lesson 

with a desire to learn from the Master rather than to 

instruct him, take heed to the words, "No man hath 

ascended up to heaven." (The last four words of this 

verse 13, "which is in heaven," are not found in ancient 

Greek MSS., and evidently were no part of this 

conversation.) 

"THE SERPENT IN THE WILDERNESS" 

The remainder of this lesson, in our judgment, was 
not spoken to Nicodemus, but combined various of our 
Lord's teachings which the writer here brought together 
conveniently. 

R4126 : page 30 

The reference of verse 14 to the lifting up of the 
brazen serpent in the wilderness and the declaration 
that it was intended to be a type of the crucifixion of 
our Lord is a very important item. We remember the 
story of the Israelites bitten by the fiery serpents because 
of sin, and how they were suffering great pain 
and were dying in large numbers until Moses by divine 
direction erected on a pole a serpent made of brass. 
Thenceforth every Israelite, looking toward that serpent, 
by faith was healed. The antitype of this we see. 
The whole world has been bitten by sin, and, as the 
Apostle declares, all are groaning and travailing in 
pain, all are dying. (Rom. 8:22.) Eighteen centuries 
ago Jesus the Son of man was lifted up on Calvary, he 
was treated as a sinner, our sins were laid upon him 
that he might thus have the right to impute his righteousness 
to all who desire it, and to grant them healing 
and life eternal. 

Our Lord, in explaining the matter, declared that 
the Son of man would be lifted up, to the intent that 
everyone believing on him should not perish but have 
eternal life. Only the few have yet had the opportunity 
of believing in him— the great mass in our Lord's 
time and ever since have been in utter ignorance of the 
Redeemer and his sacrifice, and of the blessings secured 



by looking to him. But will they never see? Will 
they never know? Will they never gain eternal life? 
Will only the Church, the specially favored of this Gospel 
Age, the Elect, have this great opportunity? 
Surely not! In due time God will cause the knowledge 
of his grace to reach every member of the race. Surely 
this is the import of our Master's words following, 
"For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth on him should 
not perish but have everlasting life." (v. 16.) Ah, 
yes! This is a blessed assurance. We are glad that 
by the grace of God Jesus "tasted death for every man." 
(Heb. 2:9.) We are glad that he was a propitiation for 
our sins, the Church's sins, but we are also glad that 
he is a propitiation for the sins of the whole world (I John 2:2), 
and that eventually the whole world shall 
have the privilege, opportunity, of having their eyes 
and ears opened that they also may see and understand 
the riches of God's grace in Christ. 
With what pleasure we read that "God sent not his 

R4126 : page 31 

Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the 
world through him might be saved." The world had 
already been condemned, for it had shared in Father 
Adam's condemnation as his race. It needed no more 
condemnation but it did need salvation from the Adamic 
condemnation resting upon it; — it did need to be 
delivered from the bondage of corruption, mental, 
moral and physical, and it was this that Jesus came to 
accomplish. How different the story as the Master 
gives it from the way in which it is told in the creeds. 
The theory claimed during the "dark ages" was that 
all who were not of the Elect Church were condemned 
to eternal torment. It was recognized that the race as 
a whole had as yet received none of God's grace, nor 
opportunity for the same, because of blindness and ignorance 
and superstition; and it was claimed that it 
never would have favor— that God never meant the 
world to be saved, and that Christ did not die for the 
world but for the Church, the Elect. How glorious the 
lengths and breadths and heights and depths of divine 
love and wisdom as now displayed through the divine 
Word in this harvest time!— showing us that the election 
of the Church is merely the prelude to the great 
work of blessing and enlightening, uplifting and restoring 
the world in general— all who will— "in due time." 
Nevertheless there is a measure of increased condemnation 
in proportion as the light is seen by any one and 
rejected; as our Lord said, "This is the condemnation, 
that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness 
rather than light because their deeds were evil." 
(John 3:19.) The meaning is evident: Our Lord's first 
advent was not with a view to increasing the Adamic 
condemnation but the reverse of this, to effect the sacrifice 



by which it might ultimately be canceled. Nevertheless 

his presence then in the world, and the light 

which then shone and which has since shone through 

his followers, has carried with it a measure of responsibility 

—a measure of condemnation to all who have 

resisted the light. 

This condemnation, however, is quite separate and 
distinct from the Adamic condemnation, which was inherited, 
and which because of Christ's sacrifice for our 
sins will ultimately be completely canceled; this condemnation, 
resulting from an intelligent rejection of 
light, bears an individual penalty, which will bring the 
unfaithful one stripes either in the present or in the 
future. In the giving of these stripes we are assured 
that full allowance will be made for inherited weaknesses, 
temptations, etc.— everything that can be justly 
charged up to the Adamic fall will be canceled 
through the merit of the sacrifice of Christ. The 
stripes merely represent the individual's own perversity, 
and should the opposition to the light of Truth be 
persisted in to the full degree, the penalty would be 
the Second Death. 

THE SELECTIVE PROCESS 

From the foregoing we perceive that wherever the 
light of the Gospel shines there is proportionately responsibility 
and more or less of a selective condition. 
As our Lord declares, all who do evil intentionally, 
in the light, thereby manifest their hatred of the 
light, and such will avoid the light, realizing that it 
makes manifest the error, the sin with which they are 
identified and which, to some extent, at least, they 
love. They hate and avoid the light because it reproves 
their darkness, their error, their sin. On the 
contrary (v. 21), all who would serve the Truth, the 
light, are glad to come to more and more light as they 
may discern it. They desire that their course in life 
shall become manifest, that all shall know that to the 
extent of their ability they are seeking to do the Lord's 
will. And if, perchance, something contrary to God's 
will may be exposed in their own conduct or theories, 
they are glad of this also that they may have an opportunity 
for correcting the same. 

This selective, separative work is not going on 
amongst the heathen but in Christendom, nor is it specially 
going on amongst the masses of Christendom, 
but chiefly amongst those who have professed to be 
God's people, who profess to have turned from darkness 
to light, as did the Jews of our Lord's day. Realizing 
the true situation, let us be very zealous for every 
ray of light which can be shed upon the divine plan or 
upon our own hearts and lives. Let us more and more 
desire to know the Truth, that it may make us free 
from every bondage and bring us more and more into 
captivity to the will of God in Christ. Children of the 



Light, we can have no fellowship with any of the unfruitful 
works of darkness, doctrinal or otherwise! Let us 
maintain our stand more and more loyally as the divine 
Word increasingly clarifies our vision and distinguishes 
for us between light and darkness, truth and error, 
righteousness and sin! 



R4126 : page 31 

AN INTERESTING LETTER 

MY DEAR BRETHREN: - 

Since entering the Colporteur work I have not 
worked more than two ten-hour days at the most, this 
being due to having but Saturday afternoons and holidays 
for this purpose. During this time I sold 73 
volumes— 17 on the Fourth of July morning, when I 
even parted with my sample book. I expected to be out 
all day on the 4th, but hereafter when I go out to spend 
a whole day I shall see to it that I have my wheel better 
loaded. One week later I took another day for the 
work, but was rather disappointed by rain. However, 
it cleared off by noon and allowed me to take another 
missionary trip. In that afternoon I sold 18 volumes. 

This, dear brethren, is the grandest privilege I ever 
enjoyed. I rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of 
glory, and can say with the Psalmist, "Praise the Lord, 
O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy 
name." May we all hold fast that which we have already 
that no one take our crown is my earnest prayer 
for all. Cannot say more at present, but with deepest 
and tenderest Christian love, I remain. 

Yours in the Lord's vineyard, 

HARRY W. DAVIDGE,-New Jersey. 



page 33 



SEMI-MONTHLY 