R868 : page 1 

VOL. VII. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., AUGUST, 1886. 

NO. 12. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 
BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 40 Federal Street, Allegheny, Pa. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS: --Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat~yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price." And you that have it-- "Wherefore do ye spend 



money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently~and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness."-- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



page 1 

SEND names of any you have reason to think might have a 
hearing ear for the truth, for samples of English, German or 
Swedish TOWERS. 



WRITE addresses very plainly, please, in every letter. When 
you change address say where from, as well as where to. You 
can thus save us much trouble. 



R868 : page 1 



MILLENNIAL DAWN. 



We are now prepared to fill the largest or smallest orders for 
Volume I of the Dawn. We have published 4,500 copies in cloth 
binding handsomely embossed, and we believe its outward 
appearance will meet your approval. And though delicate about 
eulogizing our own effort to set forth the glorious divine plan, 
we can surely say in all modesty that we believe the contents will 
be very interesting and very profitable to you. It presents the 
Plan of the Ages in a much more complete and connected 
manner than was possible through the TOWER. If its reading 
shall afford you a tithe the blessing it has been to the author it 
still will be rich. 

Some will doubtless regret that the time proofs and treatment of 
Revelation are not a part of the contents of this volume, but we 
doubt not your judgment will concur with ours, that it is best not 
to try to crowd too much into one volume; that it is better to treat 
the subject more thoroughly than could possibly be done in one 
or two even large volumes. The next volume, now in course of 
preparation, will treat of the Times and Seasons of Scripture. 

One great advantage of the present arrangement is, that if you 
loan the book to friends or neighbors to read, in glancing over it 
they will not be "choked" and "stumbled" with dates and figures, 
the value and necessity of which, they at first cannot see. The 
study of prophecy, especially time prophecies, has come to be 
considered the exclusive privilege of the denomination called 
"Second Adventists;" and their failure to apprehend the "plan" 
and the intended and needful office of time prophecies, as related 
to that plan, has made the subject odious to many. Hence it is a 
part of our duty to be "wise" (Matt. 10:16) and not stumble our 
brother with our "meat." When vol. I. "The Plan of The Ages"-- 
the plan of salvation, --is thoroughly digested, then, those who 



appreciate it, will be prepared and anxiously waiting for vol. 2, 
The Times and Seasons. 

page 1 

We quote the price of vol. I. as follows:-- One copy, $1.00 One 
copy and one Z.W.T. subscription, 1.25; One copy to those 
already subscribers, .75 Four copies and one Tower subscription, 
3.00 Seven copies, 5.00. Fifteen copies, 10.00. 

These prices include postage or expressage prepaid by us. In 
ordering see that your address is full and very plainly written. 
When ordering four or more copies, mention your Express office 
as well as your Post-office, that we may send by the least 
expensive way. 



R868 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

We this month in several articles continue our examination of 
some of the devices of Satan, which, if possible, would deceive 
the very elect in this Evil Day of trial and testing, continuing our 
endeavor to show up the errors of the present "perilous times" in 
their true light; and helping you to find and adjust the "armor" 
which God has provided. 

It may have escaped the notice of some that this has been God's 
uniform method of dealing with the Church from the first, 
namely, giving truth as an offset to error. When error was 
advanced and was about to sweep away the faith of some, God 
sent by some messenger the correction of the error and thus 
disclosed more fully the light upon the subject. 

Thus as we look at the Master's ministry, we find that some of 
his most pointed lessons were suggested by the erroneous 
teachings about him. The "long prayers" and "sad faces" and 
public alms-giving of the Pharisees, called forth the truth on 
these subjects and led Jesus to give us a sample of how to pray in 
spirit and in truth, after the manner of what is commonly termed 
the Lord's prayer. The caviling questions of the Pharisees and 
Sadducees brought out precious truths which not only silenced 
them, but what was much more important, informed us on 
subjects of deep interest. So too it was with many of our Lord's 
parables; for instance, that of the young nobleman. He spoke this 
parable because they erroneously thought, that the Kingdom of 
God would immediately appear. 

So it was with Paul's letters and those of the other Apostles. The 
Epistle to the Romans is an answer to the errors of some converts 
from the Gentiles, who supposed Israel after the flesh to be 
permanently cut off from all divine favor, and themselves 
permanently grafted into their place of favor with God. In his 



correction of their errors, how beautifully and how clearly he 
sets forth the past favor of the Jew, and the present favor to all, 
both Jew and Gentile, who in Christ Jesus have become new 
creatures. How clearly he marks the steps of divine favor in 
justification, sanctification and honor, to the little flock who 
gladly hear and obey the call to suffer with Christ that they may 
be also glorified together. And finally, how beautifully he shows 
that there is a future favor for Israel according to the original 
covenants (11:26-28), and also to the world (8:19,21 and 16:20) 
to be accomplished through the elect church, called and tested 
during the Christian age. (11:31,32.) The conclusion of the 
Epistle shows that the mysteries therein unfolded, were intended 
to be the power of God to establish them in the faith by 
correcting their errors. The First Epistle of the Corinthians was 
mainly to correct sectarianism among those at Corinth, and to 
answer the erroneous teachings of some, that there would be no 
resurrection of the dead. (1:11-13 and 15:12.) What a valuable 
fund of blessing and knowledge came to the church down the 
ages in connection with the answer and refutation of these errors. 
He shows the false divisions (1:13) and where the divisions 
should be made. (5:9-13.) He shows the needful unity of all the 
true body, and that all truly connected with Christ the head, are 
of ONE BODY. (12:12-27.) He takes advantage of the doubt 
about the resurrection, to explain the entire subject, that all will 
be raised, though not all alike (15:22,40.) He shows how the 
saints will be raised first (15:23,41-44.) He shows that the 
world's order of time is afterward, in their own order (15:23); 
and he shows what they will be like (15:48), and other precious 
lessons. 

Thus it was also with other Epistles; for instance in writing to the 
Galatians it was to correct false teachings concerning the Law 
and freedom of Christians from its bondage, and to caution them 
against false teachers and their doctrines, which were 
perversions of the true gospel. (Gal. 1:6-9; 2:16; 3:1, etc.) How 
grandly the light shines out upon the entire plan, the true gospel, 
while he exposes the errors. 

The First Epistle to Timothy was to instruct him relative to false 
teachers (1:3,4,19,20 and 4:1,7.) It was the same with his Second 
Epistle to Timothy (1:12-15 and 2:14-19,25,26 and 3:1 and 4:3.) 
It was the same with the Epistle to Titus~l:9-16. 

The Second Epistle to the Thessalonians was written to correct 
an error also, a misapprehension regarding the Lord's presence, 
some having gotten the idea that the Lord was then present. This 
occasion to correct error, became the channel through which God 
gave us such clear instruction regarding the "man of sin," the 
"mystery of iniquity," which has aided us materially in the 
understanding and applying of many of the prophecies relating to 
the same. 



In view of these facts then, let us not hesitate to meet errors 
squarely, with the word of God. It will work out good surely to 
the fully consecrated, even as all things are working for their 
good. This has been our experience during the past few years: 
the oppositions of error have in every case resulted in clearer 
views of truth to some. 

For instance: it was the promulgation of errors regarding 
substitution, that drew our attention more closely to it, and 
pointed out to us the fact that our Redeemer in becoming such 
was the substitute for Adam, and thus for all our losses entailed 
through him. This in turn showed us the distinctions between 
natures; for we saw that he gave "a corresponding price" for that 
which was lost and thus our attention was drawn to the fact that 
the divine nature to which he was raised, is totally distinct from 
the human nature which he sacrificed. 

The same error drew our attention more closely to the teachings 
of the Tabernacle types, particularly the type of the atonement 
sacrifices, Lev. 9 and 16. What a blessing came to us all 
therefrom many can testify. It opened up a wide field of 
knowledge there hidden for this very time. It showed us beyond 
question the significance of the sacrifices in the accomplishment 
of the atonement, and it illustrated to us the 

R869 : page 1 

privilege of being a partaker in the sufferings of Christ and joint 
heirs with him in the divine nature and in the glory to be 
revealed. And this in turn opened up the true meaning of 
Baptism as never before seen. How much that was precious did 
the Lord thus give just at the time it is needed to combat the 
errors. 

It was the same way with the false doctrine advanced by some, 
that Jesus was the natural son of Joseph, the husband of Mary, 
Jesus' mother. The investigation made necessary to answer the 
many ingenious sophistries advanced, only made the truth to 
shine the more clearly on the entire subject, showing more 
conclusively than ever, that he was "the first born of all 
creation," "the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending" 
of God's creation, and that by him as Jehovah's chief son and 
messenger "all things were made." 

We might proceed to enumerate, but forebear, merely reminding 
you that truth has ever needed to be defended from the great 
adversary and his repeated and various deceptions. Since "we are 
not ignorant of his devices" we well know that we must "contend 
earnestly for the faith once delivered unto the saints." Let us, like 
Paul, fight "a good fight" nor cease to wield the sword of the 
spirit, the Word of God in opposition to every device of Satan, 
until we lay our armor down permanently. 



Reminding you again of the true method of proving all things, 
described in our last, we make the above our apology to any who 
have failed to note the general principle used by God in the 
unfolding of the truth. It will explain this feature common to the 
TOWER past, present and future, as well as to all the writings of 
the Scriptures. 



R869 : page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Corry, Pa., June 29, 1886. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: Since I saw you last week I had 
quite an interesting meeting at Greenville, Pa. As I got there late 
on Saturday night, I hardly knew how to advertise it. Finally a 
bright idea struck me. I bought a piece of chalk, and with it 
wrote on the sidewalks near the churches and elsewhere, "Gospel 
Meeting at the School House at three o'clock." This had the 
desired effect. I had the best and most intelligent audience I have 
yet had. I spoke for about four hours with but little intermission. 
You must know they were interested, when most of them stayed 
for three hours, and delicate looking ladies kept on their feet all 
that time. You see the Lord supplies with power to make known 
the "unsearchable riches of Christ." Is it not wonderful how the 
Lord uses even the weak ones for his glory? for you know I am 
no speaker or orator, but blessed be his name, he knows I hunger 
and thirst to do his will. My one great desire is that every faculty 
and every power of which I am possessed may be used for his 
glory. So far the days I have intended to preach I have not felt 
very well bodily and have been nervous, but notwithstanding 
this, I have gone forth in the strength of the Lord. I was recently 
asked by a brother if I did not sometimes lose my interest. I 
assured him I did not. How could I when the Lord continues to 
fill me with riches of his grace? 

I don't expect to be idle during my vacation. I have no reputation 
to be afraid of, having sacrificed all to Christ. 

I think I might have use for some of those missionary WATCH 
TOWERS while I am away. With love to your household, 

I remain yours in Christ, 

S. O. BLUNDEN. 

[Brother B., a Commercial Traveler, thus and in many other 
ways improves his opportunities for the spread of the truth.] 

page 2 



Kent, England. 

DEAR SIR: I have been reading the book entitled "Food for 
Thinking Christians, Why Evil Was Permitted," and I see you 
offer to supply copies free. My husband is a clergyman, and we 
have a large boarding school for boys, as well as a part of the 
parish which we are responsible for. Several have seen your 
book, and I am quite surprised at the desire they express to have 
one themselves. We had no idea that these views were held by 
any one around us, but it is not the few but the many ripe 
Christians that would gladly see the circulation of this book. I 
shall be glad to use as many as you can spare me. 

Very truly yours, . 

R869 : page 2 

Mich., July 5, 1886. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-It seems a long time since I wrote 
you, but the delay has not been in consequence of any abatement 
of interest in the TOWER and its teachings. On the contrary, my 
appetite for the truth it proclaims has constantly sharpened. I can 
hardly wait its arrival. When it is received, it is anxiously 
opened, and usually read through before stopping. The outlook 
from the TOWER columns is like the index hand of the clock 
dial showing the number of the hour. 

It numbers passing events that give knowledge of approaching 
night to the civil and ecclesiastical world, and the overthrow of 
all systems of error in all of them. Like Noah warning the people 
in his days of the impending deluge in consequence of their sins, 
so is the TOWER. It is the Observatory and Telescope from 
which may be seen the passing events of the present culminating 
in the great day of the Lord. 

But, as in Noah's day, so in the present, but few seem to 
comprehend that the Lord is present. Nor is it strange that so few 
understand the present times. Since, like the Jewish Church in 
the time of Christ's first advent, men are so thoroughly trained in 
the traditions and teachings of the elders, as to prevent now, as 
then, their seeing the plan of God in the final restitution of all 
things. 

This is more clearly seen and apparent from the opportunities in 
connection with others in various localities. Scarcely one 
member of any of the nominal churches seems to have a clear 
idea of the teachings of the Scriptures bearing on the present and 
future. 

They seem as much puzzled to understand what is taught as 
Nicodemus did, though teachers like him in Israel. The 
standpoint from which they have been taught to look leads them 
into error, and hence confusion. 



Having dropped into a Bible class not long since of one of our 
great churches, its teacher (one of the professors in a great 
institution of learning) confessed that he had put much study on 
the lesson, yet it seemed to him that there was something taught 
in it which he did not understand. This was frank, and opened the 
windows for the admission of light from all quarters. There were 
some present, whose age and qualifications in a knowledge of 
several languages, was appealed to to shed the necessary light. 
After much discussion and the truth no plainer, a few passages 
were quoted to remove the perplexity and suggestions made to 
change the stand point of interpretation, and the truth and 
harmony would appear. But results seemed much like the man, 
confused, who repeated constantly that "once one is two." 

If the dogmas which have been long embraced by many were 
thrown away, their perplexity would cease at once. One minister 
confessed to me that he had a Commentary that cost him $65.00, 
and the more he read it the less he knew of the Scriptures. That's 
confusion confounded; and so it is; the very source of light is 
hid, by passing error before the sight. I feel that almost all have 
passed the center of truth, and are on the extreme, like the clock 
pendulum, and though strongly attracted by the truth at the 
center, are held in the extreme position by the cohesive attraction 
of the dogmas of their long honored creeds. 

Many Christian teachers are loudly proclaiming that the world is 
getting better. They tell us $7,000,000 were appropriated to the 
Missionary cause last year for the spread of the Gospel among 
Heathen nations, while the city of New York paid $100,000,000 
for the privilege of burning tobacco, and in the United States 
$100,000,000 for liquor drank. While in the very city in which it 
was proclaimed, about 10 Christian churches existed and 44 
saloons are patronized and sustained in some manner by the 
masses. 

The picture drawn suggests that the affirmative of the evidence 
lies on the other side, and loudly proclaims that some other 
power than human is absolutely needed to bring around truth and 
righteousness. 

Satan seems to be training his forces for a day of thick clouds 
and darkness. 

page 2 

Dear Brother, for six months past, severe sickness and final 
death of my wife, has prevented me from sending money to aid 
in the spread of Gospel truth. I enclose $1.00, all that it seems to 
me I can spare now. I hope to be able to appropriate oftener. 
Would to God I had the means to give liberally. If you can spare 
a few copies of Tower and Food in German, I think I can place 
them where some good can be done. 



[We have not the "Food" in German, but expect to have a 
German edition of Millennial Dawn ready about January next. 
Brother Von Zech is now engaged in translating it.~Editor.] 



Bay View, July 23, 1886. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The WATCH TOWER just 
received states that "Millennial Dawn" is ready for distribution. 
Please find enclosed five dollars ($5), payment for three copies; 
balance for "Tract Fund." I am still trying to follow in the 
footsteps of the Saviour. I find much opposition, and sometimes 
feel lonely and sad, and led to wish the conflict was over. 
Nevertheless, my strength is renewed, and although the night is 
dark, "joy comes in the morning." The WATCH TOWER always 
cheers me, edifies me, and strengthens me. I anticipate a feast in 
the coming book. I realize more and more every day, and am 
thankful to my Saviour for the WATCH TOWER. By its 
teaching I have been led to a good understanding of God's Word, 
so that it is not possible for Satan or his emissaries to delude me 
or lead me from the truth. 

Your Brother in Christ, . 



[Glad to know of your pleasure in the truth. Let your light 
shine. Be on your guard, too, for when realizing a dependence 
upon God for strength, we are best prepared to stand complete in 
his strength. "The hosts of sin are pressing hard to draw thee 
from the prize."-- EDITOR.] 



Sand Hill, Va., July 26, 1886. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It was with pleasure that I 
received the announcement, in the July TOWER, that our new 
book, "Millennial Dawn," is about ready. At the time, I was 
finishing a chart, which I have enlarged from the one found in 
Food, and have put it in a nice frame and hung it in my parlor. 
Already it has been useful in instructing others in God's great 
plan. I am much pleased to know that the forthcoming book will 
be a help in the understanding of the same great plan, and also 
that it will be divided into volumes, which will make it very 
convenient. 



Yours affectionately, . 



White City, Kan., Aug. 1st, 1886. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have been anxiously looking 
for the long promised book and am now very anxious to receive 
it. "View from the TOWER," in July number, has been very 
interesting to me, and I have re-read the non-Ransom Theories 
there presented and am astonished. The chart also has been very 



interesting. I am more and more conformed to the TOWER'S 
view of the Bible so that that book I value far above rubies. 

Your Brother in Christ, . 



Lackawanna Co., Pa., July 28, 1886. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am so glad to learn that 
"Millennial Dawn" is complete. I am sure it is just what I shall 
want both for myself and for loaning. Brother Adamson told me 
of it while here last winter laboring for the Master in this part of 
the vineyard. Please send me fifteen copies and find enclosed 
money order for ten dollars for same and my subscription to the 
TOWER. I shall ever be grateful to our Heavenly Father for the 
precious truths learned through Brother Adamson's ministry and 
the WATCH TOWER publications. 

Gratefully yours in Christ, . 



Dover, Ills., June 23, 1886. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It has been some time since you 
have heard from me but I am still living and feeding on the 
blessed truth that you are the means of spreading. The WATCH 
TOWER is always received very gladly and read and re-read 
with great interest and profit, but I am standing pretty much 
alone, but few will listen to me, but I think after all, the truth is 
getting hold of some minds. I received the TOWER last night 
and read the notice that your book "Millennial Dawn" is about 
ready for distribution, so I enclose money order for the book and 
subscription for paper. Please send me also a few packets for 
loaning. 

Yours in the Blessed Hope, . 

R869 : page 2 

A gunner in the British Navy writes thus from Singapore, India: 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST: Grace be unto you and peace 
from Him which is, and which was, and which is to come. 

I don't suppose you remember much about me, but about twelve 
months ago I wrote to you asking for "Zion's Watch Tower," 
monthly. About a month after, my Battery was ordered out here 
very suddenly to come and strengthen the defences of Singapore. 

I must say that Singapore is one of the most beautiful, fertile 
islands in existence. It is called the abode of health and garden of 
India, and so I think it is. 

But you will want to know something of the missionaries out 
here, and what they are doing, and I think my account of them 
will surprise you. Never in my life did I see such Babylon and 
confusion and such pretenders. Why they know absolutely 



nothing of the Scriptures. There is a very dear man here, an 
American, about the best and most able speaker in Singapore, 
but in dreadful bondage, always asking for mercy in his prayers, 
yet calling himself an adopted child of God; so I wrote and asked 
him why on earth he continued to ask for mercy when he had 
obtained it long ago? 

I have written four or five long letters to a Presbyterian minister 
here, and he can't see it at all. Of course I copied from your 
paper, but he is quite willing to read any of your papers. I have 
lent four already, and he rather likes them, except Restitution, 
but he don't at all like my speaking of Babylon, confusion among 
the sects. I have also lent another to the Wesleyan preacher, and 
one to the Baptist preacher here, and a long letter from your 
paper also, but he won't have it. He says he can't preach the 
gospel if he accepts that. 

I have another friend at the Sailors' Home reading ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER, and he agrees with it; for he says God would 
be a monster to create this universe 

R870 : page 2 

of human beings and delight in casting us into hell at the rate of 
ninety-nine out of a hundred. I have another among the soldiers 
who has accepted its teaching. I often have a chat with him, and 
he likes your paper very much. Several of the gunners here have 
accepted it also, saying that it is sound common sense. I have 
also put it before a lady here, a dear friend to soldiers, but she is 
silent about it. I lent her two or three papers to read, and have 
written several letters. All she said was, "I quite sympathize with 
you on prophecy." I often go to her Bible class. She liked your 
account on the "little flock" very much indeed. I wrote to an 
officer here the other week, an earnest Christian, and he returned 
both my paper and letter, and said he had no time for studying 
such things. I am opposed very much by a representative of the 
British and Foreign Bible Society, and the Baptists. 

I have very much upset several of the preachers here by this 
doctrine. It is all over Singapore. Of course I keep putting in a 
word here and there, which brings them to a complete standstill 
at times, and they seem quite stupefied about it. I am writing 
letters all over England to people that I know, as I have a great 
deal of spare time. I have put that beautiful illustration before 
nearly all here of the diamond in "Food," and the jewel having its 
beauty again restored so as to perfectly reflect its Creator's image 
again. 

I must just tell you how I opposed the Baptists here the other 
night: They asked God to save the heathen from going to an 
everlasting hell. I said how could that be when in Psa. 46:10 God 
says he will be glorified among the heathen and exalted in the 
earth? and again, a people that were not called a people shall be 



called the people of the living God, and nations that knew not 
thee shall come unto thee and worship. 

I must just tell you the positions they hold here as missionaries. 
They are a lot of perfect gentlemen, they ride about in the 
"gharries" like gods of the earth: for instance, the Presbyterian 
minister here gets three thousand dollars a year, beside a 
splendid house fit for any of our noblemen in England. His 
gardener and "syce" and everything free. Is such the position of a 
stranger and pilgrim here below, following the Master's footsteps 
whithersoever he goeth? And I find, too, that he preaches to suit 
his congregation, which consists of all the higher class of 
Scotchmen and other Europeans. One of the Baptists here 
occupies a large house, and takes in boarders at fifty and a 
hundred dollars a month. This is another stranger and pilgrim. 
Please send me some of your tracts for distribution. 



R680 : page 2 

"GET into the habit of looking for the silver lining of the cloud, 
and when you have found it, continue to look at it, rather than 
the leaden grey in the middle. It will help you over many hard 
places." 



R841 : page 2 

"THE Jewish population of Jerusalem is constantly increasing, 
and now numbers 18,000. This is the largest number that has 
lived in the sacred city at one time since the destruction by Titus 
in 70 A.D. The first blind asylum in Palestine, the land that 
probably has now, and has had for centuries, the largest number 
of blind people proportionately in the world, has been 
established in Jerusalem. It is connected with the Syrian 
Orphan's Asylum, under charge of the German missionary, 
Schneller." 



R870 : page 3 

THE SECRET OF THE SAINTS. 



To play through life a perfect part, 
Unnoticed and unknown; 
To seek no rest in any heart 
Save only God's alone; 



In little things to own no will, 
To have no share in great; 
To find the labor ready still, 
And for the crown to wait. 



Upon the brow to bear no trace 
Of more than common care; 
To write no secret in the face 
For men to read it there; 

The daily cross to clasp and bless 
With such familiar zeal 
As hides from all that not the less 
The daily weight you feel. 

In toils that praise will never pay 
To see your life go past; 
To meet in every coming day 
Twin sister of the last; 

To hear of high heroic things, 
And yield them reverence due, 
But feel life's daily offerings 
Are far more fit for you. 

To woo no secret soft disguise, 
To which self-love is prone; 
Unnoticed by all other eyes, 
Unworthy in your own; 

To yield with such a happy art 
That no one thinks you care, 
And say to your poor bleeding heart, 
How little you can bear. 

Oh! 'tis a pathway hard to choose, 
A struggle hard to share, 
For human pride would still refuse 
The nameless trials there; 

But since we know the gate is low 
That leads to heavenly bliss, 
What higher grace could God bestow 
Than such a life as this. 



R870 : page 3 

IS GOD THE AUTHOR OF SIN? 

SUPPOSED AFFIRMATIVE. 

"I make peace and create evil: I Jehovah do all these things. "- 
Isa. 45:7. 

"Shall there be evil in a city and Jehovah hath not done it?"— 
Amos 3:6. 



NEGATIVE. 

"A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit... by their fruits ye 
shall know them. "--Matt. 7:18,20. 

"Thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickedness: neither 
shall evil dwell with thee.. ..Thou hatest all workers of iniquity."- 
-Psa. 5:4,5. 

"Thou art of purer eyes than to behold [countenance] evil, and 
canst not look upon iniquity. "~Hab. 1:13. 

"Every good and every perfect gift is from above." "Let no man 
say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot be 
tempted of evil, neither tempteth he any man. But every man is 
tempted when he is led astray of his own desires and enticed. "-- 
James 1:13,14,17. 

"All unrighteousness is sin" and "he that committeth sin is of the 
devil."-- 1 John 5:17 and 3:8. 

"What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? 
God forbid" that we should reach such a false conclusion. —Rom. 
9:14. 

"Ascribe ye greatness unto our God. He is the Rock, his work is 
perfect; for all his ways are judgment: a God of truth and without 
iniquity, just and right is he."~Deut. 32:3,4. 

"There is no iniquity with the Lord our God."~2 Chron. 19:7. 

"Hearken unto me, ye men of understanding: Far be it from God 
that he should do wickedness and from the Almighty that he 
should commit iniquity. ...God will not do wickedly."-- Job 
34:10,12. 

"The Lord is upright; He is my Rock; there is no unrighteousness 
in Him."-- Psa. 92:15. 

"Let God be true [though it make] every man a liar."~Rom. 3:4. 

The editor of another journal lately started in the interest of the 
no-ransom theory, had not noticed the first two texts quoted 
above until recently, when he concluded he had struck a rich 
vein of new light, and hastily without mature reflection, he has 
jumped to the conclusion that he has found the key to the divine 
plan, which he in substance explains thus:~God is the author of 
all sin and evil. Having caused the evil he must rectify it. To fail 
to do this would make God and his government criminally 
guilty. Since he caused the sin and the pain, trouble and death, he 
must and will fully banish these when he has fulfilled his 
purpose with them. 

To this one-sided reasoning we object. But some one inquires, do 
you not also teach in the pamphlet "Food," that God was the 
author of sin? By no means, we answer: it teaches the very 
reverse. We agree with all the texts above quoted, all of which 
when understood, harmoniously declare that just and right is he, 



hating evil and condemning sin in every form. We claim and 
teach that every good cometh from God as the good fountain, 
and that evil on the contrary comes from sources and fountains 
in opposition 

R871 : page 3 

to God and his goodness. In "Food for Thinking Christians" we 
show to the contrary, that God's wisdom and power enabled him 
to foresee the course of all his creatures, and that from the first 
he designed or purposed to PERMIT evil to have sway for a 
time, because he saw how he could ultimately overrule it, and 
how the permission of it would but prove to his creatures the 
wisdom of his arrangements, and give them a beneficial lesson 
experimentally, on the advantage of good and the disadvantage 
of evil. This is totally different from the theory above mentioned, 
which places upon God the responsibility and criminality of 
being the creator or author of evil: it is the very reverse. 

God is indeed the author or creator of all things, of things that 
are evil and sinful, as well as of those that are perfect and 
upright; but the error is in assuming that God made them evil, 
imperfect or sinful in any sense or degree. "God saw everything 
that he had made, and behold it was very good." Absolutely 
perfect himself, he could not create anything morally imperfect, 
corrupt, sinful. Wherever such imperfection is found it is the 
result of violation of God's wise and perfect arrangements and 
consequently is a degradation of his creation. 

Are there fallen angels? They are those who "kept not their first 
estate" of perfection in which God created them, but who 
violated his rules and brought themselves into the evil condition. 
Is the human race in an evil condition? Whose fault is the evil? 
Can it be charged to the fountain of every good? Shall the 
fountain of life and blessing be charged with being a fountain of 
bitterness, of evil, sin and death? Was our Lord Jesus mistaken, 
when he declared that a pure fountain could not send forth bitter 
waters, and that a good tree could not bear evil fruit? 

Those disposed to thus malign and asperse the character of the 
great Jehovah had best go slower. They had best do a little 
thinking, and not try to build a theory with such miserable wood, 
hay and stubble. Are they prepared to entirely reject the Bible 
testimony upon the subject, except the two texts first quoted 
above? Or have they studied out a way to twist and wrest the 
many other statements of Scripture into apparent harmony with 
their theory and with their misinterpretation of these two texts? 

How plainly it is stated of man, as of angels, that God's "work is 
perfect," that he created man in his own image. A likeness of the 
perfect God, only of earthly nature. —Gen. 1:27. 

These whom we criticize claim that Gen. 1:26, "Let us make 
man in our own image," implies that God intended eventually to 



bring man to a "very good," a perfect condition, by a process of 
evolution or development, but that he began by making him 
EVIL, in order that man might develop into a good being, a 
likeness of his Creator. But how blinded by theory-can they not 
see, that the next verse (v. 27) declares that God not only 
purposed beforehand to make man a likeness of himself in clay, 
but that he accomplished that purpose in full, in Adam's creation: 
"So God created man in his image; in the image of God created 
he him; male and female created he them." 

David understood it thus and refers to man as created perfect, 
and crowned with honor and dominion of earth, a likeness of the 
divine honor and rulership of the universe, and declares, "Thou 
hast made him a little lower than the angels." -Psa. 8:5. 

If then, man's first estate, like that of the angels, was not evil, but 
perfect, very good, an image of God, did man like the angels 
leave his first estate, or did God cast him from it? We answer, 
man like the angels sinned willfully against light and knowledge 
(Gen. 2:16,17) and thus came under the proper righteous 
punishment which God had designated and foretold as the wages 
of sin. We are distinctly told that Adam was not deceived in his 
trial, hence he incurred the penalty willingly and knowingly, 
with full ability to have resisted it. (1 Tim. 2:14.) And the 
prophet plainly tells that "God hath made man upright, but they 
have sought out many inventions." Man was as much the author 
of the evil which came upon him, as were the angels which kept 
not their first estate of purity, perfection and harmony with God, 
the authors of the evils which resulted to them. 

Paul's testimony, that sin and death and all the train of evil came 
by one man's disobedience, is certainly a positive denial that God 
is the author of it.-- Rom. 5:12,17-19. 

We have now established the fact that God is good and not evil, 
the author and creator of good and not of evil. We have cleared 
his character of such a foul stigma. If he were the author and 
instigator, and designer and cause of all evil, or of any of it, he 
would certainly be the chief of sinners, insomuch as his superior 
wisdom and power are greater than those of all others. And the 
fact that God was not the author and cause of sin, disproves the 
theory built upon that claim, which is that God must bring 
mankind to a higher and happier and more perfect condition than 
he has yet attained, because of having caused him to suffer, he 
must in justice compensate him therefor, by giving him 
corresponding blessings. This theory, which makes man's future 
to depend upon God's debt to man because of past injustice in 
creating evil and placing man under it for six thousand years, is 
wholly set aside by the proofs we have given, that God was not 
the author of sin and evil, but the author of every good and 
perfect gift and naught else. We have shown that man was justly 
condemned and hence the author of his own evil [trouble] and 
that he is wholly dependent upon the loving mercy of God for 



future life. And we have heretofore shown that God has 
manifested his love and mercy in and through Christ—in the 
ransom-thus provided as a free favor to all. 

How then shall we understand the two texts which say that God 
is the creator of evil? Shall we reject them because at a casual 
glance they do not fit? Nay, let us rather examine them, assured 
that God's book like himself is good, and not contradictory and 
inharmonious. If the harmony does not appear on the surface, 
careful study and examination will always discover it. The 
explanation of these two texts is very simple indeed. The word 
rendered "evil" in these texts might have been translated 
adversity, trouble, affliction, or calamity. In fact the same 
Hebrew word is twenty-one times thus translated in our common 
version of the Old Testament. Thus understood, these two texts 
inform us that whatever calamity, adversity, affliction, or 
trouble, there may be, none of it is outside of God's knowledge 
and control. These could not happen without his concurrence or 
permission, as all power and authority is of him. And what saint 
can not and has not drawn consolation from this fact (the divine 
control of every trouble or evil), as he believed the promise that 
all things, even the calamities and troubles of life, would work 
together for good to those that love God and are called according 
to his purpose-the high calling. 

However, "evil" is not an improper translation here, for our 
English word "evil," like the word "ra," here used in the Hebrew, 
has a wide range of meaning, and may be used to signify either 
trouble or wickedness, according to the connections, the context 
deciding which thought should attach to the word. 

Webster's definition of evil is, I. "Anything that directly or 
remotely causes suffering of any kind." II. "Disposition to do 
wrong, corruption of heart, wickedness, depravity." 

Now we ask, would any pass over the first and primary meaning 
of the word evil, and apply the second definition of it, in these 
texts under consideration, unless their judgment were rendered 
unsound by reason of a false theory which they desire to prop 
up? Such must be our conclusion if we examine the context. 
Isaiah 45:1-7 is speaking of the evil which came upon Babylon 
at the hand of Cyrus, who was God's messenger (verse 13) to 
punish Babylon and restore Israel. Amos 3:1-8, is referring to 
trouble, evil, calamity, about to come upon Israel as a 
punishment for their iniquities (verse 2.) The mind that could 
construe either of these expressions to mean, that God by these 
proclaimed himself to be the author of sin, the Creator of 
disposition to do wrong, the cause of wickedness, depravity and 
corruption of heart, (Webster's definition of moral evil) has 
serious cause for examination of either his mental or moral 
balance. Yet the journal which advances this idea as new light, 
represents itself as the exponent of the very spirit of the Word of 
God. If the bare suggestion that they had followed the maxim, 



"Let us do evil that good may follow" was resented by the 
Apostles as slander, (Rom. 3:8.) what shall we say of such an 
imputation against the Almighty? 

But then, considering it proven beyond question that God is not 
the author of moral evil, i.e., sin, what shall we say:~ 

IS GOD RESPONSIBLE FOR EVIL IN THE SENSE 
OF CALAMITY AND TROUBLE? 

We answer both yes and no. Yes, 

R871 : page 4 

in the sense that the particular forms of trouble and suffering 
come by his permission and arrangement as the proper penalty of 
violating his wise and just laws. No, in the sense that man is the 
author of his own sufferings and trouble, by his violation of laws 
which were wise and good. And indeed it is a fact recognized 
very generally, that sin-disobedience to God—would bring its 
own penalty naturally, even if God had not marked out its kind. 
Thus for instance, violation of the laws of health hasten disease 
and death, while the violation of conscience and morals, brings 
its line of rewards in unhappiness, entanglements, and remorse. 
On the whole it is a principle fixed as the law of gravitation that 
"Sin when it is finished bringeth forth death." 

Hence we say that the evil and trouble which God has permitted 
upon man are but a just and reasonable result or outworking of 
man's own wilfully chosen course, which would have been far 
worse, had not God from time to time headed it off, as in the 
case of the antideluvians 

R872 : page 4 

and the Sodomites, whom God blotted out, to prevent the spread 
of their corruption, as well as to be an "example" to those who 
should afterward think to run riot in ungodliness, that God still 
oversees mankind and their affairs, and will restrain them within 
certain bounds even now. In evil, as trouble and sorrow, as well 
as in moral evil or wickedness, everything in Scripture declares 
that "God created man upright, but he sought out many 
inventions" contrary to the divine command, and defiled himself, 
and brought trouble and sorrow, direct or indirect, upon himself. 
Hence man, not God, is responsible for evil in the sense of 
calamity or trouble. 

All evil is punitory, i.e., evil [trouble, calamity, etc.] is always a 
punishment for something. Had all things continued as they were 
created, perfect and upright, there would have been no evil 
[trouble, calamity, etc.] nor any occasion for it. In fact there 
could have been no such thing; for it is, always has been, and 
always shall be contrary to justice and right, and hence contrary 
to the will of God, to inflict pain, trouble or distress upon the 
guiltless. Hence whatever evil [calamity, trouble] exists in the 



world, exists as a punishment, as a result of wilful, moral evil 
i.e., sin on man's part; it is the fault of the race which is being 
punished. 

All evil [trouble, etc.] is reformatory so far as the race is 
concerned, but not always reformatory so far as individuals are 
concerned, though this last is claimed by many. God is the great 
Physician and Surgeon; the race with its many members is the 
patient sick and diseased, and dying. Every time the good 
physician touches the sores the patient has increased pain; yet it 
is needful to the reformation and recovery of the diseased parts. 
So evil [trouble] forms a necessary part of man's experience as a 
result of his moral obliquity and fallen state, and also as an 
attendant circumstance to his recovery from that state. But there 
are times when the wise surgeon will find a member incurable, 
and for the sake of its polluting influence upon other members, it 
must be entirely "cut off." In such a case the cut off member is 
not healed, because that is impossible, though the other members 
are protected from poisonous influences thereby. So it is in God's 
government, not a member of the race shall be "cut off" whom it 
is possible to recover; but not one member which divine wisdom 
finds it impossible to renew (Heb. 6:4-8) shall be permitted to 
remain and to spread its baneful poisonous influence to others. ~ 
Matt. 25:41,46. To this intent an abundant provision for the 
healing as well as the testing of each, either in this age or the age 
to come, is arranged for. Every member shall come under the 
care and skill of the great Physician, but when that treatment is 
ended and shall have proved which members of the race prefer 
evil to good, which it is "impossible to renew," then, such shall 
be cut off for the general good. And the case once decided will 
need no further testing or trying. God is too wise to attempt that 
which he himself has declared is "impossible." Of this class 
Satan is thus far the most notable example; all the manifestations 
of God's goodness and of the terrible consequences of sin for 
more than six thousand years have only increased his wilfulness 
and hardness of heart. Those of men similarly affected by 
knowledge and experience are reckoned his messengers and co- 
workers and share with him the final destruction— to them the 
second death. --Matt. 25:41. Thus we see that evil [trouble] 
though never good, under divine supervision may be punitive, 
corrective and protective —a punishment for sin, a correction or 
remedy in bringing from sin to righteousness, and a protection to 
the race in that it destroys any of its members who will not yield 
to righteousness. 

Aside from the advantage to the race of such protective 
measures, it is better for the individual willful sinner, that he 
should be cut off from life, than that he should forever be under 
the natural consequences of his determined evil course. 

God can not be held responsible for evil, then, even in the sense 
of trouble or distress, for his part was right. He created good 



things and good laws governing them. And though all power is 
of God and all is subject to his wise control, the fact that his 
power and laws fall as distress and trouble upon his creatures is 
not the fault of the laws, or misuse of the power, but entirely the 
fault of the transgressor. And as we have shown, though the 
trouble which God permits or causes to result from wrong doing 
seems an evil or undesirable thing to the sinner, yet it really is 
good, as seen from God's standpoint. In creating [preparing] or 
arranging that trouble and distress should follow wrong doing, 
God did only that which was right. That which was right, to men 
seems evil, yet whatever way he may regard it the cause of it was 
in his own willful sin. 

THE PLACE OF THE CROSS IN THE SUBJUGATION OF 

EVIL 

While considering thus, how evil [trouble] comes as a 
consequence of moral evil or sin, and is used of God in dealing 
with the sinner, let us not lose sight of the fact that evil of itself 
is not corrective, but destructive only. Contrary to the opinions 
of some in this matter are the facts of history; for though reforms 
have occasionally sprung up, the general tendency of any 
corrupting influence is from bad to worse. It is only to the extent 
that God interposes and applies the "salt," that the masses are 
preserved from more and more rapid putrefaction. In the age 
prior to the deluge when God let men try their own skill, and 
what they could and would do for themselves undirected and 
measurably unaided, the result was not corrective. The 
corruption increased and resulted in destruction, for the 
imaginations of man were only evil and that continually, 
swallowing up and almost wholly obliterating the divine image 
except in one family, that of Noah. 

Thus God's work and wisdom is made manifest in overruling the 
destructiveness of evil, and so arranging that to those who will 
accept of his favor it shall be corrective and not destructive, and 
prove to be a blessing in the end through God's merciful and 
wise overruling. And those who would have his favor, learn to 
accept it in the way his wisdom offers it. He offers favor and 
release from evil to all, through the cross. 

It was with full knowledge of the dreadful effects to result from 
giving mankind freedom of choice of good and evil, that God 
created man thus. He saw how things would appear from time to 
time to necessitate a disobedience of his laws, and that lacking 
the knowledge which comes from experience, man would sooner 
or later choose to disobey, if he had the liberty. God decided 
nevertheless to give man the liberty, and let him bring upon 
himself the consequences of disobedience-death, with all its 
incidental train of sorrow and trouble. In wisdom he foresaw he 
could be just, and yet recover the man out of death even after he 
had been condemned, by giving a ransom—a corresponding 
price, for the willful sinner. And in wisdom he further 



determined to let the test be wholly upon one representative man, 
through whose disobedience the experience of evil would come 
to the race, while only the one man should thus be the willful 
sinner, and thus one ransom-sacrifice be sufficient to justify all 
and release all from the condemnation of sin, death. 

Nor could it be said that God had dealt unjustly with Adam's 
children, or that he inflicted evil [trouble, death, etc.] upon them, 
for God dealt only with the one man. He created only the one, 
tried only the one, and condemned only the one to death. Adam 
and his sons have spread the race and spread the evil. "The 
fathers have eaten the sour grapes and the children's teeth are set 
on edge." The groaning creation has propagated its evils as well 
as itself. 

But here God's plan steps forward in due time, and his wisdom 
and love begin to appear as we get glimpses of his plan. The 
ransom given in the person of Jesus, the willing sacrifice, is 
made to redound to His higher exaltation far above angels, (Heb. 
1:4; Phil. 2:9) to a glory and an honor far superior even to the 
excellent glory he had with the Father before the world was. 
God's arrangement to have the one representative not only was 
the grandest economy, in that but one sacrifice for sin was 
needed to redeem-- to be a corresponding price, but it became 
also the means for the exalting of one "far above" all others of 
his creatures, justly to be head over all that in all things he might 
have the pre-eminence who was the beginning of the creation of 
God-Christ Jesus our Lord. 

Had there been many tried, there would have been many guilty 
and as many would have been condemned. Justice in payment of 
the ransom for all, must then have demanded as many sacrifices 
for sin as there were sinners, and as a consequence it would have 
been but just to reward alike, all who would thus engage, and 
there would then have been no one "far above all" others, no one 
with a great pre-eminence. 

And yet the wisdom of God is further seen, when we consider, 
that though it is his plan to bring a number, a "little flock," to the 
divine nature and joint heirship with the highly exalted 
Redeemer, he manifested his favor and wisdom by selecting 
these from among the redeemed race, in another way, which 
would serve a double purpose. First, the selected ones are from 
among those who already recognize the first begotten as their 
Redeemer and Master, and being exalted through his favor they 
recognize him as head and Lord, even while highly exalted to 
joint-heirship with him. Secondly, God's arrangement permitted 
the testing and sacrifices of these, to be among the sinners whom 
afterward they should share in blessing, and in the midst of the 
evil from which by and by they should be God's agencies to 
deliver the groaning creation; and meanwhile they would be 
"lights," "examples" and "witnesses" to those yet in chains of 



darkness, among whom as "salt" they have a preservative 
influence. 



THE CREATURE WAS MADE SUBJECT TO 
FRAILTY IN HOPE 

ROM. 8:20-23. 

The Apostle while speaking of the hopes of these joint-heirs of 
the only begotten, 

R873 : page 4 

and telling us that the earnest hope of the world centers in their 
manifestation, clothed with power as the sons of God, (verse 19) 
branches off to give us a word regarding the permission of evil. 
He says: "Creation was made to submit to [its present state of 
lifeless inability or impotency] frailty, not willingly, but by 
reason of him [Adam] who [as their representative] subjected it" 
[to this lifeless or impotent condition]. This is a statement of the 
facts of the case: Man is in a hopeless state of inability to recover 
himself from the bondage of corruption (death); not that he 
would not, after seeing the results, desire to abandon the state of 
sin and death; but having been brought by Adam under the 
penalty, man can not escape from it and is obliged to wait for 
God's help. This statement (v. 20) is thrown in as a parenthesis 
and the Apostle's argument continues between verses 19 and 21 
thus:-- 

"For the eager outlook of creation is ardently awaiting the 
revealing of the sons of God [the little flock, the elect]; in hope 
that even creation itself shall be freed from the bondage of 
corruption [death] into the glorious freedom [from death, 
corruption] of the children of God." 

God permitted mankind to be thus subjected through one man's 
disobedience, because he had planned the redemption of all from 
it. The hopes of the world, that somehow there would be a future 
life, were always vague, but their hopes will be much more than 
realized in the abundant offer and opportunities of attaining life, 
which will be brought within their reach when the manifestation 
of God's Kingdom takes place. 

What shall we say then to these things? These features of God's 
plan demonstrate that God is not the author of sin, imperfection 
and wickedness, but a fountain of holiness and life, from which 
spring joy and blessing. They demonstrate that calamity, trouble, 
etc., are the proper, just and natural results of sin to which all the 
violators of God's laws are subject, and which he has been 
graciously tempering and overruling for the instruction of the 
wayward and sinful, and for the discipline of his chosen, --the 
saints. They demonstrate that evil in no sense cures itself, and 
prove 

R873 : page 5 



the cross of Christ to be the only remedy provided; and an all 
sufficient one which lays hold upon every one that was lost in 
Adam, granting every needful assistance to enable them to come 
to fullest freedom from death—to a complete restitution to their 
former estate represented in God's perfect creation, Adam, the 
divine likeness in earthly nature --"very good." 

In conclusion, we suggest another reading of the text placed at 
the head of this chapter. 



R873 : page 5 

FATALISM. 

A certain extreme and unreasonable view of God's 
foreordination leads many into errors such as we endeavor to 
correct above. Those who fix themselves in the belief that God 
causes everything, can scarcely get rid of this and a thousand 
other errors now lying as snares in the pathway of the saints. 
Upon their false premise they build false conclusions and 
theories. If God foreordains everything, then it would be 
necessary to say that he foreordained or compelled Adam's sin 
and every other sin, as well as every good deed since. This 
would not only remove all credit for well doing from man's 
efforts, but also all responsibility from evil doers. God would in 
that case have the credit of any good there is, and the 
responsibility for all the evil, (moral evil, wickedness, as well as 
physical evil, suffering) and man would be merely a figure, a 
puppet, a machine. 

In such a view how absurd, deceptive and sinful it would be for 
God, in sentencing Adam, to say, Inasmuch as thou hast done, 
etc. In such a view how absurd and misleading for the Lord and 
the Apostles to urge the people to do certain things, and not to do 
others. In such a view life's opportunities are a mockery, for if it 
is all settled beforehand, there is no opportunity for us to change 
or guide our own affairs, or affect our own interests either 
present or future. In such a view every thought of rewards or 
punishments is unjust; for wherein is the justice of rewarding a 
man for doing that which he could not avoid doing, or where the 
justice of punishing man at all for that for which he was in no 
sense responsible? 

But such a view of God's foreknowledge is utterly wrong; it is 
opposed by reason and common sense as well as by the Bible. 
"Known unto God are all his works from the foundation of the 
world." His plan is complete in all its parts, and his wisdom and 
power are such that even though he grants us liberty, freedom of 
will to do as we please within certain broad limits, yet his 
wisdom and power being so superior, he can anticipate, 
counteract and overrule the various affairs of life to work 



together for good to his saints, and in the outcome to accomplish 
what he had planned. Such a view of God's foreknowledge, 
wisdom and power gives confidence and trust to those whose 
earnest desire and endeavor is to walk with God, lean on his 
promises, and render themselves living sacrifices in his service. 
But it gives no consolation to the careless, indifferent, slothful, 
foolish or overcharged servants. 



R888 : page 5 

BEWARE [--Flatterers are the worst kind of traitors, for they 
will strengthen your imperfections, encourage you in all your 
evils, correct you in nothing, but so shadow and paint your 
follies and vices that you shall never, by their aid discover good 
from evil, vice from virtue. 



page 5 

In connection with the two articles following, the reader should 
call to mind the article in the June, '86, issue, entitled "Forsaking 
All." 

R873 : page 5 

TAKE NO THOUGHT FOR TO-MORROW. 

"Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat; neither for the 
body, what ye shall put on." -Luke 12:22; Matt. 6:25-34. 

This should not be understood as encouragement to 
carelessness or sloth. The Lord does not mean that we should go 
to bed without having, to the extent our ability, taken thought 
and made preparation for the morning meal, nor that we should 
expect clothes to grow upon our backs as feathers do upon 
sparrows or adornment upon lilies. Other exhortations from the 
divine Word quite contradict such an interpretation. Is it not 
written that we should be "Not slothful in business"? and again, 
"Let him labor, working with his hands, that he may have to 
give"? and again, that we should "Provide things" (Rom. 12:11- 
17)? and again, that he that provideth not, denies the Christian 
faith (1 Tim. 5:8)? And did not our Lord reprove the idlers in the 
vineyard parable, and does he not call the slothful servant 
wicked, in the parables of the pounds and talents? and did he not 
hold up to scorn the thoughtless builder who began a tower 
without taking thought whether he could finish it? All these 
things, as well as the Creator's method of having a plan and 
working all things towards its accomplishment, forbid that we 
should understand our Lord to enjoin upon his followers 
carelessness, thoughtlessness, improvidence, or anything akin to 
these. 



What, then, does the Lord mean? He means that we should not 
be anxious in the sense of being fretted and worried about food 
or clothing. To be so corroded with care for these earthly things 
would dwarf our spiritual growth, and prevent our interest in, 
and labor for, the promised kingdom. He would have us 
absorbed in heavenly things; in obtaining, and using, and giving 
out to others, spiritual food~truth,~and in keeping our wedding 
garment of Christ's righteousness unspotted from the world, and 
in daily inworking upon it the embroidery of good works and 
self-sacrifices. (Psa. 45:14.) And to do this,-- to make this our 
chief work, he sees that we must be freed from distress of mind 
with reference to earthly things. 

First, we should be free from that pride of life, that worldly 
spirit, which leads on so many to a love of money, fashion, 
costly apparel, and show, which as a great maelstrom swallows 
up the time, energy, and love, consecrated to the Lord and the 
truth. And through the apostle, he tells us that having [needful] 
food and clothing, we should be content (1 Tim. 6:8), and not 
seek to compete with the world in a race for the luxuries of the 
present time, but use that time and energy in the service to which 
we consecrated it. Secondly, should the Lord see fit to permit us 
to come down close, to the want of even the merest necessities-- 
if, in spite of our diligence in business, and prudence, and 
economy, we should find the cellar and the purse growing 
empty, and the cupboard bare, we should not be as others~as the 
world, but should remember that our Father knoweth that we 
have need of the necessities, and that it is a part of his promise 
that bread and water shall be SURE to us. And with this 
confidence, we should be ready to share our last loaf or last 
dollar with any more needy than we. The Lord will provide! He 
may by this means teach us the lesson of trust, or correct us if we 
were being overcharged with the cares of this life, in an attempt 
to race with the world for present luxuries and earthly wealth. 
Yet without doubting his power, we should not expect the Lord 
to send us the wheat, or flour, or ready-baked bread, any more 
than we should expect him to put food into our stomachs already 
masticated. That we may learn to walk by faith, and not by sight 
and signs and wonders, our Father usually supplies our 
necessities as he does those of the sparrow which our Lord used 
as an illustration-namely, in a natural way, as a reward of 
industry. 

Many, however, who know nothing of real, actual want of life's 
necessities, are much exercised by the loss of luxuries when 
adversity comes. These they should never have set their hearts 
upon, 

R874 : page 5 

and in most instances wealth and luxury are snares which entrap 
and consume the spirit of love and service toward the Master. As 
he said, "How hardly [with what difficulty, and how rarely] shall 



they that have riches enter the kingdom of God." (Mark 10:23.) 
We should remember that luxuries were never guaranteed to us, 
and if we are parted from them, our only regret should be if the 
means did not go to forward the truth and honor of our Lord. Our 
consolation and rest and trust should be in the fact, that "we 
know that all things work together for good to them that love 
God, to them who are the called according to his purpose," and 
who are striving to make their calling and election to the 
Kingdom sure.-Rom. 8:28; 2 Pet. 1:10. 

PROVIDING FOR OUR CHILDREN. 

But another phase of this subject presents itself. What thought 
would the Lord have his consecrated ones take for their children? 
To what extent should they use or appropriate his money, time, 
etc., to their children? 

We answer, that as God's stewards we are authorized to use our 
Bible-guided judgments upon this as upon other exercises of our 
stewardship. We are given a natural special supervision over 
those whom in God's providence we have brought into existence. 
God would have us consider our children and deal with them as 
under his care; and our influence over them was part of our "all" 
consecrated to him. He tells us that he would have us "provide" 
for their necessities which thus come in as part of our own 
necessities. As with ourselves their clothing should be neat, 
comfortable and becoming "decent" but not "costly" (1 Tim. 
2:9). And though youth need not always be arrayed in somber 
shades, we should ever remember to use economy both of time 
and means in this matter as in all others, lest we waste the Lord's 
substance and injure our children as well. Children are often 
injured by overdressing and adornment, making them the 
subjects of flattery, and cultivating in them a spirit of pride and 
selfishness, and creating the unchristian class distinctions of 
society even in childhood. The proper and best provision for our 
children's future, is a sensible education which should embrace at 
least the common school branches, as well as the practical 
lessons of life, whether trade or housekeeping or business. It is 
our duty to fit them to do something as well as to know 
something in life. And what is not learned in early life, is learned 
in later years, if at all, at great cost to themselves and others. 

If our stewardship includes money or property, may we set aside 
a portion of this for the use of our children in the future by will 
or otherwise? This is a delicate question to answer for another. 
To his own Master every steward must make his report of his use 
of the things committed to his trust. We suggest, however, that in 
the case of maimed, sickly or young children or aged, infirm, 
indigent parents, duty and privilege would seem more clearly 
defined, and aside from very pressing necessities for the money 
in the Lord's special spiritual work, the future, as the present of 
these, might be understood as being part of our responsibility in 
the Lord's sight. 



Yet, should our cool judgment ever dictate that our trust funds 
should all be spent in the present, we should not hesitate to trust 
our dear ones with ourselves, to our Father's care. The writer's 
observation agrees with that of the prophet who said, I have 
never seen the righteous forsaken nor his seed begging bread. 
And this must be the comfort also of those whose trusts do not 
include wealth. We can as fully trust our Father's care over our 
helpless little ones, and his provision for them, as for ourselves. 
Therefore, take not anxious thought for the morrow, worry and 
sweat not as the world to amass wealth for the future, but give all 
the surplus of your time and energy over and above that spent in 
providing things needful, in the accumulating of the heavenly 
riches, in filling yourself and others with the riches of heavenly 
favors, that you may abound [be rich] more and more in the 
knowledge of the Lord, in wisdom and love and joy and peace 
and in every good word and work. Be careful [worried, harassed 
and overcharged] for nothing [on no account]: the Lord is 
present, and whatever may be the present, the future of the 
faithful is glorious, and of the world blessed. 

His providence is kind and large, 
Both man and beast His bounties share; 
The whole creation is His charge, 
But saints are His peculiar care." 



R874 : page 5 

TREASURES EARTHLY AND HEAVENLY. 

Closely relating to the subject above is our Lord's statement: 
"Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, ...but lay up for 
yourselves treasures in heaven" (Matt. 6:19-20). 

The call to which the consecrated have answered is a "heavenly 
calling;" the prize for which the Christian Church runs is a 
heavenly prize. Because our hearts will be (and our time and 
talents too) where our treasure is, therefore, we should be on our 
guard lest earthly treasures draw our hearts from the heavenly 
prize. A treasure may be of any sort—money, children, wife, 
flowers, birds, horses, cattle, or self, or business --anything. That 
which fills the largest place in our hearts is our treasure. As our 
hearts are "deceitful" we cannot always take what they say 
relative to this subject, and each should judge his own heart and 
decide what it treasures the most. To aid in such examination, we 
suggest that, that is its treasure upon which the mind and 
affections dwell most pleasurably, and though broken off or 
interrupted by business or sorrow, the heart returns as naturally 
to its treasure as the compass needle to the pole. The heart's 
treasure is that for which we would and do make the greatest 
sacrifices of time, strength, convenience, etc. It is of our heart's 
treasure that we always most desire to speak to those we love, 



and to the defense of which we quickly come when we see it 
assailed, and in whose 

R874 : page 6 

defense we would most quickly spend all-even life itself. 

The honors and privileges of our calling to be "the Bride, the 
Lamb's wife," and joint heirs with him of the heavenly kingdom, 
should make that the supreme treasure of every heart in which it 
is appreciated. In comparison with that, every other treasure 
should seem, as it really is, insignificant. The heart should 
continually gravitate toward this as its center or treasure; and 
though flowers and birds and children and wife and parents be 
treasured and highly esteemed and dearly loved, yet all of these 
combined should not be as precious to us as the heavenly prize 
upon which our hearts have centered. 

To have this heavenly treasure will not prevent love for others, in 
proportion as they are good and pure; but it would always hold 
them in abeyance, so that if a clash of interests should come, and 
it should become a question of holding the affection of any or all 
of these, at the sacrifice of the Lord's approval we should be 
ready to decide for the Lord at once, without delay or hesitation; 
and we should see to it that our loyalty to the Lord is ever ready 
for this test; for he not only calls us to the honor of being his 
bride and joint heir, but he tells us he will test the faithfulness of 
our professions, and that he that loveth him not more than 
houses, lands, and all else, and whose love will not stand the test 
of fiery trial, is not worthy of him (Matt. 10:37-38), and that they 
who are ashamed of him and his word now, he will not own by 
and by. And who can say this is an unreasonable test, when the 
honor of the position is considered. 

In proportion as we are faithful to our consecration in rendering 
our sacrifices, denying self and following the Master's steps, we 
come to realize the heavenly treasure more and more clearly, and 
our hearts are set more and more upon it. On the contrary the 
more we handle and spend time and attention upon earthly 
things, the more they get to fill our hearts and so would crowd 
out the heavenly. "Set your affections on things above." Where 
your treasure is your heart will be, and what you sacrifice most 
for, becomes your treasure. That which costs us most and which 
we give most for, we love most, and thus it is proved to be our 
treasure. 

Those who hope to gain the heavenly prize would do well to 
consider frequently and with care what difference these hopes 
have made upon their plans and aims in this life. There should be 
a marked difference not only in our feelings, but also in our 
actual plans and interests. It is very easy to lightly say and think, 
"O, yes, I love the truth and the Lord's cause better than any 
thing else"; but lest our hearts deceive us, we should not hesitate 
to put them to the test—to measure and weigh our devotedness to 



God by our daily sacrifices. Those who thus frequently sit in 
judgment upon their own case do not so often need to be 
corrected of the Lord; "For if we would judge ourselves, we 
should not be judged. But when we are judged, we are chastened 
oftheLord."-lCor. 11:31,32. 

It may be a painful thing, sometimes, to apply the test 
thoroughly; but as we consider the eternal and valued interests 
which are conditioned on our present faithfulness, we should not 
shrink from the task. The Lord will not be deceived, nor take for 
his joint-heir one whose heart is divided. "He that loveth father 
and mother more than me, is not worthy of me; and he that 
loveth son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. And 
he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy 
ofme."-Matt. 10:34-39. 



R875 : page 6 

WHO SHALL BE GREATEST? 

"There arose a reasoning among them, which of them should be 
greatest. And Jesus, perceiving the thought of their heart, took a 
child and set him by him, and said unto them, Whosoever shall 
receive this child in my name receiveth me. And whosoever 
receiveth me, the same is great." Luke 9:48. 

Selfish aspirations to supremacy are not in harmony with the 
will of God; they do not come from a right and proper exercise 
of mind; and consequently they form no part of any perfect 
character. "Godliness," says the Apostle, "with contentment is 
great gain." (1 Tim. 6:6.) And said Jesus, "Whosoever shall exalt 
himself, shall be abased, and he that shall humble himself shall 
be exalted." (Matt. 23:12.) We have no intimation that either 
Jesus, or any of the angels that kept their first estate, ever aspired 
to anything beyond that sphere to which divine wisdom had 
appointed them. It was because of such unlawful aspiration to 
position and power to which he was never invited, that Satan 
fell; and it was to such ambition that he tempted Eve, saying, 
"God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, your eyes shall be 
opened, and ye shall be as gods." Gen. 3:5. 

The example of Jesus was a perfect illustration of the Father's 
pleasure, in that he was obedient to the extent of humbling 
himself; first to become a man, a nature much lower than his 
former nature, and then when a man, to become obedient unto 
death, even the death of the cross. And because of this 
obedience, proved by his extreme humiliation, God hath now 
highly exalted him. (Phil. 2:6-9.) It would be the very height of 
presumption on the part of any human being, as it was on the 
part of Satan, to aspire to the divine nature if he were not invited 
to that position by God himself; and the Scriptures, when 



referring to the future high exaltation of the Church, make a 
special note of the fact that they were all "called, and chosen, and 
faithful" to the conditions of the call (Rev. 17:14); and 
consequently their aspiration was not an unlawful one, but a 
grateful acceptance of the grandest favor of God, giving 
evidence of their full faith in the divine promise, and being 
obedient to the divinely appointed conditions. 

The love which God will have to prevail among all his creatures 
of every name and order, is also illustrated in the fact that 
throughout his plan, any exaltation of some of his creatures 
above others, is for the greater advantage and blessing of others. 
This principle in the divine economy was expressed by Jesus, 
when he said, "He that is greatest among you, let him be as the 
younger; and he that is chief, as he that doth serve." (Luke 
22:26,27.) This should not only be considered a warning to the 
individual seeking preferment in the Church, but also as an 
instruction to the Church to accept as its honored servants, only 
such as he describes; and furthermore, it expresses the will of 
God, and shows us which members of the "body" God will use in 
serving the body with meat in due season. 

To aspire to advancement for self-glory or self-gratification, to 
desire personal preferment above others, is contrary to the spirit 
of God's plan, which is love-- a love that places a neighbor on an 
equality with self, and which only desires advancement for the 
grandly benevolent purpose of increased ability to serve others. 

But notwithstanding the plain teachings of the Scriptures on this 
subject, these selfish aspirations have been a stumbling stone to 
very many of God's children. And even those fully consecrated 
to God need to watch constantly lest they fall under this 
temptation to selfishness. If we would be pleasing to God, we 
must have the spirit of a little child with regard to others, and an 
unselfish, guileless spirit, full of love and without hypocrisy. 

If we engage in the Lord's work for any other purpose, or with 
any other motives than those of the purest benevolence, we may 
or may not receive the reward sought; we must run the risk; but 
we will never receive the sure reward of the faithful overcomers. 
Those who aspire to the promised favor of the divine nature, 
should think much of the joy set before them of participating 
with their Lord in the grand work of restoring all things, of 
bringing speedily to the groaning creation life, and health, and 
happiness, and every blessing which a perfect heart can crave. 
And not only so, but of carrying the glorious work of blessing to 
all things in heaven, as well as in earth. This is our future 
mission, and the extent to which we enter into the spirit of our 
future mission, and thereby prove our worthiness of that honor, 
is measurable by our present efforts to prosecute the work to the 
extent of our present ability. Thus our Father measures us, and 
thus we should measure ourselves if we would know how we 
stand in his estimation. 



MRS. C. T. R. 



R875 : page 6 

"NOT ALL OF DEATH TO DIE." 

"Fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell."- 
-Matt. 10:28. 

"God created man in his own image, in the image of God 
created he him: male and female created he them," and he 
blessed them and gave them the dominion of the teeming earth 
(Gen. 1:27-31). Thus the crowning work of creation was 
completed and given the Lordship over "all the works of his 
hands." This likeness of himself—a little lower (only) than the 
angels—was crowned by his Maker with glory and honor (Psa. 
8). And when God rested from his work and surveyed all that he 
had done, he saw that all was "very good." 

It is a fundamental law of God's universe governing all his 
creatures that, "The soul [being] that sinneth it shall die." He will 
not supply life to any creature that will not live in harmony with 
his righteous laws. When Adam disobeyed he therefore fell into 
this condemnation (Gen. 3:19), and in him the race was doomed 
to extinction (Rom. 5:12), the sentence being (not to die merely, 
and after a period to live again, but to remain dead,) eternal 
death. 

Thus by this one act of disobedience the whole benevolent 
design of God seemed to be frustrated. But known unto God are 
all his works. He knew what man without experience would do 
before he formed him (Jer. 1:5), and full provision for this failure 
of the creature had been made. A "Lamb" had been slain in the 
counsel of God before the foundations of the earth were laid 
(John 1:36; Rev. 13:8), and it had been arranged that by another 
man should come a new supply of life to the perishing race. "For 
as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 
Cor. 15:21,22). The fearful cost had all been counted (Luke 
14:28) ere it was decided, "Let us make man." Thus in God's 
comprehensive plan all live; "For all live unto God" (Luke 
20:38), in view of this new source of life which will in due time 
reach and restore all (Acts 3:21). And because of this 
determination in the mind of God and the provisions made 
thereto (the ransom) there will be a "resurrection from the dead" 
(Acts 4:2). This plan, more or less darkly expressed, formed the 
basis of faith for all who were accepted of God in former ages. 
By their "faith in God" (Mark 11:22) "this mountain was 
removed," and it was not to them an incredible thing that God 
should raise the dead (Acts 26:8). This fixed faith that all live 
unto God sustained the overcomers of the Jewish age (Heb. 11), 



who, though they died without receiving the promises, yet saw 
them afar off, and were persuaded of and embraced them 
because they believed them (not because believing them would 
make them true, as some teach to-day). 

To this gospel "which shall be to all people" (Luke 2:10), 
another measure was added during the Gospel Age~a "great 
salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord" 
(Heb. 2:3); an exceedingly precious favor not before made 
known (Col. 1:26). By the terms of this gospel, all who by faith 
lay hold upon this new source of life are reckoned of God as 
already partakers of it, and as having passed from the dying 
condition of the old, and as receiving of the "fatness" of the new 
(Rom. 11:17) source of life. 

While their condition is but a reckoned one (that they may have 
access to the gospel which began with our Lord --Rom. 12:1), 
and they are still going into the tomb, yet at the time appointed 
their vitality (which by fellowship with Christ in sacrifice has 
become hid with Christ in God's design—Col. 3:3), will 
reanimate them, because they (with the world) live in the 
memory and plan of God, having had the new supply accounted 
to them through the redemption. 

These shall not "see death" (John 8:51). They are "asleep" and 
have not "perished" (1 Cor. 15:18). They have escaped from the 
condemnation and will be fully released (Rom. 5:18 and 8:1) at 
once when their head assumes control. If any "fall away" after 
having the full benefits of this great favor (such are few in 
number, we hope and believe,) they "see death." As they reach 
the tomb they "perish." Because it is "impossible to renew them 
again" (Heb. 6:4-6). They are not "asleep," but have fallen again 
into the original condemnation for their own (not Adam's) 
transgression, and are blotted from the memory of God as though 
they had never been. 

In harmony with the symbolic framing of the text, these had been 
"delivered from the [original] power of darkness, and translated 
into the kingdom of his dear Son" (Col. 1:13). "Translated that 
they should not see death" (Heb. 11:5) into the new Jerusalem, 
but through willful rejection of the favor, shall be themselves 
"cast into Gehenna," —not in their "graves"~(they are no 

R876 : page 6 

longer reckoned "asleep" with a future hope of awakening), but 
being denied burial, are "destroyed" (not preserved) in the 
"Valley of Hinnom" (on the south and west of Jerusalem) here in 
text translated "hell" from the Greek spelling "Gehenna, "--the 
figure of second death, and "lake of fire" of John's vision. (Rev. 
20:14). 



Thus not only the body of willful sinners perishes, but the soul 
(being) is forever blotted out of existence, having no hope of a 
resurrection. Yea, I say unto you, fear him who is able to do this. 



H. L. GILLIS. 



R876 : page 7 



A DANGEROUS RULE. 



Says a contemporary:~ M Accept the truth as it is set forth in the 
Bible as a whole, and let isolated passages wait to be reconciled 
to this truth, until further study, experience and light from 
heaven. There are a number of doctrines which I firmly hold to 
the joy and rejoicing of my heart, because I believe that the Bible 
as a whole fully supports them, and yet there are some passages 
that I cannot satisfactorily to myself harmonize with those 
doctrines. I do not think it is possible to lay too much emphasis 
on this point. Draw your conclusions from a consideration of the 
teachings of the entire Word upon any given subject, and then 
hold to these CONCLUSIONS, notwithstanding your inability to 
harmonize single passages therewith." 

This is a common and dangerous rule; so common that it 
scarcely needs an advocate, yet so dangerous that few public 
teachers would dare advocate it. Briefly stated, it is, select a 
theory for yourself regarding the general teaching of the Bible 
and "firmly hold" on to it. If any meet you with a passage of 
Scripture contradicting your theory, still hold firmly to your 
theory with joy and rejoicing of heart, and tell them their 
quotations are "isolated passages." This is the very course 
pursued for centuries by all the various religious sects, and it has 
kept them separate-each member rejoicing in, and holding 
firmly to the theory of presumed Bible doctrine which 
circumstances and education have led him to regard as the 
"general teaching of the Bible." And thus each withstands the 
truth; and growth is impossible by reason of the common 
defence: "You quote only an isolated passage." 

The Bible, when rightly understood, is one harmonious whole, 
and in proportion as these "isolated passages" are ignored, the 
theory built is sure to be erroneous: hence the danger of the rule 
quoted above. And the more closely such a rule is followed, the 
more surely will error be firmly held and truth firmly rejected 
and ignored. If this common dangerous rule were not followed, 
many false and pernicious theories would fall. The special effort 
of the journal referred to, seems to be to overthrow faith in the 
Bible doctrine of the ransom. It claims that God IN JUSTICE 
OWES mankind a restitution, and hence that we were not 
bought, redeemed, with a price, even the precious blood of 
Christ, notwithstanding the statements of Paul and Peter (1 Cor. 



6:20; 1 Pet. 1:19.) It holds to an opposite view, "with joy and 
rejoicing of heart." It claims that Jesus did not give himself a 
ransom [antilutron, a corresponding price] for all (1 Tim. 2:6), 
and that he was not a propitiation [hilasmos, satisfaction] for our 
sins. (1 John 2:2.) Its readers have probably been asking how 
these and a hundred more of the most pointed passages in the 
Scriptures, including the sacrifices typical and real, can be 
explained away. These our contemporary frankly acknowledges 
it cannot explain away, but would have its readers ignore as 
"isolated passages," and accept its claim of being supported by 
the Bible as a whole. 

"The Bible as a whole," and "the general teaching of the Bible," 
are very common expressions among many whose theories are 
very far from "the general teaching of the Bible as a whole." The 
Bible as a whole, never teaches that which any portion of it 
contradicts. The general teaching of the Bible on any subject, can 
only be obtained by a careful comparison of all that is written 
concerning it. And we should never conclude that we have the 
truth on any subject of divine revelation, so long as there is a 
single passage that contradicts, or is out of harmony with what 
we conceive to be the general teaching. The perfect harmony of 
every statement of Scripture with reference to any subject is the 
only proof of the correctness of our interpretation. 

And while our contemporary deems this error of ignoring any 
passages of Scripture which contradict or oppose its theories, as 
a principle of primary importance, and thinks it cannot lay too 
much stress upon it, we would warn the children of God to 
beware of any such counsel. It is the snare of the adversary 
which will lead any who are so listless and careless as to be 
drawn into it, away from the truth, and possibly to entire 
shipwreck of faith. Guided by this false principle, the journal 
referred to has drifted away from the rock foundation of faith, 
the ransom. Upon no other principle than this pernicious error, 
upon which it lays special stress, can any other plan of salvation 
claim Scriptural support. This dangerous rule is followed, though 
not generally so boldly stated, by every journal that advocates 
salvation without a ransom. 

If in all the Bible there is one doctrine more than any other 
which can be denominated, the teaching of the Bible as a whole, 
it is the doctrine of a ransom for all~of a price paid by Jesus for 
us, on account of our sins, on account of, or through which, 
present access to God, and future blessings upon all depend. It is 
the scarlet thread running all through the Scriptures. It attests 
both the heinousness of sin, and the love of God in providing the 
way of salvation, as well as the love of Jesus Christ our Lord in 
carrying out that plan for our redemption and restoration to 
favor. 

The sacrifices of forty centuries commanded and acknowledged 
of God as types of the true sin-offering, the words of Jesus 



himself, the fact of his death, and the many expressions and 
elaborate arguments in the writings of the Apostles, attest the 
fact that according to God's arrangement, "Without the shedding 
of blood" there could be "no remission of sins," no 
"reconciliation for iniquity," no "access to God," no "life;" hence 
no restitution. All these attest also, that not the blood of bulls and 
goats, nor the service of the typical priests, could "take away sin" 
and open up the way of life, but the blood, the life of Christ, as 
the "Lamb of God taketh away the sin of the world;" and that 
"He put away [our] sins by the sacrifice of himself."-- Heb. 9:26; 
John 1:29; 1 Pet. 1:19. 

Against this very general as well as very particular teaching of 
the Bible, not one solitary passage offers contradiction. Shall we 
ignore this testimony, and call these texts isolated passages, and 
accept and rejoice in any theory to the contrary? 

We suggest a more correct and safe rule for the study of Bible 
doctrine, which is the very reverse of the one given by our 
contemporary, viz:~ 

Confess the ignorance of yourself and your friends regarding 
God's plans except as revealed by him in the Bible. Come to its 
study free from prejudice, ready to receive its teachings and to 
reason from its standpoint. Whatever theories may present 
themselves either from your own mind, or from others, prove all 
by a rigid examination in the light of every statement of 
Scripture bearing upon it; and while there are passages which 
you "cannot satisfactorily harmonize," DO NOT HOLD your 
theory very firmly. 

There are picture puzzles made which will illustrate this 
principle. The block of wood bearing the picture is cut into all 
sorts of shapes, some of them much like others in size but all 
bearing different portions of the one picture. After these pieces 
are disarranged, the puzzle is to get each into its proper place 
again and thus produce again the original picture. Those who 
have tried it, know that the larger blocks bearing larger portions 
of the picture are most easily located, and if rightly placed 
facilitate the placing of the smaller pieces very greatly; but if one 
of these larger pieces be misplaced, it produces utter confusion 
in the placing of the smaller pieces, and though none can feel 
sure that he has it worked out correctly until the last piece is 
fitted in place properly, his assurance must be in proportion as 
the harmony of the picture progresses and the number of 
unplaced pieces decreases. 

So it is in the study of the Plan of God; it is given to us complete 
but dislocated in the Bible. The largest piece of all~the centre to 
which all others must be matched and fitted is the doctrine of 
salvation through the ransom. To it all other features of the plan 
must be fitted perfectly, and our assurance and the firmness with 



which we hold to any theory regarding God's plan should be in 
proportion only as the unfitted portions diminish. 

To put together a picture and leave out the center piece, hoping 
that when we had made a picture of our own of the smaller and 
less important and distinct pieces, we should be able perhaps to 
have it complete without the main center piece, would be to 
follow the rule our contemporary suggests. You might make a 
sort of a picture thus, but it would give but a distorted and 
imperfect view at best. The grandeur and perfection and strength 
of the complete and finished view can only be had when all the 
parts are harmoniously fitted to the grand central truth of 
redemption through a ransom~a corresponding price. 

Let each bear in mind that the Bible as a whole does not teach 
that which any portion of it contradicts. Hence we denominate a 
dangerous rule the one first given, though the editor of that 
journal professes to seek in this way for the Spirit of the Word. 



R877 : page 7 



NOT IN VAIN. 



"Now thanks be to that God who always leads us forth to 
triumph with the Anointed One, and who diffuses by us the 
fragrance of the knowledge of him in every place; because we 
are a sweet odor of Christ to God, among those who are 
perishing: To these indeed an odor of death to death, and to those 
an odor of life to life. And for these things who is qualified? For 
we are not like the many trafficking the Word of God, but really 
from sincerity, and as from God, in the presence of God, we 
speak concerning Christ."~2 Cor. 2:14,17.~Diaglott. 

One advantage which the Christian toiler has over every other 
worker, is the full assurance that his labor shall not be in vain. 
And in proportion as he has faith in the promise of God, his 
service will be a joyful one, notwithstanding many things 
otherwise calculated to discourage. How truly may the 
consecrated child of God enter into the spirit of the Apostle's 
thanksgiving. Thanks be to God who always leads us forth to 
triumph, and who diffuses by us the fragrance of the knowledge 
of him in every place. 

Like Paul it is our privilege to go with Christ outside the camp 
bearing his reproach. In the harvest field the Lord has appointed 
to every one of the anointed body a place, and showed that not 
even the humblest is excluded, and that the one, or two, or many 
talents may all be employed. Other saints have labored faithfully 
in the past, sowing the precious seed which we are now 
privileged to help in harvesting, and ere long the faithful sower 
and the faithful reaper shall rejoice together. —John 4:36. 



But some may question, In what sense are we always led forth to 
triumph? We answer, In the same sense that Paul was so led. His 
message was not always received and appreciated, but whether 
received or rejected of men, he triumphed in the fact that his 
labor and sacrifices were a sweet savor to God in any case, 
whether they resulted favorably or unfavorably to those who 
heard. Paul's service was rendered heartily, as unto the Lord; and 
while his love for others made him intensely anxious that they 
should receive the full benefit of his service, he was not 
disheartened or tempted to give up the work, when the desired 
results failed to follow. It was his privilege to rejoice even then 
in his Master's approval, for he worked with an eye single to his 
glory. 

The results of the preaching of Paul and the other apostles were 
not always favorable to the individuals who heard. Some rejected 
the whole message and would not hear it. Others would hear or 
receive only a part of it; and it seems that some even, after 
having received the truth and for a time walked accordingly, 
afterward became apostates and "enemies of the cross of Christ," 
not only turning their talents and energies away from the truth, 
but against the truth, and endeavoring to subvert the faith of 
others. 

But notwithstanding these exceptions, which charity bids us 
hope were few, there were two general classes reached by Paul 
and every other true ambassador mentioned in this text. To the 
one class the message is "glad tidings," a sweet odor, a message 
of life giving hope of life. To the other class it was a reproof, a 
warning, unpleasant in that it condemned them, declared their 
lives to be out of harmony with the will of God, and showed that 
those which do such things, and take pleasure in them, are 
unworthy of life, worthy of death. 

To these then the message had an unsavory odor; it was a death 
message and held out no hopes of life to such, but warned them 
that death was the legitimate consequence of their present 
course. 

Thus our Lord foretold that it should be (John 16:8); that when 
the spirit of truth would come [upon the church] it [operating 
through the church by precept and example] would reprove the 
world, convincing them of sin and righteousness and of a coming 
judgment—of sin [by showing their present life to be contrary to 
the will of God]; of righteousness [by showing them by word 
and example what right is, --what the will of God is]; and of 
judgment to come [by informing them that though punishment 
does not always follow sin now, yet there will be a day, and age, 
in which every deed whether good or bad will have a just 
reward]. 

The fact that our message is not acceptable to them as a sweet 
odor, does not prove that it will never be so. They are now more 



or less blinded by a failure to rightly appreciate either good or 
evil, 

R877 : page 8 

else they could see as we do, that they are perishing through 
entailed Adamic sin, and that the message we bring is good 
tidings of a way through Christ by which all may enter into life 
everlasting. Their rejection of our message does not cause them 
to perish; they already perished through Adam, and they merely 
in blindness reject, for the time, the only means of recovery. 

The Apostle mentions the same class in a following chapter 
continuing his discourse. (2 Cor. 4:3,4.) He there says that these 
who reject and do not receive the offer of life, are surely blinded 
by Satan; they do not see things in their true light. It is because 
they are blind and not that the message is not clear and favorable 
that the advantages of the message are not seen, but hidden to 
them~the lost, the unsaved. All were lost, but believers having 
heard and accepted, are reckoned as saved or recovered to life. 
These who reject are still in their former condition, still lost-- 
unbenefited by the favor as yet. 

But thank God for the assurance that these whom our message 
does not now reach, and cannot now benefit or recover from 
their lost or perishing condition, will be brought under favorable 
conditions shortly, when the glorious Millennial reign is fully 
inaugurated. The "god" or "prince of this world" shall be bound 
and his chains of blinding error and misrepresentation shall be 
removed from the groaning creation, and he himself shall be 
bound with the great strong chain of truth, and he shall deceive 
the people no more during the glorious reign of Messiah.~Rev. 
20:1-3. 

Then the blind eyes shall be opened (Isa. 29:18); then the glory 
of the Lord and the righteousness of all his arrangements may be 
clearly seen, and all flesh "shall see it" together. Then the same 
message, now an odor of death, and offensive to them because of 
their blindness, will be rightly seen. The knowledge of the Lord 
shall fill the whole earth, and all shall know him. 

The conditions of the message as it relates to sin, and God's 
abhorrence of it, and the fact that he will not grant life to willful 
sinners, etc., will still be the same; they cannot change; but the 
conditions of the sinner will change; his blindness will be 
removed, and he must then decide the question (obedience and 
life, or sin and death), which we are able to decide now. 

But it is asked, What advantage then do believers of the Gospel 
age have over those now blind, who will see in the Millennial? 
We answer, much every way. Think of the joy and peace which 
we have from believing, which the world can neither give nor 
take away; think of the fellowship with the Father, and with our 
Lord Jesus, and the realization that under his favor and care all 



things, good and bad, are working together for our ultimate 
good. And then, besides all this, remember that those only who 
believed during the acceptable time (See June TOWER, page 5), 
receive the high calling or invitation to become joint-sacrifices 
with Christ Jesus, and thus joint-heirs of his coming glory and 
kingdom, which is to bless and uplift those whom he redeemed. 

But though we enjoy the service most when it results in finding 
those to whom the message is good tidings, and sweet odor, yet 
our service to the other and much larger class is profitable also. 
Sometimes a seed of truth is a long time in germinating; 
sometimes those to whom at first your message is not agreeable, 
an odor of condemnation and death only, recover from their 
blindness and become faithful servants and messengers of the 
truth long after your message. Others it restrains from more 
violent and outward evil, and your labor is thereby a blessing in 
some degree to the world. And even the individual, though he 
die blinded to the beauties of the message you sought to carry to 
him, will in the future doubtless be helped and benefited by the 
remembrance of your words and example. 

But nevertheless, whether we see much or little fruit to our 
labors, let us remember Paul's lesson above, that our labor cannot 
be in vain if it be acceptable to God as a sweet odor, as it surely 
is where done with an eye single to his service and glory. 



R877 : page 8 



THEY SHALL CAST YOU OUT 

A number are waiting anxiously to learn the result of the trial of 
several brethren by their fellow -members in the "Disciples" or 
"Christian Church." The report was crowded out last month but 
we lay it before you now, as follows :-- 

Westmoreland, Va. DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In my letter of June 1st, [See June TOWER] I made known the 
fact that a trouble had arisen in this section in the Disciples or 
Christian Church in respect to the promulgation of those 
precious truths which have been sealed and hid until the due 
time, now present, and as advocated by ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER, which we believe are in harmony with the word, plan 
and character of God, though out of harmony with the doctrines 
and theories of men. As the preachers mentioned, five in 
number, have come and gone, I feel it my duty as well as 
privilege to give you the result. I will venture only this criticism. 
They carried nothing with them of which they will ever boast 
and they left nothing behind them of which they will ever be 
proud. After the sermon on Saturday 

R878 : page 8 



night the Evangelist announced their mission in our midst. In our 
conversation he first tried to have us think of "that man Russell" 
as a fanatic, etc., but we have begun to see things in a different 
light. We conversed on various subjects, giving reasons for our 
faith, and for the rejection of former theories; he finally stated 
that no good could be accomplished by an argument, as we 
would reject his proof and call it figurative if it did not suit us. 
All arguments were cut short save that those five preachers met 
us in the church yard Sunday afternoon seemingly to entangle us 
in our speech by asking mixed and tangling questions, and 
demanding an answer, yes, or no. We all answered according to 
the questions and not with respect to their desire. Sunday 
morning he preached on "Christian Union our Plea," etc. Sunday 
night it was announced that the trouble existing in the church 
would be decided on the following night and that the decision 
would be final. On Monday night at 8 o'clock we had a sermon 
by the Evangelist from the text, "I shall be satisfied when I 
awake with Thy likeness." (Psa. 17:15.) He went on to show that 
death was not death, that is, man does not really die but only 
sleeps, referring to the cases of Lazarus, Jairus' daughter, etc., as 
proof, stating that we might call it figurative if we liked, but it 
was there. But he called no attention to their connection which 
might have shown that the language was figurative. After 
services the church was called to order and organized for 
business in the usual manner and the following resolutions were 
read and motioned to be adopted: - 

Report of Committee selected to decide the trouble existing in 
Ephesus Church, June 27th, 1886. 

"Inasmuch as certain views are held and advocated by those 
whom we have hitherto considered as one with us, which views 
we hold are speculative, unreasonable and unscriptural, and do 
but engender strife and produce no good result, and inasmuch as 
the Disciples of Christ have a right to Ephesus Church and 
premises, and do hereby forbid for the above reasons, the public 
expression and propagation of said opinions, —therefore, be it. 

Resolved, by us the Committee selected, that those holding such 
views be required to cease from expressing themselves upon 
such views. And should they not agree to this, that they here 
make known their intention, and publicly withdraw themselves 
from the Disciples worshiping at Ephesus, giving their names, 
and the Secretary of this meeting will note them, and the clerk of 
this church will strike them from the church register. And if they 
do not comply, we withdraw and are no longer responsible. Be it 
further 



Resolved, that we deplore this sad occurrence and love these 
brethren in spite of their erroneous opinions, but to save the 
church and preserve the harmony, peace and prosperity of her 
membership, we feel this our bounden duty. W. J. COCKE, 
Evangelist and Chairman. 

We concur in the above, 

E. A. COLE, 

H. C. GARRISON, 

JOHN PEED, 

CHAS. BARKER. 

Committee. 

I having asked and obtained permission to speak, said: While I 
have not even leaned against a college wall that I might, 
perchance, draw some of the moisture out of its brick, yet in my 
humble opinion the true meaning of these resolutions would be 
more plainly expressed in these, though fewer words, viz.: 
"Notwithstanding the Disciples regard the holy Scriptures of 
both testaments as their only creed, Be it 

Resolved, That hereafter no person holding membership in the 
church at Ephesus, shall search those Scriptures in order to learn 
that he may teach to his fellow man, any truth which was not 
seen and advocated by Alexander Campbell in his day." 

When you vote on the resolutions, think of their meaning: If you 
reject them we will stay with you; if you adopt them you will 
drive from your midst every Christian who has in his heart a 
proper reverence for the Word of God, and love for his fellow 
man. You will not drive us from the Word of God, nor from the 
Christian Church, but from your midst, into the pure, free air of 
heaven. In that pure air, on this free American soil, we will still 
search those Scriptures and speak of their truths. 

We were ruled out of order. As none favoring our views were 
allowed to vote, they were adopted without a dissenting voice. 
Four of us complied by asking that our names be erased, stating 
that they were no longer responsible for our teaching, nor we for 
their actions; that we must obey God rather than man. There are 
more to follow when convenient, who are not silent. A true idea 
of the confusion and trouble can more fairly be stated in the 
words of our opponents. After they had proceeded to select the 
committee, etc., his attention being called to the fact, the 
president stated that in the confusion of the hour they had 
forgotten a most important part of the programme, viz., to 
engage in prayer. Further on the evangelist said: "I have never 
been in such a trouble before, and we pray God we never will be 
again; it has been forced on us and we have tried to settle it the 
best we could." 

We understand the plan of the chief reaper to be first, to bind the 
tares, next, to gather the wheat. 



Let fearful saints fresh courage take; 
The clouds ye so much dread 
Are big with mercy and shall break 
In blessing on your head. 

If you see anything in the above that would be of any interest, 
you can use it as you think proper. These things were not done in 
a corner, there being no less than 300 persons present, and we 
are under no obligations to keep them secret. Your brief outlines 
and advice were sufficient and of great service, though we could 
not get those preachers to attack it in any form, and we thank you 
for them. 

Your brother in the harvest work, 

H. C. REAMY. 

REMARKS BY THE EDITOR. 

This is not what might have been expected of the "Disciples," 
who claim to be the most unsectarian denomination, whose creed 
is "the Bible only." Other denominations making no claim to the 
Bible as the test of fellowship, would have tried their dissenting 
brethren by their creed and their regular church court, and would 
have cast them out without needing to violate justice, since all 
assenting to such creeds are subject to their conditions; indeed 
they should not attempt to stay in an organization with whose 
fundamental faith and regulations they are no longer in harmony. 

However we see in this the tendency of this harvest truth—to 
separate. The tares are bound up and separated, while the true 
wheat stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made them 
free. Compare Matt. 13:30 and Isa. 28:21,22. 

Thus the elect from the four winds of heaven are being "gathered 
together" into harmony, into the light, into the truth, "out of 
Babylon," but not "out of his [Christ's] kingdom." By coming out 
of Babylon in harmony with the command, they are but proving 
themselves overcomers of the "Beast and his image," etc., (Rev. 
20:4) and thereby are confirming or making sure their calling 
and election to that kingdom and class. Others, on the contrary, 
being tested by the truth, are found to be its adversaries, and thus 
proved to be unworthy of the position to which all were called- 
unworthy of the kingdom. They are gathered out of it-separated 
from the class the Lord recognizes, and bound tightly by their 
own prejudices, in which condition they will be in the "fire" of 
trouble coming upon such in this "day of wrath" and "trouble." 

Stand fast, dear brethren; maintain a good record as soldiers of 
the cross and followers of the Lamb. The Captain assures us that 
we shall conquer through death in his service; that the "crown of 
life" is laid up for overcomers. "Let no man take thy crown."— 
Rev. 3:11. 



R408 : page 8 

"WHAT is our death but a night's sleep? For as through sleep 
all weariness and faintness pass away and cease, and the power 
of the spirit comes back again, so that in the morning we rise 
fresh and joyous; so in the last day we shall rise as if we had 
only slept a night, and shall be fresh and strong. "--Martin Luther. 



page 8 

BIBLE STUDENTS HELPS. 

SPECIAL PRICES BELOW FOR SUBSCRIBERS ONLY. 

YOUNG'S GREEK, HEBREW AND ENGLISH 
CONCORDANCE. 

This work is at once a Greek and Hebrew Lexicon giving the 
meaning of the original terms in English, and also a 
Concordance giving each word of Scripture and the words which 
they translate. The value of the work is becoming more apparent 
daily, as theorists attempt to palm off a private interpretation 
under a guise of "a better definition of the original." 

In this superb volume every word is arranged under its own 
Hebrew and Greek original, exhibiting 311,000 references and 
30,000 various readings. Its size is large quarto, 1094 pages. 

Price to our subscribers, $2.50; usual price, $5.00. If sent my 
mail, the postage should be added, viz.: 56c, and 10c. additional 
if you wish it "registered." Postage to Europe, divided into two 
parts 76c. This is the latest revision.- "THE AUTHOR'S 
EDITION." 



THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

For the benefit of new readers we would state that this is a 
Greek Testament. Under each Greek word the corresponding 
English word. It is thus the most literal translation of the New 
Testament. Besides this, it has in another column alongside a 
very clear and emphatic translation, showing the emphasis of the 
Greek, which is generally lost to the English reader. 

The regular price for the work in cloth is four dollars—which, 
everything considered, is not too high; but by special 
arrangement we are enabled to offer it at $1.50 per copy to our 
subscribers, postage prepaid. 

We cannot take postage stamps in payment, as we must pay 
cash. 



PITTSBURGH CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Our meetings are held in G.A.R. Hall, over the Third National 
Bank, No. 101 Federal Street, Allegheny City. Readers and 
friends will be warmly welcomed. Preaching every Lord's day 
afternoon at 3:30 o'clock; Bible Class at 2:30 o'clock and 
Services in German at 1:30 P.M. of the same day. 


