Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Witnessing at School
“DO YOUR utmost to present yourself approved to God, a workman with nothing to be ashamed of, handling the word of the truth aright,” wrote the apostle Paul to the young man Timothy. (2 Timothy 2:15) Many children of Jehovah’s Witnesses have opportunity to give a witness about the good news of God’s Kingdom at school. They are not ashamed to do so and are appreciated for it by many of the other students.
□ An example of this comes from Martinique. A young girl who is known in school as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses was often asked her opinion on religious subjects by her teacher. She had had several conversations with this teacher, and the teacher accepted some of the Watch Tower literature.
One day a discussion came up in class about the overpopulation of the earth. In discussing how to stop overcrowding the earth, contraception and abortion were mentioned. Some students were for abortion and some against it. The teacher asked the young sister for her opinion. She said that she would be pleased to give a complete explanation the next day. That night she prepared, and the next day brought to school some Awake! magazines that dealt Scripturally with the subject of abortion. After reading the material, she asked the class questions, and at the end of the discussion “all in the class expressed themselves against abortion,” she said. Some students subscribed to the Awake! magazine.
□ Another experience comes from Sweden where the brothers have often been invited to give lectures in schools. One special-pioneer minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses had been invited to give several lectures in a class. The teacher said: “We have had other pastors here, but they just play the guitar and tell the students to be good. That is all right,” said the teacher, “but I want my students to learn something too.” Then he made arrangements to have the Witness come and conduct a regular Bible study with the class.
Students in the classroom, as well as people everywhere in the world today, have many questions about world conditions or family and social problems that they want answered. What a privilege for Jehovah’s Witnesses who are still in school to apply themselves diligently in personal study and at congregation meetings, so as to get an understanding of the Bible and help such ones to learn the Bible’s answers! The Biblical proverb counsels: “Do not hold back good from those to whom it is owing, when it happens to be in the power of your hand to do it.”​—Proverbs 3:27.

