Kingdom Proclaimers Report
‘A Large Door Leading to Activity Has Been Opened’ in Cuba
THE apostle Paul was an outstanding preacher of the good news of God’s Kingdom. He used every opportunity to share with others the Creator’s promises of everlasting life for obedient mankind. While visiting ancient Ephesus, Paul recognized a new set of circumstances that would allow him to assist even more people. He said: “I am remaining in Ephesus . . . , for a large door that leads to activity has been opened to me.”—1 Corinthians 16:8, 9.
Jehovah’s Witnesses in Cuba also find themselves in a new set of circumstances. Although not yet officially registered, the Witnesses are now able to share their Bible hope with fellow countrymen openly. Recently the government of Cuba expressed serious interest in allowing various religious groups to function freely. President Castro has publicly mentioned Jehovah’s Witnesses as a religious group with which the Cuban government now enjoys an improved relationship.
This new situation has opened “a large door that leads to activity” for the Witnesses. For example, Jehovah’s Witnesses recently opened an office in Cuba, which helps them to coordinate their preaching work in that country. More than 65,000 Witnesses are helping people to study and understand the Bible. They use Bible literature, such as the Watchtower and Awake! magazines. Many righteously inclined Cubans are benefiting from studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The Witnesses are also holding regular meetings in small groups throughout the island. Sometimes they even enjoy the privilege of holding larger assemblies in groups of some 150. They truly appreciate the permission they have received from the Cuban authorities, which gives them the opportunity of gathering with their spiritual brothers and sisters, singing praises to God, and praying together.
Recently the “Godly Fear” District Convention was held more than 1,000 times during the course of just three weekends. One report states that “order, discipline, and peace” were evident at every convention. The authorities congratulated the Witnesses on this point.
Worldwide, genuine Christians strive to fulfill their God-given command to preach the good news of God’s Kingdom. At the same time, they strive to maintain a peaceful relationship with governmental authorities. (Titus 3:1) Jehovah’s Witnesses follow the counsel of the apostle Paul, who wrote: “I therefore exhort, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, offerings of thanks, be made concerning all sorts of men, concerning kings and all those who are in high station; in order that we may go on leading a calm and quiet life with full godly devotion and seriousness.”—1 Timothy 2:1, 2.

