From Our Readers
Why Control Anger?  Thank you for the article “Why Control Your Anger?” (June 8, 1997) I come from a large family, and during my childhood I saw a series of fights in my home. My parents got divorced, and since then I have occasionally had fits of anger. Day and night I have prayed to Jehovah, asking him to help me with this problem. What a surprise to read this article, which seemed directed to me! I am taking into consideration the scriptures cited—for example, Ephesians 4:26, which states: “Let the sun not set with you in a provoked state.” My husband and I have applied this. Thanks to Jehovah and this article, I have been able to get over my problem.
A. R. S., United States
Coping With Panic Attacks  I must thank Jehovah wholeheartedly for the article “Coping With Panic Attacks.” (June 8, 1996) My sister recently had a nervous breakdown. We did not know what was happening to her, since no doctor was able to diagnose her condition. Eventually, she landed in the hospital and was diagnosed as having had a nervous breakdown and as suffering from panic attacks. The article came at just the right time, making us feel that Jehovah cares for us. My sister sat crying as she read it, for then she truly knew that Jehovah understood exactly what she was going through. The words of the sister quoted in the article, saying that she had repeatedly seen Jehovah to be a genuine source of strength and comfort, show how wonderful our God Jehovah really is.
A. E. W., South Africa
“Into the Ears of a Babe”  This article (June 8, 1997) touched me deeply. In the field ministry, I often meet young ones. Not overlooking or underrating them, I always talk to them about Paradise. Many thanks for publishing this experience, for it encouraged me to continue in this manner. Who knows whose will be the next “ears of a babe”?
M. O. U., Nigeria
This article really hit home! When I reached the part “Learning Bible Truth” and read of the shock that Louise felt in seeing Psalm 37:9 about possessing the earth—and in her King James Version at that!—I shed many tears. Thank you for these life stories, and please continue to print them regularly in Awake!
P. C., England
From Our Readers  I cherish all the magazines we receive. I especially enjoyed the comments from readers in the June 8, 1997, Awake! regarding disfellowshipping. I was disfellowshipped and then reinstated the following year. Too many people think that this action is harsh. But it truly isn’t. The discipline I received was hard to take but definitely not harsh. I know that the elders were only trying to help me. It was my rejection of their help that got me disfellowshipped. Once disfellowshipped, I realized how lonely life is without Jehovah. There was a huge void in my life that could not be filled until I changed my life-style and turned back to Jehovah. Being disfellowshipped humbled me and showed me that I needed Jehovah and his organization.
A. C., Canada
Awake!  You must forgive me for forgetting to renew the subscription for the good magazine Awake! It is an informative, educational, and factual magazine with inspiring and awakening topics. I want all the back issues I’ve missed. I cannot miss even one. Thank you for patiently helping to fight ignorance.
N. S., Sri Lanka

