Stress Can Be Managed!
“There will always be stress in life, and really what we have to look at is our reaction to it rather than trying to make the stress go away.” —Leon Chaitow, noted health writer.
THE Bible foretold that in “the last days,” there would be “critical times hard to deal with.” Evidence clearly shows that we are living in that time, for people are—true to the prophecy—“self-assuming, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal, having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness, betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with pride.”—2 Timothy 3:1-5.
It is little wonder that maintaining a measure of serenity is so difficult! Even those who try to live peaceably can be affected. “Many are the calamities of the righteous one,” wrote the psalmist David. (Psalm 34:19; compare 2 Timothy 3:12.) Still, there is much you can do to alleviate stress so that it does not overwhelm you. Consider the following suggestions.
Take Care of Yourself
Watch what you eat. A healthy diet includes proteins, fruits, vegetables, cereals and other grains, and dairy products. Be wary of refined white flour and saturated fats. Watch your intake of salt, refined sugar, alcohol, and caffeine. Improve your diet, and you may become less susceptible to stress.
Exercise. “Bodily training is beneficial,” advises the Bible. (1 Timothy 4:8) Indeed, moderate but consistent exercise—some recommend three times a week—strengthens the heart, improves circulation, lowers cholesterol, and reduces your chances of a heart attack. More than that, exercise promotes a sense of well-being, likely because of the endorphins that are released during strenuous activity.
Get sufficient sleep. Lack of sleep leads to exhaustion and decreases your ability to manage stress. If you have trouble sleeping, try keeping to regular times for going to bed and getting up. Some recommend that naps be limited to 30 minutes so that they do not interfere with a good night’s sleep.
Get organized. People who manage their time are much better able to cope with stress. To get organized, first determine which responsibilities deserve priority. Next, make a schedule so that these will not be neglected.—Compare 1 Corinthians 14:33, 40 and Philippians 1:10.
Maintain Healthy Relationships
Get support. During stressful times those who have a social network gain at least a measure of protection against becoming overwhelmed. Finding just one trusted friend in whom to confide can make a difference. A Bible proverb states: “A true companion is loving all the time, and is a brother that is born for when there is distress.”—Proverbs 17:17.
Resolve conflicts. “Let the sun not set with you in a provoked state,” wrote the apostle Paul. (Ephesians 4:26) The wisdom of quickly settling differences rather than harboring anger is shown in a study of 929 heart-attack survivors. Those with high hostility rates were three times more likely to die of cardiac arrest within ten years of the first attack than their mild-tempered counterparts. The authors of the study point out that while anger seems to be the strongest factor, any intense negative emotion that sends strong surges of stress hormones through the body can have the same effect. “Jealousy is rottenness to the bones,” says Proverbs 14:30.
Make time for family. Israelite parents were commanded to spend time with their children, inculcating right principles into their hearts. (Deuteronomy 6:6, 7) The bond that resulted promoted family solidarity—something that is sadly lacking today. One study revealed that some working couples spend an average of just 3.5 minutes playing with their children each day. Yet, your family can be a tremendous resource when you face stress. “Family gives you an unconditional charter membership in an emotional support group that really knows you for who you are and likes you anyway,” says one book on stress. “Family teamwork is one of the best means of reducing stress.”
Create Balance in Your Life
Be reasonable. A person who constantly pushes himself to the limit physically and emotionally is a prime candidate for burnout and possibly for depression. Balance is the key. “The wisdom from above is . . . reasonable,” wrote the disciple James. (James 3:17; compare Ecclesiastes 7:16, 17 and Philippians 4:5.) Learn to say no to demands that exceed what you can reasonably handle.
Do not compare yourself with someone else. Galatians 6:4 states: “Let each one prove what his own work is, and then he will have cause for exultation in regard to himself alone, and not in comparison with the other person.” Yes, even in matters of worship, God does not make unfavorable comparisons, demanding more than our individual circumstances allow. He accepts our gifts and sacrifices ‘according to what we have, not according to what we do not have.’—2 Corinthians 8:12.
Make time for relaxation. Even Jesus, hardworking though he was, made time for rest for himself and his followers. (Mark 6:30-32) The inspired writer of Ecclesiastes felt that wholesome relaxation was beneficial. He wrote: “I myself commended rejoicing, because mankind have nothing better under the sun than to eat and drink and rejoice, and that it should accompany them in their hard work for the days of their life, which the true God has given them under the sun.” (Ecclesiastes 8:15) Balanced pleasures can refresh the body and help to offset stress.
Put Stress in Perspective
When facing stressful circumstances:
Do not conclude that you are disapproved by God. The Bible tells us that Hannah, a faithful woman, was for years “bitter of soul” (“deeply distressed,” Revised Standard Version). (1 Samuel 1:4-11) In Macedonia, Paul was “in distress at every point.” (2 Corinthians 7:5, Byington) Before his death, Jesus was “getting into an agony,” and his stress was so great that “his sweat became as drops of blood falling to the ground.”a (Luke 22:44) These were faithful servants of God. When you face stress, therefore, there is no reason to conclude that God has abandoned you.
Learn from your distressing circumstances. Paul wrote that he had to endure “a thorn in the flesh,” no doubt a health problem that caused him much distress. (2 Corinthians 12:7) About five years later, though, he was able to say: “In everything and in all circumstances I have learned the secret of both how to be full and how to hunger, both how to have an abundance and how to suffer want. For all things I have the strength by virtue of him who imparts power to me.” (Philippians 4:12, 13) Paul did not enjoy his “thorn in the flesh,” but by enduring it, he learned how to rely all the more on God for strength.—Psalm 55:22.
Cultivate Spirituality
Read and meditate on God’s Word. “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need,” said Jesus. (Matthew 5:3) Reading and meditating on God’s Word is essential. Often, by making a diligent search through the Scriptures, we find just the right word of encouragement that we need to get through the day. (Proverbs 2:1-6) “When my disquieting thoughts became many inside of me,” wrote the psalmist, “your [God’s] own consolations began to fondle my soul.”—Psalm 94:19.
Pray regularly. Paul wrote: “Let your petitions be made known to God; and the peace of God that excels all thought will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.” (Philippians 4:6, 7) Yes, “the peace of God” can transcend our troubled feelings and stabilize them, even when “power beyond what is normal” is needed.—2 Corinthians 4:7.
Attend Christian meetings. The Christian congregation offers a valuable support system, for those in it are exhorted to “consider one another to incite to love and fine works, . . . encouraging one another.” With good reason, Paul told first-century Hebrew Christians not to ‘forsake the gathering of themselves together.’—Hebrews 10:24, 25.
A Sure Hope
Granted, reducing stress is usually more than a matter of following a simple formula. Often, a fundamental change in thinking is required. For example, a person may need to learn new ways of reacting to his circumstances so that they do not overwhelm him. In some cases the frequency or intensity of the stress might make it necessary to seek competent medical attention.
Of course, no one today has a life that is completely free of bad stress. The Bible, however, assures us that God will soon turn his attention toward humans and eliminate the conditions that cause them so much harmful stress. At Revelation 21:4, we read that God will “wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.” Afterward, faithful mankind will dwell in security. The prophet Micah foretold: “They will actually sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and there will be no one making them tremble; for the very mouth of Jehovah of armies has spoken it.”—Micah 4:4.
[Footnote]
Bloody sweat has reportedly occurred in certain cases of extreme mental stress. In hematidrosis, for example, there is an excreting of perspiration tinged with blood or blood pigment or of bodily fluid mingled with blood. It cannot be stated with certainty, however, just what took place in Jesus’ case.
[Box on page 12]
Stress and Surgery
  Some physicians consider the stress level of their patients before taking them into the operating room. For example, Dr. Camran Nezhat, a surgeon, says:
  “If someone scheduled for surgery tells me she’s panicked that day and does not want to go through with it, I cancel the surgery.” Why? Nezhat explains: “Every surgeon knows that people who are extremely scared do terribly in surgery. They bleed too much, they have more infections and complications. They have a harder time recovering. It’s much better if they are calm.”
[Pictures on page 10]
Cultivating spirituality can help you to remain calm
[Pictures on page 11]
Taking care of your health reduces stress
Rest
Good diet
Exercise

