Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JUNE 1, 1918 


No. 11 


OUR PERFECT PATTERN 

"Consider him that endured suoh contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. 
not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin." — Hebrews 12:3,4. 


Ye have 


With increasing fury the storm is raging against the dear 
flock of God. Wild and wilder grows the gale; high and 
higher the waves are rising, beating against the walls of Zion. 
If God's children, weak, timid and inoffensive as they are, 
should look always at the storm, they would become faint in 
mind. Hence we do well, in this strenuous hour, to call to 
mind tluit Jesus is with his church in the storm. "Lo, I am 
with you, . . . even unto the end of the «age." "Fear not, 
little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you 
the kingdom." God in his perfect wisdom foreknew the experiences
 that would be the portion of those following Christ 
Jesus, and out of the abundance of his riches he made provision
 for their comfort and sustenance. Lest, then, we 
should become wearied in our minds from suffering superinduced
 by the storm or by the fiery chariot, let us come aside 
for a while and consider" him who led the way through which 
Christians must follow, Christians who will ultimately attain 
to the place of glory, honor and immortality. 

Because man violated God's fixed law, it was required of 
him that he should suffer the penalty. "The wages of sin is 
death." Man was perfect when he sinned. It was after the 
judgment upon him and after his imperfection begau that his 
children were brought forth. Hence all his offspring were 
"born in sin and shapen in iniquity." — Psalm 51:5; Genesis 
3:20. 

Satan was the moving cause of man's fall. Therefore we 
should expect Satan and the forces of darkness under his 
control to cause man to continue to suffer. It is also to be 
expected that every effort to relieve man from sin, sorrow, 
suffering and death would be opposed by this great archenemy
. When man was driven from Eden, God announced 
that there would be enmity between Satan and his seed and 
the seed of the woman. A subsequent part of God's Word 
discloses that the seed of the woman is to he the channel 
through which blessings will flow out to all mankind. The 
preparation of this seed according to the promise has been 
the great objective of God's plan for the past six thousand 
years. The importance of this seed, the position to be occupied
 and the work to be done, can be in pome measure approximated
 in our minds when we remember that Jehovah, 
the great Economist, has devoted so much time and treasure 
to the development of the seed of promise. 

WHO IS HE? 

That we might properly appreciate the one who suffered 
such a great contradiction of sinners, we call to mind that 
the first and only direct creation of Jehovah, was the Logos. 
By him all things were created that were thereafter made. 
It was to him that God offered the great honor of redeeming 
mankind, becoming the head of the creation*, and occupying 
the position of greatest honor in the universe, next to Jehovah. 
He was rich in heavenly glory and power, honor and dignity; 
but he left the courts of heaven and became a man and met 
all the requirements of the law and its penalty upon the 
sinner, in order that he might redeem man from death and 
ultimately bless him. 

Concerning the Logos the Apostle writes: "Though he 
was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through 


his poverty might be rich/' (2 Corinthians 8:9) He took 
upon him the form and nature of man, being born of a woman, 
yet begotten by the power of Jehovah. He was made holy, 
harmless, without flaw or blemish. When he reached the age 
of thirty years, he was perfect as a man — perfect under the 
law, perfect in organism and mind. He came to this estate in 
order that he might carry out God's great plan for the redemption
 and blessing of humankind. Of him the Apostle 
says: "We see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the 
angels, for the suffering oi death, crowned with glory and 
hlonor; that he by the grace of God should taste death for 
every man. For it became him, for whom are all things and by 
whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to 
make the captain of their salvation perfect through Bufferings
." — Hebrews 2:9, 10. 

CONSECRATION BEINGS SUFFERING 

When Jesus reached the age of thirty years as a man, we 
find him at the Jordan consecrating himself to do his Father's 
will. Here he said: "Lo, I come (in the volume of the book 
it is written of me) to do thy will, God." (Hebrews 10:7) 
God's will was expressed in his law. It was the will of God 
that mankind should be redeemed by a perfect human life 
given as a ransom for the perfect human life of Adam, forfeited
 by disobedience. The ransomer must take the place 
of the sinner. He must suffer and die as a sinner. 

Satan had caused the suffering and death by his wrongful 
course. Immediately after the consecration of Jesus he went 
into. the wilderness, and there we find Satan tempting him. 
Jesus had come to do a good work, the best work for mankind; 
and Satan was there to resist him in that work. The sufferings
 of Jesus began at that time, and continued until upon 
the cross at Calvary he cried: "It is finished!" 

During the three and one-half years of his earthly ministry
 Jesu3 taught concerning his coming kingdom which would 
bring blessings to all that would accept it. Jesus did injury 
to no one. He did only good. He gave the most wonderful 
demonstration of love ever manifested before men or angels. 

The Jewish nation was under a covenant with God, who 
had provided amongst them a priestly class. Satan had 
overreached this class. They had become selfish and had 
formed themselves into a company separate and distinct from 
the common people. They were the clergy of that day. Satan 
used them to persecute our Lord. Instead of being used as 
instruments in God's hand to carry out his purposes, they 
became instruments of persecution, causing the sufferings of 
the Master. Jesus was born a Jew under the law. He came 
to his own people and they received him not. "He was despised
 and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted 
with grief.'* The leaders of the people, the Pharisaical elemenfr
—the clergy of tliat time — in substance said: "We do 
not want this man; we w T ill have nothing to do with him. 
His pious attitude is a stench in our nostrils." 

Jesus did not seek honor, at the hands of men; but, on 
the contrary, as it is written of him, "He made himself of no 
reputation." At the expense of his vitality he went about 
healing the sick, opening the eyes of the blind, teaching those 
who were teachable and doing good unto all as he had op- 


(163-164) 


[6264] 


Junk 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TO WER 


(164-165) 


portunity. Instead of being received and well-treated by the 
leaders of the people, he was denounced as a vile person, as 
a sinner, as a blasphemer of God's holy name. He was haled 
before the civil authorities and charged with sedition. False 
witnesses were produced against him, and he was unjustly 
convi-oted as a traitor. He died the most cruel and ignominious
 death, being hanged on a tree. From man's standpoint 
he was accursed Doth of God and of men. He died as a 

Slimen T77HY FEBSEOTTTED 

Why should leading men of the Jewish nation seek the 
life of Jesus? Why should they induce the rulers to put him 
to death, since he was guilty of no wrong? The Apostle Peter, 
after his mind was illuminated, answers: "I know, brethren, 
that it was in ignorance you did it, as was the case with your 
rulers also." (Acts 3:17) Jesus was teaching the people 
that life and blessings can come to mankind only through 
his kingdom. He had taught them, saying, "When ye pray, 
say, Thy Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as it is 
done in heaven." The people did not understand him. They 
could not understand him. They regarded him as an enemy 
of the government and as a blasphemer of God's name. Hence 
they caused him to die. 

But why would God permit this? The Scriptures answer 
in substance that it was necessary for our Lord to suffer and 
die in order to become the Redeemer of mankind. It was 
necessary for him to pass through trying eircumistajices, fiery 
trials and sufferings, that he mignt be perfected as a new 
creature on the divine plane. He must have certain experiences
 in order to sympathize with the weaknesses of humankind
. "Wherefore, in all things it behooved him to be made 
like unto hi3 brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful
 high priest in things pertaining to God, to make satisfaction
 for the sins of the people j for in that he himself hath 
suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that are 
tempted," — Hebrews 2:17, 18. 

From the time of Jesus* fasting in the wilderness immediately
 following his consecration, he knew that he must 
suffer and die. But the suffering and death did not deter 
him at all in his course; for he was carrying out his father's 
plan. He had the Father's promise that, if faithful to his consecration
 vow, he should ultimately possess the divine nature 
and be the head of the new creation; that he would be the 
Redeemer of mankind; that he would have with him his bride 
in due time; and that he would have the full satisfaction of 
carrying out the Father's will. All this was joy to him. 
Hence the Apostle said: "For the joy that was set before 
him, [he] endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set 
down at the right hand of, the throne of God." (Hebrews 
12:2) By willingly passing through the fiery trials aad 
sufferings, he showed a complete humility, a faith .sublime, 
and perfect love. As a reward for this, Jehovah has granted 
him the highest position in the universe, God excepted. 

HIS BODY MEMBERS 

Before the foundation of the world it was a part of Jehovah
's plan that the Lord Jesus should have associated 
with him 144,000 glorious creatures, and that these should 
be selected from amongst men, participating in the first resurrection
 and and sitting with Christ Jesus upon his throne, 
It follows, then, that the ones composing the members of his 
body should participate in his suffering. Concerning this, 
the Apostle says: "For even hereunto were ye called: because
 Christ also suffered for ug, leaving us an example, that 
ye should follow his steps." (1 Peter 2:21) Thus in him 
we have a perfect pattern, and it becomes our privilege to 
follow this pattern. 

At Pentecost the selection of the body members began ^ 
and it has progressed, according to the "perfect wisdom of 
Jehovah, through a period of more than eighteen centuries. 
In the Scriptures this elect class is designated under many 
titles, namely, the body of Christ, the bride, the royal priesthood
, the seed according to the promise, etc. As Satan resisted
 and persecuted Jesus, so he has resisted and persecuted, 
through his various instrumentalities, the members of the 
body of Christ. Often he has U9ed as his instruments misguided
 men who had good intentions, who thought they were 
doing God service. Amongst these was Saul of Tarsus, who 
stood by at the stoning of St. Stephen and approved his death. 
Here again we find the' various sects stirring up the people 
and bringing the charge of sedition and blasphemy against 
Steohen. They produced witnesses who were hired to swear 
against him, who testified that he spoke blasphemous words 
against the holy place and the law, saying, "This Jesus of 
Nazareth shall destroy this place, and. shall change the customs
 which Moses delivered to us." (Acts 6:9-14) St. 
Stephen was the first martyr to follow Jesus. 


SUFFERINGS OF ST. PAUL 

Subsequently Saul of Tarsus came to a knowledge of the 
truth and made a full consecration to do God's will. He saw 
that he had wrongfully persecuted other Christians. Before 
St. Paul was permitted to enter upon his ministry as a servant
 of the Lord, God -sent Ananias to minister unto him, and 
spoke concerning Paul, saying, "He is a chosen vessel unto 
me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the 
children of Israel \ for I will show him how great things he 
must suffer for my name's sake." — Acts 9:15, 16. 

Thus we see that the Lord has made it absolutely essential
 that all who are privileged to be with Christ Jesus 
in his kingdom of glory must suffer with him. The subsequent
 experiences of St, Paul show how fully helmet these requirements
. Speaking of his own sufferings, the Apostle 
says: "Oi the Jews five times received I forty stripes save 
one ; thrice was I beaten with rods ; once was I stoned ; 
thrice I suffered shipwreck; a night and a day 1 have been in 
the deep; in joumeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils 
of robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the 
heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in 
perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren; in weariness 
and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in 
fastings often, in cold and nakedness/"'— 2 Cor. 11:24-27. 

Following the U3uai course, the Apostle, because of his 
faithfulness in declaring the message of Messiah's kingdom, 
the resurrection of the dead and the blessings that will flow 
eo mankind during the reign of Christ, was called in question. 
Like the Lord and Master, his purpose was masunderstood. 
He was charged with sedition and with stirring up the people
; and the clergy element of the Jews sought to kill him 
and incited others to do likewise. But the Lord preserved 
him and made him a great witness to God's cause, and his 
testimony has lighted the world for centuries and has been 
a beacon light to guide Christians on to the full consummation
 of their hopes. 

Doubtless St. Paul often considered how Jesus, the perfect 
one, had patiently endured such contradiction of sinners 
against himself; and doubtless, considering, it had brought 
him great strength of faith and confidence, which sustained 
him in the hours of suffering. As a new creature, he appreciated
 that his treasure was in an earthen vessel, which 
mu&t perish before he eouJd receive the glorious body. In that 
earthen vessel he suffered; yet he rejoiced in his suffering. 
We hear him say; '*We are troubled on every side, yet not 
distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, 
but not forsaken ; cast down, but not destroyed ; always 
bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that 
the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. 
For we which live are always delivered unto death for Jesus' 
sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in 
our mortal flesh/* — 2 Corinthians 4:8-11. 

CHBISTIAK'S COURSE OEBTAIN 

The true Christian is one who follows in the footsteps 
of his Master. Every one, then, who has made a full consecration
 and appreciates it, realizes that his course in the present
 life is not one of ease and comfort to the flesh. It is not 
one that brings honors and plaudits of men. On the contrary, 
he is certain to receive the disapproval of men, particularly 
those in the ecclesiastical class who worship God in name only, 
and who possess the spirit of the world. Throughout the 
entire Gospel age there have been many who have claimed 
to follow Christ, yet who have been wolves in sheep's clothing, 
and who have preyed upon the members of the flock. 

The unalterable course of the Christian is marked out by 
Jehovah; and this course is not one of ease. All who enter 
the narrow way must understand that they leave behind their 
earthly hopes and prospects. Concerning this, Jehovah said*: 
"Hearken, daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; 
forget also thine own people, and thy father's h«~use; so shall 
the King greatly desire thy beauty ." (Psalm 45:10, 11) Thus 
clearly is shown that one cannot serve the Lord in faithfulness
 and declare the message of hi3 kingdom and at the same 
time receive the approval or plaudits of mankind. Jesus 
made this plain: "The disciple is not above his master, nor 
the servant above his lord. It is enough for the disciple that 
he be as his master, and the servant as hi3 lord. If they have 
called the master of the house Beelzebub, how mueh more 
shall they call them of his household? Behold, I send you 
forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise 
as serpents, and harmless as doves." — Matthew 10:10, 24, 25. 
THE "FEB¥» XEXBXSRS OP CHUBT 

It becomes the duty of every footstep follower of Jesus to 
declare the message of his kingdom. (Isaiah 61:1-3) A 
failure or refusal to make known this message of the kingdom 
would prove disloyalty to the Lord and unworthiness to be 


[6265] 


(166 167) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N, Y. 


called his disciples. The world in general cannot understand 
such a course of the Christian; for the* message of glad tidings
 concerning the kingdom is hid from them. The reason 
for it is -given by the Apostle, who says: "The god of this 
world [Satan] hath blinded the miinds of them which believe 
not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is 
the image of God, should shine unto them." (2 0orinthian3 
4:4) Again he says: "The natural man receiveth not the 
things of the spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him; 
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned
." — 1 Corinthians 2:14. 

Thus we see that the great adversary blinds the minds 
of men who understand not Che purposes of God, and leads 
them to believe that Christians are their enemies; and that 
any one who faithfully proclaims the message of Messiah's 
kingdom is a dangerous person. It has ever been thus; and 
Jehovah has availed himself of this condition to permit the 
followers of Jesus to suffer fiery experiences in order to develop
 the beautiful character which alone will be pleasing 
to him in his kingdom. All these fiery trials are trials of 
the faith of the Christian. The Apostle Peter likens this 
trial unto gold being refined by fire. Clay is not put in the 
crucible for the purpose of making jewels; but the heat of 
the crucible is used to refine the gold. Hence, "the trial of 
your faith, being much more precious than that of gold which 
perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto 
praise and honor and glory at the revelation of Jesus Christ." 
—1 Peter 1:7. 

The Christian whose faith is made strong by a knowledge 
of the precious promises of God's .Word and by a confident 
reliance upon them, can understand why he is misunderstood 
and persecuted by the world; and so understanding it he 
maintains a feeling of compassion and pity for his persecutors
. As Jesus says: "If the world hate you, ye know 
that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, 
the world would love his own; but because ye are not of the 
world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the 
world hateth you." — .John 15:18, 19. 

Jehovah made it clear that the seed of Satan would bruise 
the "heel" of the seed of promise. (Genesis 3:15) The Scriptures
 point out that the last members of the body of Christ 
on earth would be the feet members. Having in mind the 
figure of a human body entering the kingdom, we perceive 
that the heel would be the very last member passing over. 
Then we should have reason to expect some special persecution 
of Christians in the end of the age and some sufferings peculiar
 to that time. It would not be at all strange to find 
many of these accused of sedition, of stirring up the people 
and being against the government. If the adversary used 
this means to blind the people concerning Jesus and concerning
 St. Stephen and St. Paul, it is entirely reasonable to conclude
 that similar methods would be used against the last 
members of the body. 

CHRISTIAKS MISUNDERSTOOD 

The Harvest period of the Gospel age began particularly 
in 1878. Since then, the Lord's people have been gathered 
out from every denomination in the land and from the world 
and, fully consecrating themselves to follow in the Master's 
footsteps, have been striving thus to do. Calmly, yet boldly 
and fearlessly, they have declared the message of Messiah's 
kingdom. They have sincerely prayed the prayer that Jesus 
taught them: "Thy kingdom come; thy will be done on 
earth as it is done in heaven," Tt is manifest that with the 
coming of Messiah's kingdom the present order of thing3 
must pass away. Therefore those who declare this message 
;iro misunderstood. The Scriptures indicate that they would 
be considered as being against war, because of their faithfulness
 to the Lord. — Jeremiah 38:4. 

If the Lord was misunderstood, if . the apostles were misunderstood
, why should we not expect the last members on 
earth to he misunderstood? At a time when there is "distress 
of nations, men's hearts failing them for fear and for looking 
lifter the things coming upon the world," it would be expected 
that Christians would be misunderstood. And thus it is. 
Jesus was asked" what would be an evidence of the end of the 
world and of his presence and of the establishment of his 
kingdom. Amongst other answers, he said, "Nation shall rise 
in arms against nation, kingdom against kingdom; and there 
shall be famines and pestilences and earthquakes [literal and 
symbolic] in various places. At that time they will deliver 
you up to punishment and will put some of you to death; 
and you will be objects of hatrod of all the nations because 
you are called by my name. Then will many stumble and 
fall; and they will betray one another and hate one another. 
Many false preachers will rise np and lead multitudes astray; 
and because of the prevalent disregard of God's law, the love 


of the greaL majority will grow cold. But those who stand 
firm to the end shall be saved. And this good news of the 
kingdom [kingdom news] shall be proclaimed throughout the 
whole world to set an evidence before the Gentiles [the peoples 
of earth, all of which are representd in America] ; and then 
the end will come." 

There is no nation, no sect, no ecclesiastical organization 
on the earth today, that loves the faithful follower of Jesus. 
Hence we have a clear fulfillment of the Lord's prophecy. 
Satan's kingdom is falling. The demons are loose, and the 
forces of evil are arrayed in the final conflict against the last 
members of the Christ on earth. Jesus plainly stated that 
Babylon would become the habitation of demons and that 
from these agencies the persecution would come. 

"The kingdom of heaven is at hand." Never were these 
words so true before. Those who enter the kingdom henceforth
 must enter shortly. Shall we expect tribulation now? 
"We must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of 
God." {Acts 14:22) Are you among those who have been 
experiencing special trials and tribulations in recent days? 
Have you witnessed the fulfillment of the prophetic statement
 of God* 3 Word relating to the closing of the age? What, 
then, should be our attitude? Jesus answered: "When these 
things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your 
heads; for your redemption [deliverance] draweth nigh." 
(Luke 21:28) Shall we fear what man can do unto us? 
Jesus answers: "Fear not them which kill the body, but are 
not able to kill the soul [the new creature]. . . . Are not 
two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not 
fall on the ground without your Father, But the very hairs 
of your heads are all numbered. Fear ye not tnerefore; ye 
are of more value than many sparrows. Whosoever therefore 
shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before 
my Father which is in heaven." — Matthew 10:26-33. 

The Psalmist in beautiful poetic phrase refers to the time 
of stress upon the Christians in the close of their earthly 
career. He describes them as praying unto God when they 
are about to be overflowed by the great floods of the peoples, 
and that by faith they can hear, wafted back from the angels 
of heaven, the sweet songs of deliverance. "For this shall 
every one that is godly pray unto thee in a time when thou 
mayest be found; surely in the floods of great waters they 
shall not come nigh unto him. Thou art my hiding place; 
thou shalt preserve me from trouble; thou shalt compass me 
about with songs of deliverance." — Psalm 32:6, 7. 

THE CHRISTIAN'S ATTITUDE TOWARD THE WORLD 

What, then, should be the attitude of the Christian toward 
those who engage in persecuting him? Shall the Christian 
bo resentful? It is written concerning Jesus, "When he was 
reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened 
not; but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously." 
(1 Peter 2:23) The servant must be like unto his Master. 
(Romans 8:29) The world is blind to God's purposes. The 
dark night is settling down. There is stress amongst the 
peoples. But, thanks be to God! ere long the Sun of Righteousness
 will arise with healing in its beams, dispelling this 
darkness; and then, gradually, the peoples will understand. 

Let us remember that the end of all things hath approached
, 'ihcrefore let us be of sober mind and watch and 
pray, looking to the time of our full deliverance into the 
glorious light of the kingdom of our God. If we are subjected
 to fiery trials and sufferings, what, then, should be 
our attitude? The Apostle answers: "Our light affliction, 
which is but a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the things 
which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for 
the things w T hich are seen are temporal, but the things w T hich 
jire not seen are eternal." — 2 Corinthians 4:17, 18. 
GLORIES ETERNAL 

The glories that await the faithful cannot be described by 
human tongue or pen. "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, 
neither hath entered into the heart of man the things which 
God hath prepared for them that love him." ( 1 Corinthians 
2:9) "It doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know 
that when he shall appear we shall be like him; for we shall 
see him as he is." (1 John 3:2) "God hath appointed him 
heir of all things." (Hebrews 1:2), and hath provided that 
the members of his body be heirs of God and joint-heirs with 
Christ Jesus, "if so be that we* suffer with him, that we may 
be also glorified together. 'VKomans 8:17. 

By the eye of faith, then, we contemplate the glories of 
the kingdom; and this we can do in a measure only by comparison
. We ascend into the mountain top at the dawn of 
morning and gaze upon the broad expanse below. We mark 
the broad meadows, the green trees, the placid waters of the 
rivers, flowing on through their winding course to the great 


[6266] 


Ji-ns 1, 1913 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(167-lfiS) 


ocean. We mark the blooming flowers, sprinkled with dewdrops
 which lighted by the morning sun, sparkle like diamond* 
in the crown of a queen. We listen to the sweet song-birds, 
and all' nature seems to join in to praise the great Creator, 
And we exclaim, How glorious! How beautiful! And yet 
this does not begin to approximate the glory and beauty of 
the kingdom. 

Silently we meditate upon God's Word as we stand upon 
the brink of the mighty ocean. We see its waves tossing the 
ship like a cockleshell; and we marvel at the power thus 
manifested. And yet this does not begin to approximate the 
power of the Lord in his wonderful kingdom shortly to be 
established. 

At night we gaze into the starlit heaven above. We behold
 the innumerable planets moving silentlv through space; 
ami we exclaim, in the language of the Psalmist, "The heavens 
deelaTe the glory of God, and the firmament sboweth his 
handiwork \ i} We mark the diversified wisdom of Jehovah; 
and then we remember that his wisdom is here expressed in 
a small degree compared to what it will be when made manifest
 to member a of the kingdom. We have in mind that those 
thus glorified with the King shall dwell eternally in the 
house of the Lord to behold the beauty of Jehovah and to 
inquire in his temple. 

EXHORTATION TO HOLD FAST 

We remember some of the promises of God concerning the 
beauty of those who shall compose the kingdom class. We 
are told that these shall shine forth a3 the brightness of the 
sun in the firmament. For the encouragement of God's people
 while they are passing through the valley of the shadow 
of death, Jehovah holds before them the exceeding great and 
precious promises. Among these is recorded: "All nations 
shall see thy righteousness and all the kings thy glory; and 
men shall call thee by a new name which the mouth of the 
Lord shall pronounce. And thou shalt be a crown of ornament
 in the hand of the Lord and a royal diadem in the hand 


of thy God." (Isaiah G2:2, 3. — Leeser ) Now misunderstood, 
debpi^ed of all nations and looked upon with scorn; but when 
the kingdom of Messiah is established, all the peoples and 
nations of the earth will know that this one and that one 
was born in Zion. Thus has God promised when the record 
shall be written up. (Psalm 87:5) Now they are known 
by a name that is a by-word; then to be called by a new 
name which the mouth of God shall pronounce. 

The Christ, head and body members, when complete, will 
be the crowning feature of God's creation thus far made manifest
. The prophet describes them as a crown and a diadem 
in the hand of God. The crown represents authority; the 
diadem, to which the crown is fastened, pictures regal or 
kingly authority. Thus it is represented symbolically that 
the faithful ones shall be kings and priests unto God and 
unto Christ and reign with him; and that God will exhibit to 
all creatures in the ages to come this monument of his grace. 

Having in mind the glories and beauties of the kingdom, 
we can with the Apostle exclaim, "I rejoice to fill up that 
which is behind of the sufferings of Christ for his body's 
sake, which is the church." (Colossians 1:24) Be of good 
courage, then, dear brethren. Be not dismayed. May we not 
now truly say with the Apostle, "I have fought the good fight, 
I have kept the faith" ? And if so, if our work here is finished 
and. we have proven faithful, we may know that in a little 
while we shall see God face to face, behold his glory and 
beauty and rejoice with exultant joy, 

"Come all ye saints to Pisgah J s mountains, 

Come view our home beyond the tide; 
Millennial Canaan is before us, 

Soon we'll sing on the other side, 
Oh, there see the white throne of glory, 

And crowns which the saints then shall gain! 
And all who shall love Christ's appearing, 

Shall be bless'd by his glorious reign." 


RENDERING GOOD WITHOUT OFFENSE 

''Ye may he the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good; and 

sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust." — Matthew 5:45. 


It is one of the blessed privileges of the real children of 
God to be always free to do good. The children of the divine 
Father are led by the spirit of divine love. (Romans 8:14) 
They enjoy that liberty of the sons of God at present denied 
to a world lying in the evil one, but into which in due time — 
shortly we believe the whole world will be. inducted. As aa-ya 
the Word: "The earnest expectation [the good things earnestly
 desired] of creation [of all created beings] waiteth for 
the manifestation [in glory and in power to bless] of the sons 
of God [the divinely begotten children of the God of love] . 
Because creation itself also [as well as the children] shall be 
delivered from the bondage of corruption [of death and of 
evil conditions, ideas, thoughts and feelings] into the glorious 
liberty of the children of God." — Romans 8:19, 21. 

LIBERTY WHEREWITH C HEIST MAKES FREE 

Laws are for the restraint oi beings in bondage to hatred, 
en\y y covetousness, wrath, lasciviousness, selfish ambition and 
other fruitage of fallen flesh. (Galatians 5:19-21) . But if 
any 'be led by the spirit, they are not under the law,' and 
their character-fruitage will be "love, joy, peace long-suffering, 
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, self-control.'* Against 
the children of God, animated by such a spirit there is and 
can be no law. (Galatians 5:22, 23) "For he that in these 
things serveth Christ is acceptable to God, and approved of 
men." (Romans 14:18) If good men do not approve of Jehovah
's children it is because they do not understand them, 
or because they regard over- much the inevitable errors which 
may be sequels to the best of intentions — tr For that [evil] 
which I do I allow not; but what I hate, that do I. It i3 no 
more I that do it, but sin [imperfection — the fallen conditio*] 
that dwelleth in me. For in me (that is, in my flesh) dwelleth
 no good thing; for to will [to do perfectly] is present 
with me; but bow to perform that which is good, I find not. 
I delight in the law of God [the royal law of love] after the 
inner man [the new mind] ; but I see another law in my 
[imperfect fleshly] members, warring against the law of my 
[new] mind, and bringing me [who purpose and try to do the 
very best] into captivity to the law of sin which is in my 
members." (Romans 7:15-23) So when God's children, among 
whom was the great Apostle Paul, try their very best, they 
necessarily do and say many things in ways unpleasing to 
even the best of men, and not approved by them. 

Not only is the flesh fallen, but the brain and mind are 
imperfect. How poor are our memories! How faultily we 

[6267] 


grasp and understand things said and done! How deficient 
all are in so acting and speaking as fully to measure up to 
even customary conditions. Then when conditions change, 
how slow are our minds in seeing the change and in understanding
 its significance. But with conditions changing from 
day to day how important that all should know about the 
changes, so as to be prepared to think and act appropriately. 

As a rule, when good-minded people come to understand 
the real good intention and effort back of imperfect actions, 
they make the proper allowance, and approve those who are 
trying to do good. The new creature in Christ Jesus, being 
absolutely well-intentioned in everything, is subject to none 
of the laws directed at the ill-intentioned. Being full of the 
divine spirit of love he has a true Christian love for everyone 
and tries to lay down even his life for his fellow sons of God, 
and as, he can, for all men. "A3 we have opportunity, let us 
do good unto all, especially unto them who are of the household
 of faith." — Galatians 6:10. 

The true Christian has liberty to do anything that can be 
done in the spirit of Christian love. His compass ever points 
to the star of divine love. The loving Master said to his 
disciples: "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye 
love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one 
another." (John 13:34) So the "faithful Christian always 
tries to avoid doing evil, and to do only that which is good. 
However much his course may seem to alter in direction, 
divine love is and remains his lode-star. He may, under 
varying natural conditions, in matters not of principle, do 
one thing today and the direct opposite tomorrow. He may 
appear inconsistent in Ms acts, but to God his heart is always
 consistent. As to principle a Christian is faithful, 
but in the application of a principle to given cases, the resultant
 action may vary as widely as the conditions and circumstances
 of the cases, 

ESSENTIALS, UNITY—NON-ESSENTIALS, CHARITY 

There are certain principles, such as the "ransom for all/' 
which are forever vital, but certain subordinate principles 
may from time to time, with changed conditions, new information
, or a new viewpoint be clearly seen to be not necessarily
 vital. It was vital for a Hebrew to keep himself Levitically
 undefiled, but after Pentecost this was no longer a vital 
principle; it was vital that no one but a priest eat the "shewbread
" ; but "David when he was an hungered, entered into 
the house of the Lord and did eat the shewbread, which was 


(168-169) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


not lawful for him to eat, but only for the priests." (Matthew 
12:3, 4} It is vital, according to Paul, for brothers in Christ 
to "avoid contentions" (Titus 3:0); but "Paul thought not 
good to take him [John Mark] with them, who departed from 
them from Pamphylia, and went not with them to the work. 
And the contention was so sharp between them, that they 
[Barnabas and Paul, who had 'lived in all good conscience 
before God' — Acts 23:1] departed asunder one from the other." 
—Acts 15:38, 39. 

In apostolic times some Christians made it a matter of 
principle to "observe the days, months, times and years" 
(Galatians 4:10) of the Hebrew ritual; others did not. "One 
-believed that he might eat all things; another who was weak 
[in the faith] eateth herbs." (Romans 14:2) "And," says 
Paul, "he that doubteth is damned [judged] if he eat, because
 he eateth not of faith [with confidence that it is 
proper] ; for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin." (Romans 
14:23) In modern times one Christian can eat pork, another
 can not; one can observe Sunday, another Saturday, and 
still another can keep all days holy to God; one can engage 
in temperance work, another cannot; one can own an automobile
, another cannot. At one time a Christian feels unable 
to do certain things; later, with additional knowledge or 
thought, he can do them with a good conscience. 

A Christian might not have been able conscientiously to 
engage in the military activities of a country offering only 
combatant service; later, when the opportunity is enlarged. 
bo that he may choose some good work such as the hospital 
or amouiance service, he may with a free conscience take 
such service. A Christian to whom may have been presented 
the perverted viewpoint that the Red Gross work is only the 
aiding of that killing which is against his conscience, cannot 
help the Red Cross; then he gains the broader viewpoint that 


the Red Cross is the embodiment of helping the helpless, and 
he finds himself able and willing to help the Red Gross according
 to ability and opportunity. A Christian, unwiumg 
to kill, may have been conscientiously unable to buy government
 bonds ; later he considers what great blessings he has received
 under his government, and realizes tnat the nation is 
in trouble and facing dangers to its liberty, and he feels himself
 conscientiously able to lend some money to the country, 
just as he would lend to a friend in distress. 

The Christian with the broadest mrnd is the one who is 
best informed Scripturally. That Christian who is able to 
see from but one viewpoint is in danger of being what St. 
Paul calls "weak," in the sense that his inability to see all 
around a question limits his sphere of action. Narrowmindedness
 invites troubles and persecutions for causes not 
even indirectly connected with true Christianity. Such trouble 
may usually well be avoided, and should be avoided m order 
that such trials or persecutions which are our portion may 
come upon the clear-cut issue of faithfulness in the consecrated
 life and not for other causes. The true footstep follower
 of Christ will have enough to suffer as a Christian. 
He will do his best to study all sides of every question and 
remove from himself causes for offense, other than his truly 
Christian and religious beliefs and principles which are vital, 

"If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are 
ye; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you; on 
their part he [Christ in you] is evil spoken of, but on your 
part [in you as a new creature] he is glorified; but let none 
of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, 
or as a busybody in other men's affairs. Yet if any man suffer 
as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify 
God on this behalf."— 1 Peter 4:14-16. 


FAITH 

[This poem was a reprint of that which appeared in issue of June 15, 1917, which please see.] 


PRAYING TO GOD 

[Paragraphs 1, 2 and 23 of this article, as it originally appeared in issue of June 1, 1918, were reprinted from article entitled
, "Lord Teach Us to Pray," published in issue of July 1, 1906, which please sec] 

July 21.— Luke 11:1-13; Psa. 145:18, 19. 
who are privileged to pray how we may "pray without ceasing" — a model prayer, — its ascriptions of praise— expressions
 of confidence in god's promised kingdom — acknowledgment of oub dependence upon 3iim — confidence in 
his power to protect us and finally to deliver us — pbopkb attitude toward the expediences of liff — purpose 
of prayer — request for the holy spirit the essence of our petitions. 
"Let us therefore draw near with boldness unto the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and may 
find grace to help in time of need." — Hebrews 4:16. 
The advanced Christian should be so fully in accord with tions respecting times, seasons, dress, etc., to be observed by 


the Father, the Son and the divine program that his entire 
life will be a prayer and a song of praise. He will have in 
his mind primarily the thought, 'What is God's will in this 
matter?' The heart that is thus ever looking for divine direction
 in all of life's affairs is thus continuously in an attitude
 of prayer; and no other condition is proper to the 
Christian.— Prov. 3:6; Psalm 37:4. 

WHO IS PBIVTLEGED TO SAY, "OUB FATHER''' 

Only those who have become children of God by forsaking 
sin and laying hold upon Christ as their Savior are accorded 
the privilege of approaching the throne of grace to obtain 
mercy and to find grace sufficient for their time of need. Only 
those who are accepted in the Beloved are privileged to call 
Jehovah God by the endearing name, "Our Father who art in 
heaven." The attempt thus to approach God implies (1) 
faith in him; (2) realization of dependence upon him; (3) 
faith that a way of reconciliation with him has been effected 
through our Redeemer; (4) realization that God no longer 
condemns the suppliant, but accepts him as a son. Moreover, 
it implies that the suppliant recognizes the fact that there 
are other sons of God who, like himself, have fled from sin 
and been adopted into God's family; for tne petition begins, 
"our Father," not "my Father." 

Therefore whoever thus addresses God must have concern 
for all the interests of the family of God. Whatever selfishness
 he might formerly have had he must divest himself of 
when he comes to the" Father, and must realize himself as 
merely one of the favored class of sons thus privileged. It 
is in harmony with this thought that all of the Lord's consecrated
 people have special pleasure when permitted to approach
 the throne of grace together, whether but two or three 
or in laTger numbers. 

The more clearly we recognize that tiK privilege of prayer 
is an exclusive one, the more we shall be inclined to use it 
in a most reverent manner. The kings of earth make regulathose
 who wish to enter their presence; and all who have a 
proper appreciation of the majesty of the King Eternal, the 
only true God, will approach in a worshipful, reverent spirit, 
implied in the expression: <f Hallowed be thy name." Our 
holy God is to be revered. His sacred name stands for everything
 that i3 just, wise and loving. 

THE KINGDOM FOK WHICH WE PEAT 

In the older manuscripts the words, "Thy will be done, as 
in heaven so in earth," are not found in Luke's Gospel, but in 
Matthew's. They are therefore properly to be considered a 
part of the petition. Be it noted, however, that while this 
petition as it stands is appropriate enough as a prayer, it 
evidently was not our Lord's intention that "these words should 
continually be used as the only petition at the throne of grace, 
but rather he gave it as a sample. The various items of this 
prayer should therefore be to the Lord's people a suggestion 
of the general character of their petitions, and not understood 
as binding their terms, their expressions, their words. 

The thoughts of true disciples are directed to the fact 
that the present condition of sin and death is not to be everlasting
; that God has provided for a glorious kingdom through 
his Son and the church, his bride, under which all evil will be 
conquered and brought under complete subjugation to righteousness
. Those in proper heart relationship to the Lord 
must recognize thi3 fact, and be so separated from the spirit 
of this world that they will long for the installation of the 
reign of righteousness, even though they know T that this will 
imply the overthrow of the present order. Their hearts are 
so in accord with the Lord that they are out of accord with 
every form, institution and vine not of the Father's righthand
 planting. (Isaiah 60:21) Longing for the Kingdom 
that will bless the world, they also long for the promised 
privilege of being joint-heirs with their Redeemer as members
 of that kingdom class which shall bless the world and 
uplift mankind out of sin and death. 


[6268] 


Juws 1, 1918 


THE \VA TCH TO WER 


U70-17H 


PROVISION FOE ALL OUR NECESSITIES 

The next petition is for our needful bread. There is no 
attempt here to supplicate delicacies, but merely an expression
 of trust in the Lord and of confidence that he will provide
, in harmony with his promise that our bread and our 
water shall be sure. (Isaiah 33:1(5) Indeed, when we remember
 our Master's words, that the heathen have in mind 
what they shall eat, drink and wear, but that the heavenly 
Father knows what things we have need of (Matthew 6:31- 
33), we perceive that to the spirit-begotten and developed 
Christian these words respecting daily bread imply more 
particularly the spiritual food than the earthly food. Provision
 for all our necessities, both temporal and spiritual, according
 to divine wisdom, is briefly summed up in this petition
. 

To suppose that the Master is merely referring to the natural
 food w T ould imply that the petitioners were merely natural
 men; whereas we have seen that the prayer was taught 
only to those who were about to become new creatures in 
Christ by a covenant to walk in his steps in the narrow way. 
Therefore it must be understood that it is the new creature 
who is offering the .petition; ar.d this w T ill imply that it is the 
nourishment of the new creature winch is here chiefly under 
consideration, with whatever provision for temporal necessities
 the heavenly Father may see best. This is distinctly 
brought to our attention in Luke 11:13, wherein the heavenly 
Father is represented as dispensing the holy Spirit, the spiritual
 blessings and experiences which develop in his children 
his own spirit, the spirit of the truth, the spirit of the Lord. 
GOD'S MEEOT PROPORTIONATE TO OURS 
"Forgive us our sins; for we also forgive everyone that is 
indebted to us." The sins here referred to, or a-s in Matthew 
"debts," are in no way related to original sin, which we are 
not to pray to havo forgiven, but which the heavenly Father 
has already made provision to forgive unconditionally to 
those who accept Christ. Original sin is not forgivable, as 
that word is generally used. But God in his mercy provided 
w Redeemer; and so we read: "Christ died for our sins according
 to the Scriptures/' (1 Corinthians 15:3) He is the 
propitiation for our sins, the Just for the unjust, to bring us 
to God. This prayer relates not, therefore, to that sin the 
forgiveness of which permits us to approach God and by covenant
 through Jesus to call him our Father. The sins mentioned
 in this prayer, the "debts," are those which are. ours 
after we have become new creatures in Christ, children of the 
Highest. Because of the imperfections of our flesh we cannot
 do the things which we would, the things which we know 
to be the perfect will of our FatheT in heaven. 

In a certain sense these aTe our debts or obligations to 
the Father from the time when we start to walk in newness 
of life, not after the flesh but after the Spirit. Walking after 
the Spirit, we find that we cannot come up to it; hence the 
debts. It is for the forgiveness of these that we are privileged 
to petition — matters of omission and of commission not wilfully
 done, not intentionally omitted. — Romans 7:19-23. 

According to the divine arrangement the merit of Christ 
not only covered the sins that are past, but made provision 
for our weaknesses and blemishes en route for the kingdom. 
God could indeed apply the merit of Christ to these debts, excuse
 us from them and not require us to mention them at all; 
but for our advantage he has arranged otherwise, that we must 
make application for the covering of these debts, for exoneration
 in the* name of Jesus our Lord and Redeemer, 
WISDOM IN THE DIVINE ARRANGEMENT 
In making daily application for forgiveness of our unintentional
 shortcomings we learn, three important lessons: (1) 
to keep track of our blemishes ; (2) to keep in mind that we 
are always dependent upon the merit of our Savior, the merit 
of his precious blood; (3) to be merciful, compassionate and 
generous toward those who may be our debtors in matters 
great and small. Thus we are better assisted in warring a 
good warfare against the world, the flesh and the devil. 

How just and how wise is the divine arrangement which 
requires that in applying for mercy we pledge ourselves to 
the Lord to see to it that we are also merciful, forgiving, to 
others, that we do not attempt to exact justice from those 
with whom we have contact and who are 'under some obligation
 to us! This is a wise provision in that it will assist us 
in the right direction, will assist us in the development of 
character which the Lord will approve, and which will be 
meat for those who would be inheritors of the kingdom. It 
will assist us in our endeavors to be copies of God's dear Son, 
and like unto our Father in heaven in the sentiments of our 
hearts at least. It is just; for God has not arranged simply 
to show us favors above the remainder of mankind, except as 


we shall receive his mercies with proper appreciation and 
with a desire to attain the condition which would be pleasing 
to him and which he would be pleased to reward with the 
life everlasting and the kingdom glories. 

THE ARCH ENEMY OF THE CHURCH 

These words, "Deliver us from evil " are not in the original 
of St. Luke's account of this prayer; but they are found in 
St. Matthew's account, and hence" are properly a part of the 
petition. The Revised Version reads: "Bring us not into 
temptation, but deliver us from the evil one." {Matthew 
6:13) This statement is a little confusing; for elsewhere we 
have the assurance that "God tempteth no man." (James 
1:13) The thought then seems to be that there is an evil 
one ever ready to attack the Lord's people to the extent that 
God will grant the opportunity, as in the case of Job. 

We remember, too, that trials, testing3 and temptations 
are necessary for our development as new creatures; and 
since these are necessary and of divine arrangement or permission
, it would not be appropriate for us to pray that the 
Lord would spare us from all trials and temptations. (Hebrews
 12:8) Therefore we must paraphrase this petition in 
our thoughts and suppose it to mean: 'Bring us not into 
temptation that would be too severe for us/ or 'Abandon us 
not in temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.' 

This thought is in full accord with the entire testimony 
of the Word of God. The promise is: "He will not suffer 
us to be tempted above that we are able, but will with the 
temptation provide a way of escape." (1 Corinthians 10:13) 
The evil one would indeed utterly destroy the Lord's consecrated
 people, but he will not be permitted to do so. Thus 
far may he go, but no further. If God be for us, who or what 
power can prevail against us? Nothing shall by any means 
separate us from the love of God in Christ. — Romans 8:31-39. 
THE PURPOSE OF PRATER 

Although our Lord did not teach his disciples to pray until 
they had requested instruction, yet this was evidently not 
because he was unwilling to assist them, but because he wished 
them to desire further teaching. Some may argue that no 
one needs instruction as to how to pray, but this thought is 
not borne out by this lesson. Evidently there are proper and 
improper prayers. We might as well say that no one needs 
instruction in singing or in playing music. While singers 
and players are born with the talent, nevertheless the most 
talented musicians reach their proficiency through instruction
. 

So it is with prayer. We have already seen that great mistakes
 have been made as to who may pray and what may be 
prayed for; and we have already considered the Lord's outline 
respecting a proper form of prayer, beginning with ascriptions
 of praise and proceeding to expressions of confidence 
in God and in the promises of his kingdom, continuing with 
acknowledgments of our dependence upon his provisions day 
by day, and ending with expressions of confidence in his power 
and goodness to protect us and ultimately to deliver us. This 
is the general form which our Lord commends to us as proper. 

On the other hand, it is interesting to note that the Lord 
does not wait until we have become proficient in the iise of 
language and in the form of expressing our petitions to him, 
but that so broad and ao gracious are his arrangements that 
we may come in imperfection and with stammering tongues 
to tell him of our devotion, our appreciation, our confidence, 
etc., in any manner we please. The suggestion is, however, 
that in proportion as we appreciate the privilege of prayer, 
we shall desire to use the privilege in the manner most acceptable
 to the great One whom we thus approach. 

Why should the Lord wish us to ask before he gives his 
blessing? For a wise purpose we may be sure! He would 
have us feel our need; he would have us appreciate the privilege
; he would have us look for the response; and in all 
these experiences he would develop us as his sons of the new 
creation. Therefore we are to ask, seek and knock if we 
would find the riches of God's grace, and have opened to us 
more and more the wonderful privileges, mercies and blessings
 which he is so willing to give us^as we develop in character
 and in preparation for his mercies. 

The clear intimation of the remainder of the lesson is that 
the essence of our petitions to our heavenly Father should 
be a request for more of his holy Spirit; and that we should 
look to the experiences of life, its trials, disappointments, 
discouragements, oppositions, as being not really injurious 
to lis, not as stones, scorpions and serpents, but as blessings 
in disguise, if we but receive them in the proper spirit. Our 
God i3 able to make all things abound in the interest of his 
children, the new creatures in Christ Jesus. These know 
from experience that some of their severest trials and dis- 


\ J I— 39 


L6269] 


(171-173) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


"Brooklyn, N. Y. 


appointments of an earthly kind have worked out for them 
development of character, elements of the holy Spirit, -which 
fhey probably could not have so well received in any other 
manner. 

Hence, when we" pray to the Lord for Ma blessings, we are 
with patience to wait for them, and to seek and find them in 
the various circumstances of life which his providences will 


permit. Remembering that the holy Spirit is the spirit of 
meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly kindness
, love, we may well ask ourselves how else could the Lord 
work out for us these elements of character which we desire 
did lie not permit to come upon us the trials necessary for 
our development. 


PROMINENT BRETHREN ARRESTED 


On the 7th day of May warrants were issued by the Federal 
Court of the Eastern District of New York for the arrest of 
brethren connected with the management of the Society or 
with the Editorial Committee of The Watch Tower, or identified
 with the preparation or circulation of "The Finished Mystery
." The brethren for whom warrants were issued were: 
Joseph F. Rutherford, William E. Van Amburgh, A. H. Macmillan
, Robert J. Martin, Clayton J. Woodworth, George H. 
Fisher, Robert H. Hirsh, Giovanni De Cecca, Fred H. Robison. 
On The 8th of May most of these warrants were served by 
United States Marshal Power. The charge given in the 
warrants was that these brethren were united in a conspiracy 
to obstruct or impede the war work of the United States. 

Shortly after their arrest the brethren were arraigned in 
the Federal Court, Judge Garvin presiding, and all eight were 
m*t with an indictment previously returned by the Grand 
Jury, charging 

{1, 3) The offense of unlawfully, feloniously and wilfully 
causing and attempting to cause insubordination, disloyalty 
and refusal of duty in the military and naval forces of the 
United States of America, in, through and by personal solicitations
, letters, public speeches, distribution and public circulation
 throughout the United States of America of a certain 
book called "Volume Seven — Scripture Studies— The Finished
 Mystery"; and distributing and publicly circulating 
throughout the United States certain articles presented in 
pamphlets called, "Bible Students Monthly," "The Watch 
Tower," "Kingdom News" and other pamphlets not named, 
et cetera; 

(2, 4) The offense of unlawfully, feloniously, and wilfully 
obstructing the recruiting and enlistment service of the United 
States when the United States was at war. 

The first four brethren named faced a second indictment 
of trading with the enemy. Urns was based upon a claim 
that the Society's officers sent $500 to the manager of the 
Swiss branch at Zurich, Switzerland. 

Each of the brethren arraigned was held over on bail of 
$2,500 for each of the indictments for appearance in court on 
May 15th— the group, bond aggregating $30,000. Some inconvenience
 and difficulty was experienced in getting bail, 


because most of the bonding companies had agreed not to 
give bail for us, but after the second day it was arranged. 

The eight brethren appeared in court on May 15th and 
were held over until June 3rd, at which time the trial may 
occur, though that point is not certain. The space in the 
court room is very limited and we suggest that it would be 
more advisable for the friends generally not to try to attend. 
Your prayers and interest, however, as already expressed in 
many communications, arc deeply appreciated. Needless to 
say,* the brethren pleaded "not guilty" to both indictments, 
as they consider themselves innocent of the charges made. 
They all affirm their motive in connection with the Seventh 
Volume, or associated matters, to be merely the desire to advance
 the interests of the Kingdom of Christ by announcing 
its near establishment. If anything has been said or written 
that is in any measure unwise or indiscreet it certainly was 
not with a view to interfering with the prosecution of the 
war, which war "was foretold in the columns of this journal 
as early as 1885. It was there pointed out that Jehovah saw 
the world war to be a necessity. It it not within our 
province to interfere with the Lord's affairs, and no true 
Christian could intentionally do so. Our business is to announce
 Christ's Kingdom and the blessings it will bring. 
In connection with such announcement it is necessary to 
point to the false position which Churchianity holds in relation
 to earth's affairs. But that is very different from interfering
 with the military operations of the United States. 

Many of the brethren in different parts of the country 
have been arrested on a like charge. We are certain that 
their arrest has followed as a result of their zeal for Christ 
and not as a result of any desire to interfere in any measure 
with the civil authorities. We counsel sobriety of mind 
under all circumstances and an attitude of prayerful, watchful
 waiting upon the Lord. His kingdom is "at hand; his 
will be done. The "Overman Bill" has now become a law 
and it makes wisdom and discretion in speech very appropriate
. The bill was not designed to interfere with the preaching
 of the Gospel, but many things can be misconstrued by 
enemies. "All who will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution," but let none suffer needlessly. 


OBEYING GOD 

[The first six and the eighth paragraphs of this article, as it originally appeared in the June 1, 1918, Tower were reprinted 
from article entitled, "The Beginning of Jesus' Ministry," published in issue of January 1, 1898, which please see.] 

JULY 28.— Matt. 4:18-22; JoHtf 14:22-24; Jas, 1:22-27. 

THE THEME OF OUR LOBD'S PREACHING WHAT THE JEWS TJNDEBSTOOD THE KINGDOM TO 11 KAN— WHY THEY FAILED TO BECOME THE 

PROMISED SEED OF ABRAHAM— WHAT IT IS TO BE A DISCIPLE OF CHRIST— THE THREE COMMANDMENTS ENJOINED UPON THE 
PEOPLE OF GOD ONE OF THE SUREST SIGNS OF SPIRIT-BE GETTING THE CRUCIAL TEST UPON THE CHURCH— VARIOUS INJUNCTIONS
 FOR KEEPING OURSELVES UNSPOTTED FROM THE WORLD. 

"If ye love me, ye will keep my commemdments." — John 14 : 1 5. 
-THE GOOD NEWS 01 THE KINGDOM" thy God with all thy heart, mind, being and strength." The 

Andrew and Peter, James and John, fishermen, were in- second is: "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." Every 


vited by the Master to be his followers, his associates in the 
great work of calling the "elect" and, if faithful, subsequently 
to sit with him in his throne as part of the glorified church. 
They left all to follow him. His terms were these: "If any 
man will be my disciple, let him deny himself and take up 
his cross and follow mc." The Lord does not open the door 
of opportunity to all of his disciples throughout this Gospel 
age to become prominent ministers of the truth after this 
manner. Yet he accepts none as his disciples except those who 
forsake all to follow him. In their hearts they must give up 
all else. They have the spirit of discipleship and self-sacrifice, 
and would gladly forsake all actually if the door of opportunity
 opened to them. 

OTJB LOED'S COMMANDMENTS TO HIS PEOPLE 

Every follower of the Master should realize that if he has 
entered the. service of the Lord he has pledged his very life 
to the service of truth and righteousness. Although he is not 
under the Mosaic law, nevertheless the will of God, which is 
the spirit of the Jewish law, is binding upon him in proportion
 as he knows it. Speaking of the spirit of that law, 
Jesus declared that it was briefly comprehended in two commandments
. The first of these is: "Thou shalt love the Lord 


Christian and every angel recognizes the divine law and feels 
a responsibility to it to the extent of his ability; but neither 
angels nor Christians are under the Law Covenant, That 
covenant was made with Israel only. 

How could any truly consecrated child of God 3o less than 
his very best to love and serve his heavenly Father with all 
his mind, being and strength? How could he decline the divine
 requirement to love his neighbor as himself — to be kind, 
generous, unselfish? True, the new creature may find difficulty 
in devoting all of his mind and strength to the Lord and in 
dealing with perfect fairness with all of his fellow creatures. 
But this is his desire and intention; and to accomplish this 
he must strive daily against the natural inherited weaknesses 
of his old nature, his flesh. In proportion to his lore for the 
Lord will be his zeal in this strife; and proportionate also 
will be the reward that will be given him in the end by the 
heavenly Father. 

"A NEW COMMANDMENT" 

At first it would appear that these two commandments 
itemized by our Lord Jesus would include everything that 
could be required by justice; and so they do. Justice requires, 
nothing more than what those two commandments include. 


[6270] 


June 1, 1918 


THE WA TCH TOWER 


(173-174) 


Hut we find that our Lord gave his disciples another command
, a third one, a new one, over and above anything that 
the divine law required, a commandment not applicable to 
any except those who become the disciple 3 of Jesus. 

"This new commandment the Father did not put upon the 
Son. Jesus voluntarily put this regulation upon himself and 
laid down his life sacrificially, something no law could justly 
demand. The heavenly Father did not require that Jesus do 
this in the sense of commanding our Lord to dp it. He did 
require it, however, in the sense that he promised glory, honor 
and immortality, the divine nature and the Messianic kingdom 
to the saintly one who would enter the covenant of sacrifice. 
— Psalm 50:5. 

In entering this covenant of sacrifice, therefore, our Lord 
Jmus did more than what the law given to Israel required. 
Consequently when pointing out to his disciples the terms 
upon which he would become thoir advocate and guarantee 
them a share with himself in the heavenly things he specified 
the importance of this third commandment: "A new commandment
 I give unto you. That ye love one another as I have 
loved you." (John 13 : 34-35 ;15 : 12) St. John points out that 
Christ loved us \o the extent of dying for us, and that ^ all 
the true followers of Jesus, possessed of his spirit, should likewise
 count it a joy to be permitted to lay down their lives 
in the service of* the brethren. — 1 John 3:14-16. 

Gradually our eyes of understanding have been opening 
wider and wider to see the breadths, lengths, depths and 
heights of the love of God. As a result we have been striving 
more and more to love and to serve our God with all our 
heart, mind, being and strength. More and more, also, have we 
learned to appreciate the necessity for dealing justly and 
kindly with the members of our families, with our neighbors, 
with all mankind — loving our neighbors as ourselves. We 
may have been congratulating ourselves on the progress we 
have been making, ^and surely we all need some encouragement
 while battling with the old nature. 

But now, behold the new commandment, requiring a still 
greater devotion to the will of our Father and to the leadership
 of our Redeemer! We are obligated to observe the rule 
of righteousness toward our heavenly Father and toward all 
our neighbors; but toward the brethren of the household of 
faith we are to do more than the right. We are to suffer, to 
sacrifice, on their behalf, in their interest. "We ought _ to 
lay down our lives for the brethren." Oh, what a searching 
proposition this covenant of sacrifice is! How strange it is 
that it should be on behalf of the brethren that we are expected
 to sacrifice, to lay down our lives! 

"HEREBY MAT WE KNOW" 

It seems remarkable that in pointing out one of the surest 
signs whereby t ho Lord's people may know positively that 
they have been begotten of the holy Spirit, the Apostle John 
•*ays: "Hereby we know that we have passed from death unto 
life, because we love the brethren." Long ago we pointed out 
that one of the final and most searching tests upon the church, 
and the one under which many will fall, will be love for the 
brethren. Seemingly many will fail at this point, and be 
therefore accounted \inworthy of nn abundance entrance into 
the kingdom of Christ. Like all other tests this will be most 
pointed and conspicuous during this time of special privilege 
and special trial in the last hours of the Gospel age. 

How strange that love of the brethren should be the crucial 
test, as we have already pointed out in the Stcmks in tttk 


Scriptures! As we may seriously fear, it will be more and 
more manifest as we come down toward the consummation of 
our hope. This is a personal matter. Each one who has 
named the name of Christ is under this testing. If not yet, 
then sooner or later this willingness to sacrifice in the interests
 of the brethren will prove each of us either as loyal, 
faithful to our covenant or else as disloyal, unfaithful to our 
obligations. Let us make this matter of love for the brethren 
and of laying down our lives for them one of personal study 
and of practical application to our own hearts, minds, thoughts, 
words, actions. Moreover, let us pray for one another, as well 
as exhort one another along these lines, striving to be filled 
with the spirit of the Master. 

"tmSFOTTED FROM THE WORLD" 

Addressing the Lord's people the Apostle James declares: 
"If any man among you seem to be religious and bridleth not 
his tongue, that man's religion is vain." Because the tongue 
is the index of the heart, because ''out of the abundance of 
the heart the mouth speak eth," therefore the unbridled tongue 
speaking selfishly, enviously, bitterly, boastfully, slanderously, 
proves that the heart from whose fullness these wrong sentiments
 overflow is un sanctified, unholy, grievously lacking in 
the spirit of Christ. Hence whatever religion such a man 
may have attained is thus far in vain; for that heart is not 
saved nor in a salvable condition. 

To avoid the development of any such wrong condition 
of heart the Apostle ur^es us to keep ourselves unspotted from 
the world. This implies that there is a possibility of our 
having our robe of Christ's righteousness spotted. This does 
not signify that anything we could do could destroy Christ's 
work or make of none effect his sacrifice for sin. The robe 
signifies th«t share of Christ's merit which has been freely 
imputed to us by him with the Father's consent. If through 
receiving the spirit of the world we blemish or sully this robe 
we shall be unfit to be of the bride class and shall be rejected
. 

Yet in our present imperfect condition and our many unfavorable
 surroundings and besetments it would be miraculous 
if we never came so closely in contact with evil as to spot 
our garment or wrinkle it. "(Jude 23; Revelation 3:4; 16:15) 
However, we find that God's gracious provision in Christ is not 
only that our Lord Jesus' sacrifice was sufficient for all our 
imperfections of the past, but that it is sufficient for any 
unintentional blemish or weakness or misstep resulting from 
our own imperfections or the weaknesses of others, after we 
become the Lord's children from the time of consecration. 

In other words we are provided not only with the robe 
covering all the past, but also (in the same sacrifice of 
Christ) with a spot-remover; and any who through weakness 
or temptation stumble by the way and soil their garments 
are to be restored by the brethren "'in the spirit of true meekness
, considering themselves, lest they also be tempted.' To 
restore another, means to help him to see the spot and by 
faith to apply the provided cleansing, through penitence and 
prayer. All who are in the right condition of heart, appreciating
 the purity of the robe, appreciating the Bridegroom
 and his favor, appreciating the great King and appreciating
 the honor of being called to the marriage, will be 
very careful indeed to keep themselves unspotted from the 
world, and very careful to remove as quickly as possible any 
spot that might appear thereon. Thus the bride of Christ 
makes herself ready for the marriage of the Lamb. 


MAY 30 FOR PRAYER AND SUPPLICATION 


In accordance with the resolution of Congress of April 
2nd, and with the proclamation of the President of the JJnited 
States of May 11, it is suggested that the Lord's people 
everywhere make May 30th a day of prayer and supplication. 
God was graciously pleased to cause this nation to be formed 
and to grow under the most favorable conditions in the world 
for the preservation of liberty, civil and religious. 

This is the land divinely "shadowed with wings" — overshadowed
 by the providential watchcare of God's ^ Word — 
where God has lifted up an ensign on the mountain (kingdom), 
and where he has blown the trumpet message of the truth. 
Here the love of truth has for three hundred years attracted 
from all quarters of the world people who love God, love the 
Bible and love religious liberty. Here, practically alone of 
all the nations, exists in the fundamental laws of the land 
the safeguard that so long as the Constitution stands no law 
may be made nor any governmental action taken prohibiting 
the' free exercise of religion, or abridging the freedom of speech 
or of the press. 

Countless blessings have flowed to devout people through 
the wise provisions of the laws of the United States, blessings
 whose influences have been felt to the remotest corners 
of the earth, wherever even a spark of love for God-given 
freedom might be fanned into a glow. Here, more perhaps 
than elsewhere, exists that "present" which shall be brought 
unto Jehovah (Isaiah 18:7), earth's oblation (Ezekiel 45:1) 
to God of that class who, when in the age to come the restitution
 host3 shall be numbered, shall be found to have been 
"born in Zion" (Psalm 87:5, 6), taken out of the world and 
given, in a figure, as humanity's present to their God, to be 
forever sons and servants of the Most High. 

This class love to "assemble themselves together, and so 
much the more as they see the day approaching" (Hebrews 
10:25), and they will be of all people the most ready to embrace
 an opportunity of gathering in an additional service of 
prayer and supplication. As says the spirit through the 
Apostle Paul: "I exhort, therefore, that first of all, supplications
, prayers, intercessions and giving of thanks, be made 
for all men; for kings, and for all that are in authority; that 
we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and 
honesty. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God 
our Savior." (1 Timothy 2:1-3) Let there be praise and 


[6271] 


(174-175) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


thanksgiving to God for the promised glorious, outcome of 
the war, the breaking of the shackles of autocracy, the freeing
 of the- captives (Isaiah ,61 : 1 ) and the making of the 


world safe for the common people — blessings all assured by 
the Word of God to the people of this country and of the 
whole world of mankind. 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


LOVE AND CONFIDENCE 
Dear Brethren: — 

The ecclesia at this place at a recent meeting voted unanimously
 that all the dear brethren at Brooklyn be advised 
of our loving interest and sympathy in this hour of trial 
upon the church. The hand -of Herodias and her daughter 
is surely being made manifest, thanks to "that servant's'' 
warning to the church. And more and more we realize, as 
events transpire, how faithfully he labored for our instruction
 and edification in the truth, ceasing not to warn us 
night and day. 

In this connection, the ecclesia would like to express its 
fullest confidence in the Lord's chosen servant at this time 
to direct his great work. We rejoice that we have had so 
many evidences of his approval of the management, viz., by 
the wonderful distribution of literature and books, the great 
bulk of the Lord's people held together by the strong ties 
of Christian fellowship, the grand visits of The Watch Towkk 
semi-monthly, laden in eaeh issue with spiritual fatness, and 
we can say without exaggeration that it is better than ever 
before; but greatest of all these evidences is, we believe, that 
the clergy, seeing their opportunity to deal a deathblow to 
the truth under the cloak of "patriotism" are, so to speak, 
making hay while the sun shines. But we know their efforts, 
while designed to work evil to the Lord's people^ can only 
result in ultimate good through the loving oversight of our 
dear heavenly Father in all of the affairs of his people. 

We are pleased to notice that you counsel wisdom and 
extreme care on the part of the Lord's people, and avoidance 
of acts contrary to the law, thus putting the entire responsibility
 upon the clergy and those who support them. 

Our prayers continually ascend to our Father on behalf 
of all you dear ones at Brooklyn, and those in every place 
who have been deprived of their liberties in one way or another
, and as the great night settles down upon the earth we 
lay hold more securely than ever upon the wonderful promises 
which belong to God's children. 

With loving greetings in our dear Redeemer's name, I am 
very sincerely your brother, W. W. — Md. 

REJOICING BECAUSE DELIVERANCE IS NEAR 
Dear Brkthr^ in Christ: — 

Bnelosed please find money order, and receive it as my 
little share in the work. 

As I am sure the realization of our glorious hope is very 
near and T make ready to leave at any minute my beloved 
Master may call me, I want to thank you for all the grand 
spiritual blessings I have received through the Society during 
the many years I have enjoyed the wonderful truth, Oh, 
what would life have been if it were not for the truth, the 
light, the joy of the Lord ! \ am rejoicing because I see my 
deliverance draws near. I want to be faithful and strong 
in the Lord, no matter what shall be required of me. 

I am alone here and often miss the fellowship with others 
of the same precious faith. I therefore ask you to remember 
me before the Throne of Grace. 

Yours in his name, 0. S. C. — Al:i. 

ASSURANCE OF LOVE AND LOYALTY TO TRUTH 
Dear BiurriT rhn : — 

Please find our check enclosed, to be used in the Lord^s 
work as you may see fit to direct. 

We certainly feel that the Lord 13 using the Society to 
spread the message to his people, and we intend by the Lord's 
grace and help to stand by the Society in its trials and persecutions
 to the end. We have been rejoicing in this present 
truth for about three years, and would not part with it for 
all this world, although many times we wonder why the Lord 
was so good to any so unworthy as we are. 

Every day we pray for the Lord's guidance over 3*ou and 
all at Bethel, some of whom we arc personally acquainted 
with ; and we desire your prayers that we may meet before 
our Lord. With Christian love and best wishes, we are 

Your brother and sister in the Lord, 

K. J. and O. J. M.— 111. 
SUNSHINE, WIND AND RAIN NEEDED 
Di:ar Brethren: — 

Considering the end of the Gospel age harvest, numerous 
truth friends inquire respecting the taking away of all the 
saints reasonably soon, or during this year 1918. My thought 
is. that, the harvest is over onlv in so far as the cut tins' of 


the antitypical grain is concerned. There is no more wheat 
to cut, but there may be some more to bind into sheaves, 
and set up in the field to be cured — subjected to the elements
, sunshine, wind, and rain and other developing influences
 designed to make such fit for the garner. 

We, as the wheat of the Lord's harvest, may need some 
similarly trying experiences to harden and fit us for the ingathering
. In other words, we are waiting for the wagon to 
take us to the bam, 

The harvest storm's may upset us, but the good man of 
the farm picks us up, re&hocks us, and we are ready for the 
next testing of our strength to stand. 

Some of us may go home in a nice wagon, some of us 
in a ramshackle affair amid much jolting, but, if faithful, 
we shall all get there somehow, in due season. 

Does any of us feel that he is sufficiently developed and 
fit for the in-gathering? Or do we all realize the need of 
a little more hardening of character, a little more buffeting 
from the earthly elements to prepare us for the threshing 
floor? Shall we not patiently wait for the vehicle to haul us 
home? In Christian love. 

Your brother, J. A. Boiinet. — Pilgrim. 

READY TO DIE FOB CHRIST 
Dearly Belovkd Bbkturln in Christ: — 

Full of rejoicing because of having come to a knowledge 
of the marvelous light now shining from the presence of 
our Redeemer, who has showed me the unfathomable riches 
of our heavenly Father's character through his glorious Plan 
of the Ages, I am writing you these few lines to express my 
sincere appreciation of the work the Lord has placed in your 
hands. Continually do I pray that he will bless you richly, 
filling you more with hi3 holy Spirit, in order that you may 
continue in the precious way which he has shown" us and 
which, though strewn with difficulties and dangers of all kinds, 
is the most sublime way ever opened up, or ever to be opened. 

Perhaps we shall very soon be compelled to give our testimonies
 with our lives, or rather with those of our Lord; for 
wo have consecrated our lives unto death. How great will 
be the privilege of dying as loyal soldiers of the great Captain, 
not having rejected the teaching of the cross, but confessing 
before the blinded world the name of him who redeemed us 
from sin and death and whose we have been from birth! 
May the Lord give us grace and strength to die at the side 
of our Savior and our beloved brethren in the precious faith, 
so thai thus we shall see one another face to face beyond the 
vail, having gained the crown of life and being forever freed 
from the power of Satan, of the world and of our poor, weak, 
fallen nature! 

I cannot find words with which to express to the Lord 
my deep gratitude for the "meat in due season" which he 
gave me through the volumes of our well beloved brother. 
Pastor Russell, whose memory is a powerful influence on our 
way toward the heavenly Jerusalem. 

With Christian love, Your br oilier and servant in Christ. 

Abkl Orti-xja. — "Mexico. 

REFRESHING CONVENTION IN AUSTRALIA 
Dkar Brethren : — 

Greetings in the name of our Lord and Master. 

It is my privilege to furnish you with a brief report ol a 
two-day convention recently held here, the purpose of our 
gathering being the special recognition of the Lord's goodness
 in blessing our efforts in the extension field, and the 
linking up of those brethren, numbering some 50, who had 
responded to the truth message, and who expressed the desire
 to come under the general administration of the church, 
which arrangement is now working admirably. 

Notwithstanding the fact that traveling -facilities were 
limited on account of strike conditions, on the Sunday approximately
 150 assembled, while on Monday 70 to 80* were 
present. 

At the baptismal service four brothers and seven sisters 
symbolized their consecration. 

The occasion proved to bo most helpful and inspiring, and 
we believe the most happy season of fellowship ever enjoyed 
by the Lord's people in Sydney. The testimonies of the 
various brethren gave strong evidence of love for and determination
 to stand by the truth at all costs, and to hold 
fast the beginning of their confidence firm unto the end. We 
arr convinced that our little gathering was a real time of 


[6272] 


JunB 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TO WER 


(162-179) 


refreshing from the presence of the Lord, and will prove a 
stimulus to the faith of these privileged to attend. 

With Christian love, praying our heavenly Father's richest
 blessing on your efforts for his people. 

Yours in the Masters service, 

D. H., {Sydney Class) — Australia. 
STRUCK WITH THE TRTJTH 
Deab Friends: — 

I have signed the petition to the President and six of my 
best friends with me. Let me briefly state how I came into 
possession of "The Finished Mystery.'* 

It was on the night of March the sixth, about 11 o'clock; 
1 was walking down Third Avenue, thinking about practically 
nothing, and with a heavy thud I was struck on the shoulder 
by what I thought was a brick, but, alas, it was "The Finished
 Mystery." I brought it home and read it all, and then 
traded my old fiddle to a boy for the other six volumes — and 
have read them all. 

r find they all go straight forward, without making a turn. 
1 have since' learned that it was a preacher of- the M. K. 
Church who threw the book from his window in a rage of 
anger. I have nothing to say to the dishonor of that preacher, 
for he is at least one of Great Babylon's teachers that sends 
out the truth in volume, and by that one act of his I firmly 
believe that he converted more people to a living hope than 
by any other act of his life. 'Surely the wrath of man shall 
praise him,' and through this preacher's wrath we now praise 
(Jod. Yours in the Truth, \V. H. K.— W. Va. 


THE "BLINDING HAZE" DISPELLED 
Dear Bketheen: — 

I heard a little news I thought might cheer your hearts; it 
did mine, at least As you know, Brethren, some of the friends 
have thought the Lord had nothing much to do with the 
language used in Volume Seven and B. S. M. 99, especially 
concerning Methodism. But I am more convinced than ever 
that the Lord overruled it all. 

A young man who was studying to he a Methodist minister
 told me his experience. He said that the morning on 
which we put out the "Fall of Babylon" issue he was in a 
testimony meeting. Almost everyone talked about it, and said 
they had put the papers right into the stove. He thought: 
"Why are they so afraid of it? It cannot be that they are 
very well established in the Scriptures." So he hurried home 
and looked to see if he could find one; and he did. 

He sat down and read; and when he came to that part 
which says "a blinding haze came out of the bottomless pit," 
he said: "That describes it to a *T'; if those people can show 
me that the churches are wrong, I will withdraw tomorrow." 
I was notified, called at his house and talked with him about 
two hours, then asked him what he thought of Babylon. He 
said: "I don't see how I can ever go back again." And he 
never did. 

Last Sunday he helped us put out "Kingdom News," having
 made a consecration. This has given us positive evidence 
of the Lord's hand in writing the Seventh Volume. 

Your brother by His grace, J. R. G. — N. Y. 


"REVELATIOJST-SINAITIC READING 


We now have in stock a vest pocket edition of the Book 
of Revelation, according to the Sinai tic Manuscript. We 
believe the friends will be much pleased with this little volume
, in convenient form, and meeting quite fully the requirements
 of all who desire to know* the meaning of this wonderful
 portion of the divine Word. Not only is the accurate 
rendering of the ancient Sinaitic Manuscript given, with headings
 and subheadings in bold-face type for convenient location 
of passages, but explanatory notes and comments are included
, with many illustrations. The book contains 200 pages, 
same size as the Vest Pocket Manna. Full black leather, 
gold edges, 70c postpaid. Cloth, red edges, 35c. In lots of 
50 or more, 50c for the leather and 25c for the cloth edition, 
charges collect. We suggest that each of the brethren approximate
 how many copies he' can use for himself and 
friends, and then order them all at one time, and quickly, 
as the edition is limited and probably will not be reprinted. 

