No Longer “Missing Life’s Purpose”
CAN the Bible really help people to achieve contentment and happiness in life? The following experience from the western United States is interesting:
“Before I knew the truth, my life was preoccupied with material things rather than intellectual or spiritual things. I thought that life’s purpose was to acquire as much as possible. I gave little attention to God or the Bible; but I found such a life very dissatisfying and disappointing. After going to college for two years, and buying a house, a new van, an expensive sports car and other things, I still wasn’t satisfied or happy with my life. I could see myself going through more of the same for the next 40 years and then finally acquiring a grave.
“In addition to this, I was having problems with my marriage. My wife and I had sought out such help as guidance groups and even a psychiatrist, but nothing improved our marriage.
“Then a part-time position for a welder experienced in ultra-high vacuum systems developed at my place of employment. That same week the company received a telephone call from a man with the needed experience who was looking for part-time work. Even the supervisor was surprised and asked him how he knew the position was available. The man said he didn’t know that it was and simply had come across the company’s name in the yellow pages and was glad he found it, since he couldn’t find part-time work anywhere else.
“The man turned out to be one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I was curious as to why he was working only part-time, since I was holding down two jobs but still couldn’t keep ahead. Later he told me of something humorous heard while on a ‘Bible study.’ That broke the ice and I started asking all kinds of questions. It was all he could do to get me back to work that day.
“For the first time, I heard of the new earth. (2 Pet. 3:13; Rev. 21:1) I was finally beginning to understand what Jesus meant when he said: ‘Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven also upon earth.’ (Matt. 6:10) From that first day I realized that I had been missing life’s purpose. Within two weeks I was having a weekly Bible study in my home. However, in a short time I felt that one Bible study per week wasn’t enough; I asked for another one, and a short time later, I asked for a third. So, within five weeks I was having three Bible studies per week and going to all meetings at the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses. One year later I was baptized.
“The first effect the truth had on me was a feeling of relief—relief from bondage to the world’s materialistic thinking and relief in my marriage. The more I would apply Bible principles in my marriage, the more it improved.”

