VOL. XV. APRIL 1, 1894. NO. 7. 

THE IMPORT OF THE EMBLEMS. 



WHEN announcing the date of the Memorial 

Supper and stating our reasons for 

its yearly commemoration, in our issue of 

March 1, we promised that in this issue we 

would examine briefly the import of the emblems 

used to represent the body and blood of 

our Redeemer. 

Of the bread our Lord said: "This is my 
flesh;"— that is to say, the unleavened bread 
represents his flesh, his humanity, which was 
broken or sacrificed for us. Unless he had 
sacrificed himself for us, we could never have 
everlasting life, as he said: "Except ye eat 
the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood 
ye have no life in you."— John 6:53. 

Not only was the breaking of Jesus' body 
thus to provide bread of life, of which if a man 
eat he shall never die, but it also opened the 
"narrow way" to life, and broke or unsealed 
and gave us access to the truth, spiritual food, 
as an aid to walk the narrow way which leads 



to life. And thus we see that the broken loaf 
fitly represented the breaking of him who said, 
"I am the WAY, the TRUTH, and the LIFE; no 
man cometh unto the Father but by ME."— 
John 14:6. 

Hence, when we eat of the broken loaf, we 
should realize that had he not died— been 
broken— for us we would never have been able 
to come to the Father, but would have remained 
forever under the curse of Adamic sin 
and in the bondage of death. 

Another thought: the bread used was unleavened. 
Leaven is corruption, an element 
of decay, hence a type of sin, and the decay 
and death which sin works in mankind. So, 
then, this symbol declares that our Lord Jesus 
was free from sin, a lamb without spot or 
blemish, "holy, harmless, undefiled." Had 
he been of Adamic stock, had he received his 
life in the usual way from any earthly father, 
he, too, would have been leavened with Adamic 
sin, as are all other men; but his life came 
unblemished from a higher, heavenly nature, 
changed to earthly conditions; hence he is called 
the "bread from heaven." (John 6:41.) Let 
us then appreciate the pure, unleavened, undefiled 
bread which God has provided, and so let 
us eat of him— by eating and digesting the truth, 
and especially this truth— appropriating to ourselves, 
by faith, his righteousness; and let us 

R1637:page99 

recognize him as both the way and the life. 

The Apostle, by divine revelation, communicates 
to us a further meaning in this remembrancer. 
He shows that not only did 
the loaf represent our Lord Jesus, individually, 
but that after we have thus partaken of him 
(after we have been justified by appropriating 
his righteousness), we, by consecration, become 
associated with him as part of the one 
broken loaf— food for the world. (1 Cor. 10:16.) 
This suggests the thought of our privilege 
as justified believers to share now in the sufferings 
and death of Christ, the condition upon 
which we may become joint-heirs with him of 
future glories, and associates in the great work 
of blessing and giving life to all the families 
of the earth. 

R1637 : page 100 

This same thought is expressed by the Apostle 
repeatedly and under various figures, but 
none of them more forceful than this, that the 



Church, as a whole, is the "one loaf" now being 
broken. It is a striking illustration of our 
union and fellowship with our Head. 

We quote: "Because there is one loaf, we, 
the many [persons] are one body; for we all 
partake of the one loaf." "The loaf which 
we break, is it not a participation of the body 
of the Anointed one?"-l Cor. 10:16,17.- 
Diaglott. 

The "fruit of the vine" represents the sacrificed 
life given by our Lord. "This is my 
blood [symbol of life given up in death] of the 
new covenant, shed for many, FOR THE REMISSION 
of sins." "Drink ye all of it."— 
Matt. 26:27,28. 

It was by the giving up of his life as a ransom 
for the life of the Adamic race, which sin 
had forfeited, that a right to LIFE may come to 
men through faith and obedience under the 
New Covenant. (Rom. 5:18,19.) The shed 
blood was the "ransom [price] for ALL," which 
was paid for all by our Redeemer himself; but 
his act of handing the cup to the disciples, and 
asking them to drink of it, was an invitation 
to them to become partakers of his sufferings, 
or, as Paul expresses it, to "fill up that which 
is behind of the afflictions of Christ." (Col. 1:24.) 
It was the offer to us that if we, after 
being justified by faith, voluntarily partake of 
the sufferings of Christ, by espousing his cause, 
it will be reckoned to us as though we had part 
in his sacrifice. "The cup of blessing, for 
which we bless God, is it not a participation 
of the blood [shed blood— death] of the 
Anointed one?" (1 Cor. 10:16.-Diaglott.) 
Would that we all might realize the value of 
the "cup," and could bless God for an opportunity 
of sharing with Christ his "cup" of 
sufferings and shame: all such may be assured 
that they will also be glorified together with 
him.-Rom. 8:17. 

Our Lord also attached this significance to 
the "cup," indicating that it signified our 
participation in his dishonor, our share in his 
sacrifice— the death of our humanity. For instance, 
when asked by two of his disciples for 
a promise of future glory in his throne, he answered 
them: "Ye know not what ye ask; are 
ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink 
of?" On their hearty avowal he answered, 
"Ye shall indeed drink of my cup." The 
juice of the grape not only speaks of the crushing 
of the grape till blood comes forth, but 
it also speaks of an after refreshment; and so 
we who now share the "sufferings of Christ" 
shall shortly share also his glories, honors and 



immortality— when we drink the new wine 
with him in the Kingdom. 

Let us then, dearly beloved, as we on the 
evening of the 19th inst. commemorate our 
Lord's death, call to mind the meaning of 
what we do; and being invigorated with his 
life, and strengthened by the living bread, let 
us drink with him into his death, and go forth 
more determined than ever to be broken with 
him for the feeding of others. "For if we be 
dead with him we shall live with him; if we 
suffer we shall also reign with him."— 
2 Tim. 2:11,12. 

WHO MAY PARTAKE. 



It is left open for each to decide for himself 
whether he has or has not the right to partake 
of this bread and this cup. If he professes to 
be a disciple, trusting in the blood of the New 
Covenant, for forgiveness of sins, and consecrated 
to the Lord's service, his fellow disciples 
may not judge his heart. God alone can read 
that with positiveness. 

Because of their symbolism of the death of 
Christ, therefore let all beware of partaking of 
these emblems ignorantly, unworthily, improperly 
—not recognizing in them "the Lord's 
body" as our ransom, for in such a case the 
partaker would be as one of those who murdered 
the Lord and would, in symbol, "be 
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord." 
1 Cor. 11:27. 

"But let a man examine himself:" let him 
see to it that in partaking of the emblems he 
realizes them as the ransom-price of his life 
and privileges, and furthermore that he by partaking 
of them is pledging himself to share in 
the sufferings of Christ and be broken for others; 
otherwise, his act of commemoration will 

R1637 : page 101 

be a condemnation to his daily life before his 
own conscience— "condemnation to himself." 
-ICor. 11:28,29. 

Through lack of proper appreciation of this 
remembrancer, which symbolizes not only our 
justification, but also our consecration, to share 
in the sufferings and death of Christ, the Apostle 
says, "Many are weak and sickly among 
you, and many sleep." (1 Cor. 11:30.) The 
truth of this remark is evident: a failure to 
appreciate and a losing sight of the truths represented 



in this Supper are the cause of the 
weak, sickly and sleepy condition of the 
church nominal. Nothing so fully awakens 
and strengthens the saints as a clear appreciation 
of the ransom sacrifice and of their share 
with their Lord in his sufferings and sacrifice 
for the world. "Let a man examine himself, 
and so let him eat of that bread and drink of 
that cup." 



R1637 :page 101 
FEET WASHING. 



SOME feel that the feet- washing mentioned 
in John 13:4-17, is as important as the 
Memorial Supper; and hence we will here consider 
the subject: although only one of the 
Evangelists remembered to even mention it. 

In Eastern countries, where sandals were 
worn, and the feet thus exposed to sand and 
dust, feet-washing was a regular custom, and 
an actual necessity. This service was considered 
very menial, and the humblest servants 
or slaves performed it for the family and guests. 

Our Lord had noticed among his disciples 
a spirit of selfishness; he had overheard them 
disputing which of them should be greatest in 
authority and dignity in the Kingdom he had 
promised to share with them; and, foreseeing 
that this spirit would injure them in proportion 
as it grew and strengthened, he had rebuked 
them for their lack of humility. So indeed 
it did, in the fourth to the sixth centuries, 
blossom and yield bitter fruit, in the organization 
of Papacy, and the train of evils and errors 
which still flow from that impure fountain. 

To illustrate the proper spirit which should 
characterize all who would be his disciples, 
he took a little child and set him in the midst, 
and said, Except ye become (artless and simple) 
as a little child, you are not fit for the 
Kingdom for which I am calling you. Ye 
know how the Gentiles lord it over one another, 
and recognize caste and station, but it 
must not be so with you. Ye have but one 
Master, and all ye are brethren; and he that 
would be chief, let him become chief servant. 
(Mark 10:35-43.) They who serve you most, 
you must mark as your chief ones. I am the 
chief servant myself; for the Son of man came 
not to be served by others, and honored thus, 



but he came to serve others, even to the extent 
of giving his life in their service. As 
therefore my greatest service toward you renders 
me your chief, so shall it be among you. 
Esteem and honor one another in proportion 
as you find in each other unselfish sacrificing 
love and service. Esteem such very highly for 
their works' sake.— 1 Thes. 5:13. 

But for all this, the spirit of pride and a desire 
to "lord it" over others, and be reverenced 
as chief, was there, even after three 
years and a half spent with the Master, and 
under his example; and as he was about to 
leave them, Jesus sought, even on the last 
evening with them, to impress this lesson indelibly 
upon their hearts. So, after the Passover 
Supper, he arose from the table and 
performed for his disciples the most menial 
service, in washing their feet. They probably 
had not even thought of performing such a 
service for each other or for him, and even 
had consideration enough to object to his thus 
serving them in so humble a manner. 

When Jesus had finished, he said to them, 
"Know ye what I have done to you? Ye call 
me Master and Lord, and ye say well; for so 
I am. If I then, your Lord and Master, have 
washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one 
another's feet. For I have given you an example, 
that ye should do as I have done to 
you. Verily, verily, I say unto you, The servant 
is not greater than his lord; neither is he 
that is sent greater than he that sent him. If 
ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do 

R1637 : page 102 

them." If you understand and appreciate the 
lesson I have given you, and will practice it, 
you will be blessed thereby, helped in my service, 
and prepared for the Kingdom in which I 
have promised you a share.— John 13:4-17. 

That the lesson had its designed effect we 
can scarcely doubt, as we look at the course 
of several of the apostles, and see how, with 
much self denial, they served the body of 
Christ, of which they were fellow-members, 
following the example of the Head, who was 
chief servant of all. 

The question arises, What did the Lord 
mean when he said, "I have given you an example, 
that ye should do as I have done?" 
Was the example in the principle, in the lesson 
of service one toward another? Or was the example 
in the method of service, in the ceremony 
of feet-washing? To suppose the latter 



would be to hide the real lesson under a form. 
And if the example were in the form, then 
every item of the form should be observed: 
an upper room; a supper; sandals should be 
worn; the same kind of garments; the towel 
girdle; etc. But no: the "example" which 
we should follow lay in the humble serving of 
the disciples by the Master, regardless of form. 
His example of serving the fellow-members in 
even the most menial manner is what we should 
follow— and blessed will we be, in proportion 
as we do follow it. In that proportion we 
shall be prepared for the everlasting Kingdom 
and service of God. 

Those now living in Eastern countries, where 
sandals are still worn, may find an opportunity 
now to follow the example, the same form 
which the Master used, as well as other forms; 
and those differently circumstanced may follow 
the "example" in a thousand forms. Some 
of the fellow-disciples probably live in your 
city and in mine. How can we serve them? 
How can we refresh them? How can we show 
them our love and sympathy according to the 
Lord's "example?" Not in this climate by 
washing their feet— this would be an inconvenience, 
the very reverse of a pleasure and 
service to them, and therefore contrary to the 
"example." But we can serve the "body" 
otherwise, and truly follow the example. We 
can improve our various opportunities to serve 
them in matters temporal as well as spiritual. 
We can be on the lookout, and when we see 
sadness or discouragement, we can lend a helping 
hand to lift our brother's burdens, or our 
sister's sorrows, and we can let them see by 
deeds, as well as words, our anxiety to serve 
them— figuratively speaking, to wash their feet. 

Do not wait until they request your assistance; 
for in proportion as they are developed 
disciples, they will not ask your aid. Do 
not wait until they tell you of their burdens 
and trials, but watch to anticipate; for in proportion 
as they partake of the Master's spirit, 
they will not be complainers, but will live 
"always rejoicing"— rejoicing even in 
tribulations. 

Be not ashamed of such service of the "body," 
but seek it and rejoice in it— "ye do serve 
the Lord, Christ." But still more important 
than temporal service is our service one of another 
as "new creatures." 

The washing of the body with the truth— 
the sanctifying and cleansing of it with the 
word— is in progress now. (Eph. 5:26,27.) 
What are you doing to cleanse and purify the 



faith and lives of your fellow members? Do 
you approach them humbly with the truth, 
sincerely anxious to serve them, to bless and 
comfort and refresh them therewith? If so, 
go on; grand is your service; the Master served 
thus; this is his example; follow on. The 
more you can thus serve, and at the greater 
cost of time, and effort, and convenience, and 
self-interest, the greater will you be in the 
eyes of the Master, and the more honored and 
beloved of the body when they shall come to 
see and know you, as the Lord sees and knows 
your love and service. 

Follow closely, then, the noble "example" 
of Jesus: wash and be washed one of another, 
cleanse and purge away the defilements with 
which each comes daily in contact in the 
world, that ye may be clean, "through the 
word spoken unto you." Purge out the old 
leaven of hypocrisy, and envy, and self-exaltation, 
even as ye have already been justified 
from all things and reckoned pure and holy 
by the merit of the precious blood which the 
chief servant and Lord of all gave for all. — 
2 Tim. 2:20,21. 



R1637 :page 103 
BEAR UP THE FEET. 



"Judge this, rather, that no man put a stumbling-block, or 
an occasion to fall, in his brother's way." "He shall 
give his angels [messengers, servants] charge over thee; 
...they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest 
thou dash thy foot against a stone." 
--Rom. 14:13; Psa. 91:11,12. 

EVERY gathering of the saints, even of two 

or three, is an assembling of the members 

of the body of Christ. So that the entire number 

of saints in the world to-day, or in any day, 

represents the one body; and yet the entire 

body is but one. Looked at still another way, 

we see the head first, and the succeeding members 

following in order, leaving those members 

of Christ who are alive and remain unto the 

presence of the Lord to represent the last members 

—the feet. 

It is to these that the prophet refers above: 
not to the literal feet of Jesus, but the feet 
members of his body. (Many improperly accept 
Satan's interpretation of this passage, notwithstanding 



Jesus' rejection of it— Matt. 4:6,7.) 
The prophet makes the statement that the 
Lord will make special provision for the help 
and support of the "feet," just after giving a 
description of the evil day which the "feet" 
class will experience— the dark day, when the 
arrows of error will fly thick and fast; when 
the pestilence of Infidelity will stalk abroad; 
when all, except the "feet" class, shall fall- 
thousands on every hand. The question will 
no longer be, Who will fall? but, "Who shall 
be able to stand?" These, the real feet members, 
shall not fall; these shall have special 
help; God will send them messengers, whom 
he will specially instruct or charge that his 
will shall be accomplished, and the true overcomers 
be upheld, and neither stumble nor fall. 

Blessed assurance! cause for trust and confidence, 
that if we abide under the protection 
with which he has covered us, we shall be safe 
and come off conquerors, and more than conquerors, 
through him who loved us and washed 
us in his own precious blood. But the thought 
specially in mind is this: Not only are those 
who scatter the pestilence, and shoot out the 
arrows of error, and cast stumbling-blocks in 
the way, men in the flesh, but those messengers 
whom God will use to bear up the "feet," 
and keep them from falling, are also human 
agents. Both classes are servants— serving 
some cause, either of truth or error; serving 
some master— the God of truth, or Satan, the 
father of lies and errors. No matter whose 
uniform we wear, his servants we are to whom 
we render service. If Satan can get into the 
service of error those who profess to serve the 
Lord, he is the more pleased, and the more 
successful in reaching others of the same class. 
As the Apostle advised us, so we find it in this 
evil day— the ministers or messengers or servants 
of error will appear as messengers of 
light, and their influence will thereby be the 
greater; and all not fixed upon the rock foundation 
of Christian hope will be sure to fall. 
All not protected by the armor which God's 
Word supplies are sure to fall pierced with the 
arrows of error. 

Of two things then be assured:— We each 
must serve one side or the other in this battle 
of the great day of God Almighty, which has 
to the Church a different phase from that in 
which it will present itself to the world. Our 
strife is with spiritual adversaries, a battle between 
truth and error on religious subjects, 
while there is a conflict also between right and 
wrong, truth and error, as relates to political 



and temporal affairs. On which side are you 
serving? Are you scattering error by words of 
your own, or reading matter, or in other ways 
doing that which will smite down and stumble 
your fellow pilgrims? or are you giving the 
more earnest heed to the special "charge" 
God has given us regarding the dangers and 
pitfalls of this day? and are you thus "bearing 
up" the fellow members of the body— the feet? 
Are you earnest in rightly dividing the word 
of truth? and are you careful to put before 
others only that which you have thoroughly 
examined and proved to the extent of your 
ability by the Word of God? Are you one of 
Satan's messengers, being used of him to overthrow 
the faith of some, and to remove "the 
feet" from the grand rock of faith— the ransom? 
or are you rendering yourselves as servants 
of righteousness and messengers of God, 

R1637 : page 104 

serving and blessing the feet? If the one, you 
are stumbling and defiling the "feet;" if the 
other, you are bearing up and "washing" the 
"feet." 

True, the errors will test the armor of each, 
whether you shoot any of them or not; and it 
is also true that the "feet" shall be borne up 
and not dashed, whether you assist or not; but 
the question is none the less important to each 
of us, and will demonstrate our own faithfulness 
or unfaithfulness, our own worthiness or 
unworthiness to be members of the feet class 
of the body. 

Blessed shall be that servant whom the Lord 
shall find giving meat in due season, to the 
household of faith. (Matt. 24:45,46.) Such, 
as messengers of God, are serving, strengthening 
and bearing up the "feet" of Christ. 
The same thought is beautifully expressed in 
Rev. 19:7. The bride makes herself "ready" 
for the Bridegroom: each member assisting the 
others results in the preparation of all. Not 
that we could make ourselves ready of ourselves, 
but that we aid each other in the cultivation of 
those traits of character which the Lord has 
stipulated shall distinguish all who become 
his joint-heirs.— Rom. 8:29. 

Judge— examine yourselves— that none of 
you "put a stumbling-block, or an occasion 
to fall, in his brother's way."— Rom. 14:13. 



R1637 : page 104 



"LEST YE ENTER INTO TEMPTATION." 



"Watch and pray, lest ye enter 
into temptation. "-Mark 14:38. 

IT seems peculiar that there should be greater 

liability of falling into sin at one season 

than at another; but nevertheless we have noticed 

for several years and have before called 

to the attention of others the peculiar force of 

temptations at the time of the Passover, every 

Spring. Year after year at this season we have 

noticed special liability of many or all to 

stumble or be offended. Let us, therefore, take 

earnest heed to our Lord's words, and earnestly 

watch and pray for others and for ourselves; 

and let each one be on his guard not to cast 

a stumbling-block before his brother.— Rom. 14: 13; 

Heb. 2:1. 

It was at the Passover season that our Lord 
said, "I am the living bread which came down 
from heaven: if any man eat of this bread he 
shall live forever; and the bread that I will 
give is my flesh, which I will give for the life 
of the world." Then many of his friends and 
followers said, "This is a hard saying; who can 
hear it?. ..and walked no more with him. 
Then said Jesus unto the twelve, Will ye also 
go away?"— John 6:4,51,60,66,67. 

It was at the Passover season that Judas 
bargained for the betrayal of our Lord,— and 
a little later on accomplished it. 

It was about the Passover season that our 
Lord said, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, 
even unto death." (Matt. 26:38.) "I have a 
baptism [death] to be baptized with, and how 
am I straitened until it be accomplished!" 
-Luke 12:50. 

It was about the Passover season that our 
Lord took the disciples and began to explain 
unto them that the Son of Man must be delivered 
into the hands of the chief priests and 
scribes and be put to death (Matt. 16:21); and 
then Peter was tempted to forget that he was 
the disciple, and took the Lord and began to 
rebuke him, saying, "Be it far from thee, Lord. 
This shall not be unto thee." Thus also he 
tempted our Lord to repudiate his sacrifice, 
and brought upon himself the rebuke— "Get 
thee behind me, Satan: thou art an offence 
unto me: for thou savorest not the things that 
be of God, but those that be of men."— 
Verses 22,23. 



It was while met to eat the Passover that the 
twelve got into a dispute as to which of them 
should be greatest in the Kingdom. They 
thus brought upon themselves our Lord's just 
rebuke, and induced the illustration of humility 
on his part by the washing of their feet. 

It was when they had sung a hymn and gone 
out from the Passover that our Lord used to 
them the words at the head of this article, 
"Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation;" 
while he himself was in an agonizing 
battle, and with bloody sweat submitting his 

R1637 : page 105 

will to the will of God; and, praying earnestly, 
was strengthened.— Luke 22:39-46. 

It was but a little later that the emissaries 
of the High Priest came upon them and the 
eleven all forsook the Lord and fled (Mark 14:50): 
the temptation, the fear, they could not 
resist. 

It was but a little later that Peter and John, 
bolder than the others, went with the crowd 
into Pilate's court to see what would befall the 
Master; and Peter, being recognized as one of 
Christ's disciples, was tempted to deny the 
Lord with cursing.-Mark 14:68,70,71. 

It was at the same time that our Lord was 
tempted before Pilate, but victoriously "witnessed 
a good confession."— 1 Tim. 6:13. 

The temptations of our Lord followed rapidly. 
When his foes spat upon him, and 
crowned him with thorns, and reviled him, 
saying, "Let him save himself, if he be Christ, 
the chosen of God," he could have smitten them 
with disease or death; but, as a sheep before 
her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his 
mouth. He overcame, and prayed for those 
who despitefully used him.— Luke 23:33-37. 

He might even have concluded that he would 
not be the Redeemer of such thankless beings; 
but, while realizing that he could even then 
ask of the Father and receive the assistance of 
twelve legions of angels and overcome his enemies, 
he resisted the temptation. He gave 
himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due 
time. 

The death of our Lord was a great trial of 
faith to all the disciples, who straightway were 
tempted to go again to their old fishing business, 
and neglect the fishing for men.— 
John 21:3-17. 

Paul and the other apostles subsequently had 
special trials at this special season also. See 
Acts 20:16; 21:10,1 1,27-36. 



In view of all this in the past, as well as in 
view of our own experience since the present 
harvest began in 1 874, we feel specially solicitous 
for the Lord's sheep every Spring; and this 
Spring is no exception. What may be the 
character of the temptations, we may not clearly 
discern until they are upon us; for if we 
knew all about them in advance they would be 
but slight temptations. Watch, therefore, and 
pray always; for the only safe way is to be 
prepared; because your adversary, the devil, 
is seeking whom he may devour. He knows 
your weak points, and is ready to take advantage 
of them. We will each need the graces 
of the spirit in our hearts, as well as the Lord's 
"grace to help in time of need" if we would 
overcome. "Watch and pray, lest ye enter 
into temptation!" 

"My soul, be on thy guard, 
Ten thousand foes arise; 

The hosts of sin are pressing hard 
To draw thee from the prize." 



R1637 : page 105 

THE WORK IN ENGLAND. 



AFTER an expenditure of considerable by 
the Tract Fund to get the Colporteur work 
started in Gt. Britain (books, etc., to the retail 
value of $965.67), we have to announce that 
Brother Rogers, who went there for the purpose 
of starting it, has left the colporteur service. 
He assures us, however, that he has not 
left the Truth, and that he will still circulate 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, as he may have opportunity, 
in his new line of work. 

His new plan of labor we cannot approve for 
several reasons. He describes it as a work of 
faith. Instead of accepting and using the sale 
of the DAWNS, as God's provided means for 
the support of the laborers in the present "harvest," 
he proposes to rely largely upon collections 
and donations from the friends. He explained 
to us that he proposes to work as follows: 
On going to a city, he will seek for any 
who are already interested, and expect them 
to hire a suitable place for preaching and to 
attend to his financial matters and "see that he 
lacks nothing," while he preaches orally. Between 
meetings he will call upon Christian 
people and talk with them privately about the 



Truth. If any of them inquire for reading 
matter on the subject, he proposes to take them 
the MILLENNIAL DAWN, the profit on the sale 
of which will go toward defraying his expenses. 
Brother Rogers became so infatuated with his 

R1637 : page 106 

idea, that without even trying the method or 
writing one word about it he crossed the Atlantic 
to urge, nay almost to force upon us, the 
general adoption of this plan, instead of the 
present Colporteur method, which, together 
with the Tract work and WATCH TOWER, has 
been so greatly blessed of the Lord to so many 
of our readers. He expresses a dislike for the 
term Colporteur, preferring to be called a minister 
or preacher. We fear that he is getting 
ashamed of the method which God seems specially 
to have used and blessed in the preaching 
(making known) of present "harvest" truth. 

Our objections to the proposed method are 
as follows: 

(1) We are opposed to all forms of begging 
—whether by word, by insinuation, by suggestive 
hint, by collections, or by going into a 
Brother's home and sitting down on him until 

he is forced to say, Move on. 

(2) Experience, which is much better than 
theory, convinces us that the majority of Christian 

R1638 : page 106 

people are prejudiced against any religious 
meeting held in a hall, unless they have 
some knowledge of its character in advance. 
Consequently, a gathering of representative 
Christians can not be had in that way. Indeed, 
we find that Christians who seldom attend 
Church services of any kind, being prevented 
by family cares, and some by skepticism, are 
more often reached by the colporteurs and 
deeply interested. 

(3) It is an expensive method, wasteful of 
time and money which could be much better 
spent for the service of the Truth and the 
praise of the Lord in the colporteur work and 
Tract circulation. The time spent in seeking 

a suitable hall and in preparing and delivering 
discourses, could all be used in colporteuring, 
and the expense of hall-rent, etc., be saved 
besides. 

(4) The effects of public discourse, soon 
wear away, because the Scripture proofs are 
not so well appreciated as from reading, when 
the quotations, being marked and cited, can be 



referred to and re-read until fully understood. 

(5) In a town with a population often 
thousand, properly colporteured, two or three 
weeks' effort should dispose of at least four or 
five hundred DAWNS, and bring it to the attention 
of all; whereas the proposed plan would 

bring the Truth to the attention of only a 

few, probably circulate not above fifty DAWNS, 

and require much more time and expense. 

Experience shows that while some of the 

books sold may awaken no immediate interest, 

many of them bring forth good fruitage years 

after. Besides, as Brother Rogers himself has 

previously remarked, it seems as though the 

Lord is circulating the reading matter, to select 

and arm at once the overcoming class now, 

and the remainder of it to do a similar work 

for another class to be developed under, and 

out of, the great tribulation approaching. (Rev. 7:14.) 

See Brother Rogers' clear statement on 

this subject in our issue of July '93, page 194. 

(6) The method proposed would debar 
from the privilege of the "harvest" work the 
majority of those now engaged in it as DAWN 
colporteurs; for about one-half of the number 
are sisters, and of the brethren very few have 
the gift of oratory or any of the qualifications 
for attracting, interesting and profiting the 
public by preaching-meetings. 

Indeed, Brother Rogers agrees with us and 
many others of his best friends, that he lacks 
the talent of a public speaker; but he claims 
that the less ability he has, the more the Lord 
will use him in that way. He states that for 
this reason he never even attempts to prepare 
a discourse. And a similar course he urges 
upon others. We, on the contrary, hold that 
each of the Lord's servants should seek to use 
the talent which God has given him, as directed 
in Rom. 12:6-8; 1 Cor. 12:8-11; and that 
each should study how best to use his talents 
for the edification of his hearers.— 2 Tim. 2:15; 
ICor. 14:19. 

Upon going to London, Brother Rogers 
started a three months' course of discourses, 
announcing subjects. Being from America 
and coming to them as a representative colporteur 
and instructor of colporteurs, of several 
years experience, commended to them by us, 
the WATCH TOWER readers there naturally inferred 
that his oratorical preaching was part 
of our arranged program; and when they went 
to hear him some were greatly disappointed, 

R1638 : page 107 



and wrote us accordingly. One only recently 

interested TOWER reader, was quite provoked 

indeed, and wrote that we must have a very 

low estimate of the intelligence of our English 

readers when we sent Brother Rogers as a representative 

to instruct them; and intimated 

that not one of his audience could have made 

a poorer effort as a public speaker. Another 

wrote, Surely if our dear Brother Rogers has 

been used of the Lord for the blessing of others, 

it is not because of eloquence of speech, etc. 

We replied privately to these brethren, telling 
them that they should not judge of Brother 
Rogers as a servant of the Lord by his ability 
as a speaker. We assured them that his talent 
consists in his ability as a colporteur and an 
instructor and starter of other colporteurs; and 
that thus his efforts had been greatly used of 
the Lord to the blessing of many. We assured 
them that we had not sent him to England 
as a representative orator of the truth, but as 
an efficient colporteur, and one, too, who we 
had every reason to believe held clear views 
of truth and who was firmly fixed upon the 
foundation-doctrine of the ransom. We asked 
that with this explanation they receive and 
honor Brother Rogers for his colporteur-work's 
sake (1 Thes. 5:13), and that they encourage 
his use of the talent he possesses while discouraging 
his attempt to use a talent which he 
does not possess so far as his best friends can 
discern. 

Feeling it to be our duty to Brother Rogers, 
as well as toward the truth, we wrote to him 
as kind and brotherly a letter as possible, explaining 
the situation, urging him to specially 
use his great gift of preaching by the circulation 
of the printed page, and advising that he 
turn the remainder of the announced London 
meetings into Bible Study Meetings and lead 
them, instead of preaching; and we enclosed 
some of the correspondence received. We 
closed the letter with an exhortation that he 
consider our love for him and our interest in 
and our appreciation of his service, and referred 
him to Psa. 141:5. 

But the effect was the reverse of what we designed. 
Whether from a lack of humility or 
whatever the reason, Brother Rogers concluded 
that all who did not appreciate his preaching 
were devoid of spirituality. As he considered 
the question, he reached the conclusion that he 
had a mission from God to change the whole 
program of harvest work: that he should come 
to Allegheny, and if Brother Russell were not 
humble enough to accept the Lord's message 



from him, then he should do all that he could 
do to stop the other colporteurs from present 
successful methods and get them started in his 
untried, theoretical and mendicant method. 

He came to Allegheny and stopped with us 
for ten days, during which time we gave him 
twenty-four full hours of valuable time, listening 
to his scheme, and endeavoring to point 
out its impracticability, telling him we had 
tried the plan in a general way before the publication 
of DAWN and TOWER-except that instead 
of depending upon others to pay the expenses, 
the Editor paid them himself. 

Brother Rogers urged that the Lord had 
sent forth the early disciples without purse or 
scrip and had provided for their necessities, 
and that without books or tracts to sell, and 
that they lacked nothing. We answered, that 
God had sent out this "harvest" truth similarly 
from house to house, and had none the 
less PROVIDED for the necessities of all who 
went forth,— although in a different manner. 

Brother Rogers urged that it did people 
good to give; that the WATCH TOWER had 
failed of its duty in not urging people to give; 
that the priests of the Jewish age lived upon 
the charity of the people— their tithes— and referred 
us to the Apostle Paul's reference to the 
Law upon the subject in 1 Cor. 9:7-11. 

We agreed that people who give most to the 
Lord's service are most blest, provided they 
give it of a grateful willing heart; but we pointed 
out the Apostle's words in the same connection 
—"Nevertheless, we have not used this power 
[to demand support] ; but [on the contrary] 
suffer all things, lest we should hinder the 
gospel of Christ." "I have used none of these 
things: neither have I written these things that 
it should be so done unto me." I "make the 
gospel without charge, that I abuse not my 
power in the gospel." ( 1 Cor. 9: 12, 15, 1 8.) 
We also showed that the priests were not permitted 

R1638 : page 108 

to squeeze the tithes from the people, 

that the people were free to do as they pleased, 

although the tenth of all increase was demanded 

by the Law. All of the consecrated are of 

the antitypical "royal priesthood" for whom 

God will provide, and who are to engage somehow 

in self-sacrifice in God's service. The 

saints are, therefore, typified by the tithe-takers 

and not by the tithe-payers; and besides, 

among them are not many great or rich 

—chiefly they are of the poor, rich in faith 



only. We assured him that we believed that 

we had done our full duty in placing before 

the consecrated an opportunity to share in the 

Lord's work through the general fund of the 

WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY, used for publishing 

and circulating tracts by the million, to 

forward the translating of DAWN and Tracts in 

other languages, and to assist in colporteuring 

the DAWNS and Tracts. Those who are of a 

willing mind need no prodding and, so far as 

we know, are doing all that they can do in this 

way. We have even returned money to some 

we had reason to believe from their own letters 

were giving beyond their ability. We assured 

him that our commission from the Lord 

was not to beg, or even to "make a poor 

mouth" to thus excite pity and draw money, 

but merely to preach the gospel and leave to 

the Lord to provide (in his own way) the 

things needful for ourselves and for his work. 

But Brother Rogers was so infatuated with 
the delusion that God had given him the message 
for us that he declared that we were resisting 
God in the matter, and that he was not 
sure but that the Apostle Paul made a similar 
mistake in the method he used, as expressed in 
the verses to which we referred. 

Finding argument of no avail, we proposed 
to set aside some city, large or small, in 
which he could make a trial of his method- 
provided he would make a complete demonstration 
and not leave the city until he had 
done all the work that he thought should 
be done there. We believed that the experiment 
would prove a refutation of his theory, 
and that thus he might be convinced that it 
was not of the Lord. But he would not agree 
to this and told us that we should live by faith. 
We replied that "our sufficiency is of God," 
that the Apostle also said, "Hast thou faith? 
have it to thyself!"— that we are not to have 

R1639 : page 108 

faith in other people's generosity and endeavor 
to squeeze money from them, but to have faith 
in God and to use the means which he puts 
into our hands,— as he (Brother Rogers) had 
been doing for six years in preaching the gospel 
by the sale of DAWN. 

We bade Brother Rogers Good-bye, assuring 
him that so long as he continues in the Truth, 
trusting in the ransom, we will have a deep interest 
in his welfare, even though he take what 
seem to us less advantageous methods of work; 
that we would put not a straw in his way to hinder 



his service of the Lord in such a manner as 

his conscience would approve; and that if, when 

tried, his method shall seem in any degree to 

have divine approval we shall be glad to adopt 

any part that may seem to us compatible with 

the Lord's Word and spirit. But, meantime, 

we must demand the same liberty for our conscience 

that we accord to his. Brother Rogers 

assured us that he is still in perfect harmony respecting 

the Truth as presented in the volumes 

of DAWN, and that he will still be glad to use 

them in whatever way he may hereafter work. 

We assured him that we were glad to know this 

and that we would be pleased to supply him 

what DAWNS he might desire, at the usual low 

rate at which we supply all TOWER readers. 

We regret, however, that when he saw that 
his mission and theory did not move us from 
the method which God has so far blessed, he 
seemed somewhat bitter in spirit, and left us 
expressing his intention to see and influence 
as many as possible of the colporteurs. Hence 
the propriety of so full a resume of this matter 
for the benefit, not only of the colporteurs, but 
also of the English friends, to whom Brother 
Rogers hopes soon to return;— although no 
longer as a representative of the Tract Society, 
nor at its charges. 

"As the body is one, and hath many members, 
and all the members of that one body, being 
many, are one body: so also is Christ.... 
But now hath God set the members every one 
of them in the body, as it hath pleased him." 
See 1 Cor. 12:12-18-25-29. 



page 109 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1639 : page 109 

JOSEPH SOLD INTO EGYPT. 



II. QUAR., LESSON III., APR. 15, GEN. 37:23-36. 

Golden Text— "Ye thought evil against me, but God 
meant it unto good."— Gen. 50:20. 

In tracing the overruling providence of 
God in the lives of some of his chosen people 
of the past we find a great stimulus to 
our faith; and in the noble examples of the 
ancient worthies we should indeed find 
spurs to our zeal for God and our faithfulness 
in his service. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, 
Joseph— how beautifully they walked with 
God! how simple and childlike their trust 
in the dark as well as in the light! and how 
earnest and sincere their devotion! 

In our last lesson, Joseph, the favorite son 
of Jacob's old age, was brought to our attention 
(a dutiful and promising boy of 
seventeen), and his prophetic dreams and 
the envy of his brethren toward him. In 
this lesson we see how that envy and hatred 
brought forth their fruits. With the exception 
of two of the brethren— Reuben and 
Judah— all were desirous of taking his life; 
but the two did not dare to openly oppose 
the rest, so they suggested other measures. 
Reuben had him cast into a pit from whence 
he intended secretly to rescue him, but where 
the others were agreeable to letting him 
die of starvation. But before Reuben could 
accomplish his purpose of rescue Judah had 
proposed his sale to a company of traveling 
merchants going down to Egypt; and to 
this they had agreed, and had disposed of 
their young brother and divided the price 
among themselves. Of this transaction 
Reuben evidently was not informed, and he 
shared his father's grief at the supposed 
death of Joseph. 

Judah's motive was apparently a double 
one— first, to ease his conscience by choosing 
the lesser of the two evils, avoiding to 
incur the guilt of his brother's blood, and 
yet desirous to accomplish the purpose of 
getting rid of him, and that at a slight profit 
to themselves. Then, in common with the 
other eight, he was willing to lie to his father 
and to make believe that Joseph was dead. 
Judah's choice of the lesser of two evils he 
may have regarded as a species of virtue, 
as the suggestion from, "Let us slay our 
brother," to "Let us sell our brother," presents 
a strong contrast. Thus men are 
often deceived by comparing a great with 
a lesser evil, or themselves one with another, 



and especially with those of meaner 
disposition, instead of with the perfect standards 
of virtue and true holiness set forth in 
the Scriptures. 

This supposed loss of a beloved son was 
another severe trial for Jacob. Evidently 
Joseph was the one in whose line of descent 
he looked for the fulfilment of the divine 
covenant. He was the eldest son of his beloved 
Rachel, and a son after his own heart, 
in whom was the reverence of God and the 
love of righteousness. The coat of many 
colors seems to have been his expression of 
this hope, which he did not seek to conceal 
from his family, being desirous and hopeful 
probably that they also would share his 
sentiments. And in Reuben's favor it may 
be remarked that of all the brethren he had 
more reason to be envious of Joseph, since 
he was the eldest son of Leah, the first wife. 
For twenty-three long years Jacob suffered 
the loss of this beloved son before he received 
the glad tidings— "Joseph is yet 
alive." Yet he faithfully held to the promises 
of God and waited for the consolation 
of Israel, and humbly developed the graces 
of meekness and patience which, in God's 
sight, are of great value. 

In the case of Joseph the trial was one of 
great severity. From being a beloved and 
favorite son, tenderly reared in his father's 
house, he was suddenly transported to the 
position of a slave in a foreign and heathen 
land. Added to this, too, were the bitter 
experience of the murderous hatred and 
cold-hearted cruelty of his brothers and the 
thought of his father's grief and loneliness, 
and that without any apparent prospect of 
ever seeing his face again, or of even hearing 
a word from him, as no railroads or telegraphs 
or mailing arrangements then facilitated 
communication between foreign nations, 
and Joseph was a servant having no 
command of time or money. 

This was surely a bitter experience for a 
young man of seventeen; but as he left 

R1639:page 110 

the scenes of his childhood and all that he 
held dear on earth, and that under such 
painful circumstances, like his father when 
he fled from Esau, bereft of every thing else, 
he took with him the staff of the divine 
promises and the principles of truth and 
righteousness under whose influence he had 



been reared, and he resolved to be loyal and 
faithful to God and to maintain his integrity 
under whatever circumstances he should 
be placed. Alas! how few young men in 
these days— nor did they in those days- 
make such resolutions, even under the most 
favorable circumstances. This is the age 
when they generally think they should be 
sowing their wild oats, of which they generally 
forget they must afterward reap the 
bitter harvest. 

While God could have prevented and 
might have interfered at any step of these 
distressing circumstances, we see that he 
did not, but that he allowed each one to 
freely manifest his disposition for good or 
for evil; yet above them all we see his overruling 
providence in turning these very 
circumstances to account in a most marvelous 
way for the furtherance of his benevolent 
designs and to the special blessing of 
his faithful servants. Thus, for instance, 
Joseph being thrown more upon his own 
resources and in contact with a new, and 
at the time the most advanced, civilization 
of the world, received a new and valuable 
education which otherwise he could not 
have received, and a discipline that developed 
manly strength, courage, tact, and firmness 
of character; while his isolation from 
all the old home associations led him to closer 
communion with God and reliance upon his 
power. 

Then, too, in the providence of God, Joseph 
was the forerunner of all Israel in the 
land of Egypt, where God proposed to give 
that entire nation a needed and valuable 
experience for four hundred years, in contact 
with the highest civilization of that 
day, yet under the humiliating circumstances 
of servitude which would tend to humble 
them, and also to teach them reliance upon 
God. Here, too, their race would be kept 
pure and distinct from others, since, as 
slaves, they could not intermarry with the 
Egyptians. And through Israel in the land 
of Egypt, not only the Egyptians, but other 
nations through them, were to learn something 
of the power and character of the true 
God. 

A very special lesson of importance to us, 
in considering the course of divine providence 
with these ancient worthies, may be 
gathered from the fact that the value of 
their experience in developing character and 
in shaping circumstances for future good is 



so manifest to us from the standpoint of the 
ends attained, while to them, as they passed 
through those experiences, they had to walk 
by faith trusting the guiding hand of God, 
where they could not trace his loving purposes. 

Abraham could not know that God would 
provide himself a lamb other than Isaac; 
and therefore it was his part to obey the 
divine command, even to the raising of the 
knife to slay his son. Jacob could not 
know how Esau would meet him in peace 
and permit him to enjoy the good of the 
land; but it was his part to arise and take 
all his house and all his goods and go to 
meet Esau when the Lord commanded. Joseph 
could not know just how all the painful 
circumstances that befell him after he 
left his father's house in search of his brethren 
were to work together for such great 
good for himself and for all his father's 
house, and for all Egypt as well; but it was 
his part to carry with him into Egypt the 
principles of divine truth and righteousness 

R1640:page 110 

and the noble example of a godly character, 
and as a servant to Potiphar to faithfully 
perform his service to the best of his ability. 
And while, like his father Jacob, he thus 
walked in the path of faith and duty, God 
could add his blessing; and we, at this end 
of the line, see the blessed results of their 
faithfulness, trust and humility. 

Just so, in the light of eternity, the past 
experiences of our lives will appear if, like 
them, we prove faithful under all circumstances 
—in the dark as well as in the light, 
in the storm as well as in the calm. As 
children of God we must all have the discipline 
of experience: let us see to it, therefore, 
that we patiently and meekly submit 
ourselves to God, taking courage from the 
noble examples of the ancient worthies, and 
from the manifestations of God's love and 
care and wisdom in making all things work 
together for good to them as he has promised 
to do for us also. 

"Leave to his sovereign sway 
To choose and to command: 

So shalt thou gladly own his way, 
How wise, how strong his hand!" 

R1640:page 111 

JOSEPH RULER IN EGYPT. 



II. QUAR., LESSON IV., APR. 22, GEN. 41:38-48. 

Golden Text— "Them that honor me I will honor."- 
1 Sam. 2:30. 

In Egypt we find Joseph making the best 
of his new and trying circumstances. Having 
resolved to look upon the brightest side 
of things and to act upon the right side, he 
trusted in God and was cheerful and faithful 
in all his duties, whether they were 
agreeable duties or not. He acted thus, not 
from policy, but from principle— because he 
loved righteousness and desired the approval 
of a righteous God. 

His faithfulness soon won his master's 
confidence; "and his master saw that the 
Lord was with him, and that the Lord made 
all that he did to prosper in his hand;... 
And he made him overseer over his house, 
and all that he had he put into his hand." 
And when, after some ten years of faithful 
service here, he was falsely accused and cast 
into prison, "and he was laid in iron and 
his feet were hurt with fetters" (Psa. 105:17,18), 
with a clear conscience and a sense 
of the divine approval he determined to 
make the best of that situation also; and 
there too "the Lord was with him and 
showed him mercy, and gave him favor in 
the sight of the keeper of the prison;" and 
there, without any prospect of release, he 
remained faithful to God and duty for three 
years, when suddenly, the purposes of this 
discipline and proving having been served, 
God set before him an open door. He did 
not take him out of prison, but in pursuance 
of the pathway of benevolent helpfulness 
to others he led him out. 

Wherever Joseph was, and no matter 
what were the circumstances, he did what 
was right and made the best use of the situation; 
and his faithfulness in all the little 
things prepared him for larger and wider 
fields of usefulness. He was rightly exercised 
by the experiences of life. He was 
kind both to the thankful and to the unthankful, 
generous to the mean as well as 
the noble, not allowing the injustice and 
harsh treatment which he received from 
others to harden his heart. And in all his 
course we see no signs of distrust in God 
or of complaining. In his trials he simply 



clung closer to God and took comfort in 
the manifestations of his favor, while he 
trusted where he could not trace him. 

When God showed to Joseph the interpretation 
of the dreams of the butler and 
baker in prison, he recognized the favor as 
from God and thought he saw in the circumstance 
an open door to liberty once 
more. But the ungrateful butler forgot his 
benefactor, and for two years more he remained 
a prisoner. Then the door was 
swung open— this time, not only to freedom, 
but to honor and advancement, and Joseph 
was prepared to enter. His suggestion to 
Pharaoh of a wise course in view of the predicted 
famine was an evidence not only of 
his faith in God but also of a keen, active, 
business turn of mind. He thus taught that 
men should act upon their faith promptly 
and without wavering; and when he was 
chosen to pilot the nation through the 
threatening dangers of their future, he showed 
his great executive ability and his faithfulness 
there also. In this he was partly 
favored by inheritance from his father; but 
much was added to that by his own energy 
and force of character. All the open doors 
to usefulness and honor are of no avail if 
we lack the energy and force of character 
to enter them and to carry forward successfully 
the enterprises to which they lead. 
Faithfulness, purity of character, nobility of 
purpose, energy, courage, acquired skill, 
piety and self-discipline are all necessary 
to a successful life from God's standpoint. 

Joseph's exaltation to the throne of Egypt, 
where he was second only to the king, may 
be regarded by some as the full reward of 
his faithfulness. But evidently Joseph did 
not so regard it. He still had respect to 
the promises of God: he did not lose his 
head and become puffed up with pride on 
being elevated from the position of a slave 
and a prisoner to a royal throne, but with 
the same steady dignity that characterizes 
a true man, he quietly went about the business 
of his new office with the same energy, 
competency, and faithfulness that had characterized 
him as a slave and as a son and 
brother in his father's house. His long acquaintance 
with God, especially under the 
discipline of adversity, had made him humble, 
and the graces of character grew beautifully 
in his prepared heart. But the throne 
of Egypt had never been the goal of his 
ambition; for, like Abraham and Isaac and 



Jacob, he looked for the heavenly city, the 
Kingdom of God. There was his treasure 
and there was his heart, and from thence 
he drew the inspiration of his noble life; 
and the court of Egypt was esteemed only 
for its privileges of helpfulness to others. 



R1640:page 112 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



page 112 



DEAR TRACT SOCIETY:-Enclosed please find 
$5.00, which is to be applied on my "Good 
Hopes." It is more than I thought I would be 
able to send, and I am truly glad of it. I only 
wish it were many times more. I have thoroughly 
tested all the Tract Society publications, 
and never feared to place them in any one's 
hands; for they stand on the true foundation, 
and besides are easily comprehended. I have 
been an advocate of these publications for 
nearly thirteen years, and I like Brother R's 
method. He has never yet bewildered or mystified 
my mind, and I feel satisfied with his 
exegesis on Bible subjects. I believe MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and ZION'S WATCH TOWER to be 
God's agents for disseminating the truth; and 
may the Father's blessing go with both the 
Editors and the publications. Yours in love 
of the truth, MRS . B . F. MILLER. 



R1640:page 112 

DEAR SIR:— I send you a brief sketch of the 
life of Mrs. Lucretia Mead, who was an earnest 
Christian, a great reader and a deep thinker. 
She died last August at the ripe age of ninety. 
All her life she studied to find justice combined 
with mercy in the old orthodox theologies, 
but failed utterly. And consequently she was 
unhappy. About ten or twelve years ago a 
copy of the TOWER was sent to the postoffice 
of which my father was postmaster. He took 
the liberty to send the paper to her. She read 
and reread it, and then sent for the paper for 
a year; and we have taken it ever since. 

If you could have seen her study your books 
and papers, and compare them with the Bible, 



and heard her exclaim, "It is truth! It is 
truth;" and then, raising her eyes to heaven, 
as it were, praise God for sending her those 
truths, as I have seen and heard her do, you 
would praise God, too, for being the means 
of so much happiness. Then to see and hear 
that aged mother teach her children (gray-headed 
men and women) and grand-children 
and great-grand-children was a sight or rather 
an experience few families have witnessed. 
She used to wonder why God let her live so 
long. I told her I firmly believed God intended 
her to live in order that four generations 
at least should be made acquainted with 
these truths through her. 

And so she died, every faculty clear to the 
last; and we all bless God for your teachings, 
through Christ, brought to us through grandmother. 

Yours sincerely, MRS. E. M. YOUNG. 



DEAR FRIEND AND BROTHER:~Again I intrude 
on your valuable time, not to ask questions 
or to make complaints, but to tell you 
the joy I feel, and the hope that daily grows 
stronger within me. I have at last been able 
to do something for Him, in his blessed cause. 
I have been the means in his hands of supplying 
"meat" to some truth-hungry souls, and 
feel that I have His approval in so doing. True 
it is, that I have accomplished little; but that 
little gives me great encouragement and stimulates 
me to press onward in the good work. 

Until lately, I have been more or less in 
darkness; that is, trying to see through the 
gloom in which I was enveloped, knowing that 
something better lay beyond, yet failing continually. 
Now I am commencing to see more 
clearly. I was an idle laborer in the vineyard; 
now I trust I am becoming a worker. True, 
my work is small, but who knows, but our dear 
Lord, how far it may extend. If one can bring 
the Truth to four, what may those four do. As 
to myself, I am daily putting the old self under. 
The work is slow, but is progressive, evil is continually 
with me and sometimes gets the better 
of me, but it is dying slowly and surely. What 
used to be severe trials are now almost nothings. 
I look to Him and put my trust in Him, 
knowing he is working all things together for 
good. All I regret is lack of opportunity to 
do more in His service. The time, I know, is 
short; hence my impatience. With love to all 
your workers and yourself and helpmate, I remain, 
Yours in hope, W. F. POTTER. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--The last TOWER 
has reached me, and oh! it is fine! My heart 
goes out to you and yours in the work you are 
doing in spreading real good news, and when 
I think of the multitudinous vexations which 
must continually harass you. 

In reference to your appointment of a committee 
to examine MS. sent in for publication, 
for my own part I hope it will soon have to be 
dispensed with because of lack of work. In 
reference to others publishing, I always feel if 
the same means, time and energy were put forth 
in circulating already published articles from 
the TOWER office (which are certainly published 
at a much lower rate), how much more good 
would be done! This is still my feeling; and 
I do not feel one whit able to write (much less 
publish and circulate) anything to exceed what 
comes out from time to time. Accept much love. 

Yours in our Lord, F. B. UTLEY. 



page 114 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 



December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1641 :page 114 

"WATCH WITH ME ONE HOUR!" 

--MATT. 26:40.-- 

Little did we suppose, when writing for our 
last issue the article, "Watch and Pray, Lest 
Ye Enter into Temptation," that the admonition 
was so greatly needed by you all, and 
especially by the Editor and his faithful co-workers 
in the service here. Suffice it here to 
say that the Adversary has been busy concocting 
a dark conspiracy in the hearts of some 
who should be "true yoke-fellows," but who 
are proving themselves to be "false brethren," 
similar to some mentioned by the Apostle in 
2 Thes. 3. 

Brethren and Sisters, watch and pray yet 
more earnestly for yourselves and for us; for 
assuredly the Adversary opposes us all, more 
and more, at every step. In all probability 
the Church's path will grow narrower and more 
difficult as the Master's did, until, like his, it 
shall reach a Gethsemane and a Golgotha. 
The same thought is illustrated in the career 
of John the Baptist-pointed out in M. DAWN, 
VOL. II., pp. 260-262. 

The severest feature of the present trial is 
that it is the work of "false brethren." It enables 
us to appreciate our Lord's "contradiction 
of sinners against himself"; and we are 
not weary nor faint in our minds. We have 
not yet resisted unto blood— death. We are 
looking away to Jesus, the author of our faith, 
who in due time, we trust, shall be the finisher 
ofit.-Heb. 12:2-4. 

A JEWISH VIEW OF JESUS. 



It is becoming quite popular with all sorts 
of people— religious and irreligious— to point 
to Jesus of Nazareth, our Redeemer and Lord, 
as a great and wonderful teacher; and therefore 
it need not surprise us to find that a similar 
sentiment is springing up amongst the Jews. It 
will prepare the way for their ultimate acceptance 
of him— when the Kingdom is his, and he 
is the governor among the nations.— Psa. 22:28. 

The following extract from The Overland 



Monthly is by a Jew— Jacob Voorsanger— and 
gives evidence in the direction named. He 
says:— 

"Shorn of all theological attributes, divested 
of his Greek garments, disrobed and appearing 
in the strong light of history, the majestic 
character and figure of the Nazarene are 
intelligible enough to a Hebrew. A son of 
his people, his heart aflame with great intents, 
his ambition wholly to restore the law, his 
dream that of the prophets, to bring the kingdom 
of heaven to the children of earth, he 
preached a Millennium to men engaged in 
quarrels and contentions. If he failed, if his 
life paid the forfeit, it was the sorrowful consequence 
of troubled times. But his teachings, as 
they appear upon the face of his book (not as 
they are interpreted by metaphysicians), are the 
genuine echoes of the holy things propounded 
by old prophets. A life led in harmony with 
such teachings, the same teachings given to 
Israel in the law and the prophets, must needs 
be pure and holy. This much we understand. 
Why cannot all the world thus read these 
teachings, and thus, to quote the great words 
of Sir Moses Montefiore, 'remove the title page 
between the Old and New Testaments.'" 

page 114 

PAPER-BOUND DAWNS. 



These are supplied to TOWER subscribers at 
25 cents per copy or, when taken in packs of 
five, ten or twenty of any one volume, at the 
Colporteur rate, 15 cents each;— this to facilitate 
loaning and giving, so greatly enjoyed by 
those who receive the truth in the love of it. 
On account of extra postage the foreign rate 
will be five copies for $1.00. 



R1641 :page 115 
