Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., OCTOBER 1, 1918 


No. 10 


REMOVAL NOTICE 

Please address of communications in future to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIEY 

FEDERAL AND RELIANCE STREETS 

N. S. PITTSBURGH, PENNSYLVANIA. 


The removal will delay about thirty days all orders received 
after August 26; but we know the friends will bear patiently 
with us for that length of time or even longer. 

After prayerful consideration, and counsel with brethren in 
otiier places, it was decided by the Board of Directors of the 
Watch Toweb Bible and Tract Society, the Executive Committee
 and the Board of Directors of the Peoples Pulpit Association
, to move the ofiices of our Society from Brooklyn, N. 
Y., to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, North Side. Large and commodious
 quarters have been secured in the Martin Building, 
third floor, corner of Federal and Reliance streets. A beautiful
 reception and fellowship room has been provided for visiting
 friends; and all friends are cordially invited to pay us a 
visit. The Bethel home has been discontinued for the present. 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


For nearly forty years this journal has sought from time to 
time to forewarn its readers against the peculiar trials and 
temptations of the period marking the closing years of tJie 
Gospel age. Especially has it endeavored to warn the Lord's 
people against the increasing activities of the demons, evil 
spirits, the "angels which kept not their first estate." During 
this period we have been much encouraged by the many letters 
received from a number of our readers, showing us that our 
efforts have not been in vain, but that their influence for good 
has been widely felt, not only in restraining the Lord's people 
from curious and dangerous investigation of occultism and 
various forms of spiritism, but also in opening the eyes of 
some — including a few mediums- — who had been partially overcome
 by the wiles of the devil and his associated fallen 
spirits. — Ephesians 6:12. 

Once more we would remind our readers that "the days 
are at hand, and the effect of every vision" ; that the restraints 
under which the fallen angels have been held ever since the 
days of Noaih were gradually to be relaxed during the closing 
years of the Gospel age, the time now present. The Biblical 
record is that the evil spirits, the demons, were "restrained 
[in Tartarus, the atmosphere of earth] in lasting chains of 
darkness unto the great day" of judgment for the world. ( Jude 
6; 2 Peter 2:4) As that great day drew near, the Watchers 
have noted many evidences that the chains have been gradually 
loosened, that evil spirits have greater liberty than ever before
. FALLEN HUMANITY EASILY DECEIVED 

We are well aware that many intelligent people laugh to 
scorn the Scripture teaching along these lines. But God's 
Word forewarns us that those persons are in great danger 
w<ho refuse to believe in the existence and the activity of the 
demons, and who regard as superstitious the Bible narratives 
of how our Lord and his apostles cast out -demons, and who 
sneer at the Mosaic laws which strictly prohibited the Israelites
 from any dealings with witches, wizards, necromancers
 and others who held intercourse with unseen intelligences 
purporting to be the spirits of the dead. As a result of present
 day skepticism along these lines many of the self-confident
 have been easily caught in the demon trap, which is baited 
with curiosity. A visit to a medium, a seance with friends, a 
planchette or ouija board at a neighbor's home, etc., entrap 
the unwary to their destruction. At first their curiosity is 
aroused. Then they are gradually given what seems to them 
indubitable proofs of the existence of their beloved dead. Experiment
 follows experiment until finally they are fully convinced
 that they actually hold conversations with "those who 
have gone before." Thus little by little they are brought under 
the influence of the demons. 

Hie Word of God repeatedly warns us that mankind are 
no match intellectually for the unseen intelligences that masquerade
 as the spirits of dead human beings. It declares that 
these are evil spirits, "angels that kept not their first estate," 
and that we need the protection afforded us in the counsels of 
the divine Word. In the end of the Jewish age many Israelites 
were afflicted with evil spirits; and a considerable part of 
tJhe work accomplished by our Lord and his apostles was the 
freeing of the afflicted from the merciless persecutions of these 
fallen angels or demons. So preeminent is this subject that 
the four Gospels contain no less than forty -two references to 
the demons — mistranslated devils. 

SATAN'S OEIGINAL LIE STILL BELIEVED 

A similar influx of evil intelligences is predicted to occur 
in the end of the Gospel age. St. Paul points out that at 
this time the Lord will send, or permit, a strong delusion 
to come upon professed Christians, to try them. He says: 
"For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they 
should believe the lie [Greek], that they all migiht be condemned
 who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness
." {2 Thessalonians 2:11, 12.) Thank God that 
we see that this condemnation is not to be everlasting torture
! The blasphemous misrepresentation of God's Word is 
one of tine devices with which these wicked spirits have 
driven many honest men away from God, by w*hich they have 
blinded men to the true character of Jehovah God, But now 
in the closing hours of the age these strong delusions are being
 permitted in order to differentiate between those who ha\e 
really loved and obeyed the divine counsel and those who have 
failed thus to do and are about to be judged unworthy of the 
high reward soon to be given to the faithful overcomer. 

In the context the Apostle points out that these strong 
delusions which will characterize the close of the old order of 
things will ensnare mankind because "they received not the 
truth in the love of it." The truth here referred to is the 
statement which God made to father Adam in Eden: "In the 
day thou eatest thereof, dying thou sihalt die." (Genesis 2:17, 
margin) In other words, it is the fact that tie dead are dead, 
and cannot re- live except by the exercise of divine power for 
their awakening from the death-sleep. This plain truth, 
abundantly set forth in the Scriptures, is not relished by any 
except the truth-h.ungry. The majority of mankind do not 
like to believe thus. On the contrary, they prefer to think that 
the dead are really more alive than they were before they died. 
Rejecting the plain statement which God made to Adam in 
Eden, they prefer the monstrous, lie which Satan there do 
clared to mother Eve: "Ye shall not surely die." (Genesis 
M:4) All who thus reject the foundation truth are easy marks 
for the demons, who have continued to repeat the original 
lie told in Eden. Indeed, so thoroughly have they succeeded 
that all mankind except a few followers of Jesus arc thoroughly
 indoctrinated with this fundamental untruth. All 


[63321 


OcroBi-R 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(292 -293) 


literature, whether historical or mythological, perpetuates 
this egrrgioua falsehood; and throughout the centuries since its 
first inception the demons have used every means within their 
power to impersonate the dead and thus to give an appearance 
of truth to Satan's original lie — the lie. See John 8:44, 
Diaglott. 

BELIEF IN SPIRITS WOKLD-WIDE 

"Missionaries in heathen lands tell ua that the demons are 
working today as they did of old, and that the New Testament
 description of demoniacs would be equally applicable to 
cases under their observation in heathen lands. 

"The old traditionary ideas and belief in demonism are intensively
 reproduced in the great civilized nations of modern 
times. It is not called 'demonism/ now, but 'spiritualism/ 
'psychic science/ 'spiritism/ etc. But call it by what name 
we will, it bears the same stamp, the same earmarks, the 
saine brands, as uhe old demonism. The wonders performed by 
the ancient wizards, necromancers, sorcerers, magicians, are 
in these days repeated a hundredfold in the seances that are 
held continually throughout Christendom. 

"It is impossible to tell the number who are avowed spiritualists
 or are its adherents. The organization is as loose and 
consistent as its teaching. Algernon Pollock says that there 
are 60,000,000 spiritualists in the world, with 200 journals 
devoted to its propaganda. ... In the United States the 
number is estimated all the way from 2,000,000 to 16,000,000. 

"The great war, with its millions of dead, the intense 
anxiety of relatives for their beloved ones, the strong advocacy 
of the belief by men like Sir Oliver Lodge, who has recently 
embodied in a book long communications from a spirit which 
he believes to be his son Raymond, who was killed in this 
war in France — all have tremendous influence in making converts
. Now if we add to these the countless heathen hordes 
in China, India, Japan, Africa and the islands of the sea, we 
get a faint idea of the extent of spiritualism, and the reason 
for its consideration here. 

"During the last twenty years spiritualism has spread 
apace. The planohette, or ouija board, has had tremendous 
sales. Private and amateur circles have been formed. Scientists
 of the highest repute and many others 'under every test 
condition that expert scientific knowledge and trained detective
 ingenuity could devise' to eliminate fraud, prevent deception
, and shut out tihe invisible human element, have come 
to the conclusion that there are intelligences behind the manifestations
." — World Problems. 

PERISHING FOB LAOS OP DIVINE WISDOM 

There is a reason for this increased activity on the 
part of the demons. As the world has approached "the judgment
 of the great day," the chains of darkness which have restrained
 the demons throughout the centuries since the Deluge 
liave gradually been unloosed ; and as a consequence they have 
more liberty than they have had for many centuries. So successfully
 are they able to impersonate the dead that they 
are able more and more to deceive the whole civilized world 
except those who 'have heeded the warnings of the Word of God 
along these lines. Even the wisest among mankind are being 
deceived into thinking that they can hold communion with the 
dead, for they have rejected the divine Word as unreliable and 
as a collection of old wives' fables which no intelligent mind 
can believe. — 1 Corinthians 3:19. 

Rejecting the Scriptural teaching that the dead are dead 
under the sentence pronounced upon Adam for his disobedience 
in Eden, and accepting in its stead the monumental lie which 
Satan there foisted upori their first parents, men have unwittingly
 aided the demons in their age-long deception of the 
professed church of Christ. When the tide turns — and turn 
it surely will — Christian people will examine the teachings of 
the Word of God, and will realize that, despite all the advantages
 of Bible study which characterize our day, they have not 
understood the first principles of the Scriptures, but have igjiorantly
 taught ana believed "the doctrines of demons." — 1 
Timothy 4:1; 2 Timothy 3:1-9. 

During the uast forty years a marked change has taken 
place in the attitude of scientific men toward the subject of 
religion. At one time perhaps the majority were purely 
materialistic in their views. While some believed in the existence
 of God, perhaps none had faith in Christ as the Redeemer
 of the world, ox in life on anv other plane than the 
material. In 1882 a number of eminent British scholars 
founded the Society of Psychical Research, for the purpose of 
making an organized aid systematic attempt to investigate all 
spiritual phenomena. The members were some of the most 
noted statesmen and scholars of our day. In 1884 an American
 society was established for the same purpose; and in 1890 
it was incorporated with the British society. Similar societies
 have since been established in other countries. The 


VII— 33 


growth of these societies has been so rapid the past few years 
that hundreds of cities have flourishing branches. 
SCIENTISTS ALSO MISLED 

As a result of the work of these organizations the subject 
of spirit phenomena has attracted many of the brightest minds 
of our time; and many who were once skeptical materialists 
have now swung to the opposite extreme and are credulous 
spiritists. Ignorant of the Bible teachings in regard to the 
work of the evil spirits these wise men and women have 
fallen prey to the demons, who have played all manner of 
tricks upon them. But instead of realizing that men have 
been duped by evil spirits, poor humanity thinks that it has 
proved the existence of life beyond the grave, and that the 
spirits of dead human beings really communicate with mankind
. So far has this work of deception been carried that 
books have been written to describe life in what is called 
Spiritland. There the dead are said to live much the same as 
they did on this side the grave. Music, the arts, intellectual 
and spiritual (?) knowledge and progress are said to have 
increased. People build, plant, carry on business, etc., much 
as before death. In fact, life beyond the grave is merely a 
repetition of present day conditions on this mundane sphere. 
Very different indeed are the Scriptural descriptions of the 
joy and peace which will obtain during the "times of restitution
," under the beneficent rule of the Messianic Kingdom. 

A careful scrutiny of various communications from these 
spirits show us that the fallen angels are shrewd enough not 
to reveal anything concerning conditions beyond the human 
plane of existence, but that they do all in their power to 
impress upon the minds of their dupes the original lie which 
Satan told in Eden. To those who do not know the truth as 
it is set forth in the Word of God, however, these communications
 give something tangible, something with which to 
mitigate their sorrow of heart at the death of their loved 
ones. As a result many who have lost friends and relatives 
on the battlefield are becoming spiritists or theosophists in 
the vain hope of coming into touch with their dead, so the 
daily press informs us. It is said that in London lectures on 
occult subjects are crowded with women, including royalty. 
Doubtless a similar condition prevails elsewhere. 
APPEALS TO THE HUMAN SENSES 

To illustrate the insidious nature of the attempts made 
to entrap the unwary, we give an excerpt from a book purporting
 to be the work of a young physician who died a short 
time ago: 

"Listen I Son speaks to you. He is not far away today; 
he is close by you. Did he enter as you turned away to hide 
your tears? You did not hear his footstep, but he came and 
stood close beside you. Doors do not keep him from entering
." 

Such words as these could not fail to appeal very strongly 
to a mother who is grief -stricken at the death of her 
boy. But to those who are well versed in the Scriptures relating
 to the subject of death the deception is easily seen. 
But while the Bible is explicit in regard to the present state 
of the dead, yet remarkably few people know anything about 
the real teachings of the Word of God. Hence when death 
enters the family circle they know not which way to turn 
in order to get comfort. Under such circumstances they fall 
an easy prey to such appeals as the above excerpt; for these 
give the natural mind something on which to build hope, 
MODERN FICTION PERMEATED WITH OCCULTISM 

Since the beginning of the Gospel harvest the reading public
 has multiplied four or five times, as a result of the impetus
 given to education during this period; and cheap editions
 of popular novels have brought them within the reach 
of all classes. Meantime the demons have not been slow to 
take advantage of these conditions, as the following excerpt 
shows : 

"The application of modern science to supernatural ism or 
of the supernatural to modern science is one of the distinctive 
features of recent literature. . . , Each advance in science 
has had its reflection in supernatural fiction, and each phase 
of research contributes plot material, while some of the elements
 once considered wholly of the devil are now scientific. 
The transition from the sorcerer, the wizard, of older fiction, 
to the scientist in the present has been gradual. . . . Hypnotism
 enters largely into the fiction of modern times. It 
borders so closely on the realm of the uncanny, and is so related
 to the science of today as well as to the sorcery of the 
past, that in its earlier stages it was considered as distinctly 
diabolic, used only for unlawful purposes, being associated 
with witchcraft. Only in more recent times has it been rehabilitated
 in the public mind, and thought of as a science 
which may be used for helpful ends. . t . 

"That there is at present a definite revival of interest in the 


[6333] 


(293-294) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Rrookt.yn, X. Y. 


supernatural appearing in the drama, in poetry and in fiction, 
is evident to any one wiho has carefully studied recent publications
 and magazines. Within the last few years, especially 
in the last two years, an astonishing amount of ghostly 
material has appeared. I hesitate to. suggest a reason for this 
sudden rising tide of occultism at this particular time, but it 
seems clear to me that the war has had much to do with it. 
. . . But whatever may be the reason for this revival of 
the ghostly, the fact remains. . . . Now the weird and the 
ghostly have regained a popularity which they never surpassed
 even in the heyday of medieval fiction. . . . The rising
 tide of the unearthly in art shows itself in all literary 
forms, such as dramatic, narrative and lyric poetry." — The 
Supernatural and Modern English Fiction. 

ANTAGONISTIC TO SCBI7TUBB 

That psychic research must greatly modify the teachings 
of the church is the firm belief of Sir Oonan Doyle, the noted 
writer, who is deeply interested in occult phenomena. In the 
January Metropolitan he says: 

'^Christianity must change or perish. That is the law of 
liife — that things must adapt themselves or perish. Christianity
 'has deferred the change . . . until her churches are half 
empty, until women are her chief supporters, and until the 
learned part of the community on the one side and the poorest
 class on tihe other, both in town and in country, are 
largely alienated from her." 

The reason for this condition is then given. To those 
who know nothing of the philosophy of the Ransom, but who 
have been indoctrinated in Evolution theories, the explanation 
may seem to be very logical. But to those who know tine 
Word of God it is a poor substitute for the soul-satisfying nortion
 on which the Lord's people are fed. The noted writer 
continues : 

"One can see no justice in a vicarious sacrifice, nor in the 
God who could be placated by such means. Above all, many 
cannot understand such expressions as 'the redemption from 
sin,' 'cleansed by tthe blood of the Lamb,' and so forth. As 
long as there was any question of the fall of man there was 
at least some sort of explanation of sueh phrases; but when 
it became certain that man had never fallen — when with fuller 
knowledge we could trace our ancestral course down through 
th« cave-man and the drift-man, back to that shadowy and 
far-off time wfhen the manlike ape slowly evolved into the 
apelike man — looking back on all this vast succession of life, 
we knew that it had always been rising from step to step. 
Never was there any evidence of a fall. But if there was no 
fall, then what became of the atonement, the redemption, of 
original sin, of a large 'part of Christian mystical philosophy? 
. . . Too much seemed to be made of Christ's death. It 
is no uncommon thing to die for an idea. Men die continually
 for their convictions." 

How true it is that the wisdom of this world is foolishness
 to God! Of a similar class in his day the great Apostle 
to the Gentiles said: "Professing themselves to be wise, they 
became fools, and changed the glory of the incorruptible God 
into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and 
to four-footed beasts, and creeping things." {Romans 1:22, 
23) His clear, cold logic deals a mortal blow to all evolutionary
 theories. He fully believed in the fall of man. His 
masterly presentation of the philosophy of the Ransom Sacrifice
 offered on Calvary has never been surpassed. 

DEVICES FOB EKTBAPPING THE TJNWABY 
That a great wave of mysticism is breaking over the civilized
 portion of tlie world is claimed by many. The demand 
for planchettes and ouija boards is said to he beyond the 
ability of the manufacturers and jobbers to supply. The ouija 
board consists of a little table with three wooden legs, which 
moves about on a polished plank bearing the letters of the 
alphabet, the basic numbers and usually the words, "Yes" 
and "No" and "Good-by" Two or three" persons sit around 
the board with their finger tips resting lightly on the table; 
and the ''messages from the dead" are spelled out as the triangular
 table moves about on the board, pointing out the letters
 with the table leg at the top of the triangle. The causes 
of the movement and the origin of the messages are still much 
in dispute among spiritists. But the Lord's people can easily 
trace these phenomena to the demons, who seek to destroy 
mankind by breaking down the barrier of the will. 

Professor Olin, of Akron University, is quoted by the 
Akron Beacon Journal (Marrti 1, 1918), as warning people 
not to take the ouija board too seriously. "Many people, falling
 victims to its lure, have been mentally unbalanced," said 
the gentleman, who has made the ouija board the subject 
of careful study. A similar warning has come from Sir Godfrey
 Raupert, who has investigated psychical subjects both in 
America and in Europe. The end of the study of occultism 


and of various experiments connected therewith, Sir Godfrey 
declares, is in many cases the sanitarium or the insane asylum. 
Often what seemed to be a simple means of amusement has 
led to the loss of reason. 

Everywhere about us the signs deepen that the evil spirits 
are invading the human mind as never before. Our literature 
is steeped with occultism. Our psychological laboratories are 
given over to experiments in hypnotism. Our periodicals are 
filled with advertisements of books which show people how 
to use hypnotism and spiritism to take advantage of tiheir 
fellow men. Not in vain do the Scriptures warn us that "as it 
was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the- days of the Son 
of Man" — at the time of our Lord's second advent. Truly "we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities
, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this 
world, against the wicked spirits in heavenly places.'* 

"The devil and his angels are old. They are masters of 
craft and cunning. With satanic ingenuity they have been 
practising upon the mortal human race for millenniums. They 
have been studying the art of impersonation and deception for 
thousands of years. They have been adapting the beliefs, the 
customs and the inventions of the humans to their own deceptions
. They know all the details of the man's life history 
that his own relatives could know; and in the secret cabinet
 and the seance they recall them, and counterfeit dress, 
voice and manner." — World Problems. 

A WASHING TO THE CHURCH 

Our beloved Pastor Russell, the Messenger to the Laodicean
 stage of the church, has written much upon the subject
 of Spiritism. Those who have heeded his warning along 
the lines of occultism have been enabled to escape these 
snares of the adversary. We quote from his well-known 
sermon on "Spiritism Is fiemonism": 

"On the basis of human credulity — the supposition that 
the dead become more alive when they appear to die — the demons
 have advanced their deceptions and sought to enthrall 
Ehumjanity. Invisible to men, yet fully informed respecting all 
human affairs, thev can readily personate the dead. The fallen 
angels, since the Deluge depnved of the power to materialize, 
use as channels of communication such individuals as they 
can deceive into being their servants — mediums. Many of 
these are noble characters, and many of them the reverse ; but 
vicious or ignorant or good, iJhc demons use such as they can 
control, none being too debased for their service. 

THE BASIS OF BBBOB 

"Working on the credulity of their dupes, they use the lipw 
or the pencil of the medium to describe the dead one, who 
is supposed to be very anxious to communicate with the living
. And the description generally fits well to the dupe's last 
knowledge of the person — age, sex, clothing, all. So deluded 
do people become that they fail to remember that the children 
of two or ten years would, ten years later, if alive, be twelve 
or twenty years of age, and proportionately larger, and certainly
 not content to wear in a spirit land the same clothing 
they wore when last seen by the dupe. The demons* power to 
discuss matters known only to the dupe and the deceased carries
 conviction. 

"And all the teachings of all the denominations, that the 
dead are not dead, are helping on with the deception. The 
venerable minister, deceived by the doctrines of the dark ages. 
tells his hearers at the funeral that their deceased is hovering 
over them; and that if he could speak, he would say, 'Weep 
not for me/ The medium and the clairvoyant announce that 
they are under spirit control and that the departed one can 
speak through them. Is it any wonder that the deception is 
a powerful one with many? The antidote for all the doctrines
 of demons is the message of the Word of God : 

(1) That the dead are really dead; 

(2) That Christ died on our behalf; 

(3) That at his second coming and kingdom, 'there fIikII 
be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the 
unjust/ — Acts 24:15. 

"Let those who deny that there are invisible evil spirits 
explain what Jesus meant when he gave his disciples power 
over all manner of disease, and over unclean spirits. Let 
them explain wfhat the apostles meant when they returned 
with joy, saying, 'Lord, even the demons are subject unto us 
in thy name/ It is for them to explain, too, what really took 
place at Gadara, where the Scriptures declare Jesiw oast a 
legion of these evil spirits out of one man. That legion, permitted
 to go into the swine, were sufficient in number to craze 
the entire herd. 

"Let us also have an explanation of what St. Paul meant 
when he turned to rebuke the young woman who had the 
power of divination, and commanded the evil spirits to come 
out of her. (Acts 16:16-18) Let theim explain why her 


[6334] 


October 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(294-295) 


soothsaying prognostications were at an end, when once the 
evil spirit was gone forth. Let us also remember that there 
ia not a suggestion anywhere in the Bible that these evil 
spirits were even human beings in any sense of the word, or 
at any time. Let us all remember that these are the same 
evil spirits dealt with at the time of the Deluge. 

"Immediately after the Flood, they began their attack 
upon humanity, their attack upon the truti, their endeavor 
to make humanity believe the lie — that the dead are not 
dead. To whatever extent they succeeded in so deceiving humanity
 they prepared mankind proportionately to he their 
dupes. The goal of their ambition is possession, everything 
else being merely accessory to this end. 

"Spirit mediums recognize the demon character of the 
spirits communicating through them; and they dread thean 
and warn each other against the danger of allowing their 
wills to come completely under spirit influence, knowing that 
surely the result will be possession, demonization. And this 
in our day is palled insanity, although many physicians realize
 the difference, and candidly say that not one-half the 
cases in an insane asylum are due to functional disorder. The 
majority are cases of possession by evil spirits. 

SUGGESTION, DIVERSION, IMPEESSION, POSSESSION 

"These are the four steps along which those who do not 
put themselves under the guidance of the Lord are in danger 
of being led by the demons. And every step of the wav should 
be fought with a determination of the will, if the r wiles of 
the adversary' would be escaped. The vacant, unoccupied 
mind is the most open to suggestions of the demons. The purposeful
, earnest, energetic, have a protection in their activity
- 

"But if suggestions, or imaginations, have been entertained, 
the second step will soon foltow — diversions, Tlie mind will 
be diverted from the lines of thought — study, prayer, or what 
not. The poweT of suggestion becomes so strong as to interfere
 with proper thinking and reasoning. 

"This leads on to the third step — impression. Some are 
naturally more impressionable than are others, and can receive
 promptings, or suggestions, frcwn the evil spirits with 
so little difficulty that they do not realize the source of the 
impression, but rather wonder if it is a power of their own. 
Really it is the outside power impressing them, and more 
and more bringing them under occult influence. 

"Finally comes the last stage — possession — and tihe evil 
spirit gets full power and control of the will, and ignores 
the human will entirely. This is not always accomplished 
without more or less <A a struggle — sometimes covering years. 
Tn the struggle, sometimes by ciairaudient powers, sometimes 


through mediums, the spirits will seek more and more the 
•confidence of the dupe. If he be inclined toward evil, the 
leadings will be that way. If he have a religious tendency, 
he will be counseled to pray or read the Bible, then be chided, 
the object always being to bring him into full submission of 
his mind, in a manner that none should yield himself, except 
to the Almighty, whom the evil spirits sometimes even da-re 
to impersonate in their- speech. 

WITCHES, WIZARDS AND NECROMANCERS 

"Many today laugh at the stories of witchcraft handed 
down from the past. Quite probably some executed as witches 
may have been good people, misunderstood by their neighbors. 
This does not, however, alter the fact that witches, wizards 
and necromancers are not mere myths. The Bible tells us 
of them as realities, and explains the demon power operating 
through them. 

"In olden times, the divine law forbade any witch, wizard, 
or necromancer (one claiming to have communications from 
the dead) to live in the land of Israel, or to practise their 
black arts. (Deuteronomy 18:9-14) Through the prophet 
the Lord asks the people why the living should seek unto 
those who peep and mutter and claim to have communication
 with the dead [for wisdom, knowledge, guidance, etc.], 
and not unto the living God? 'Should not a people seek unto 
their God?'— Isaiah 8:19, 20. 

"We all remember the story of the witch of Endor, and 
how King Saul, when he could not have communication with 
the Lord, sought communication with Samuel the prophet, who 
was dead. Saul saw nothing and heard nothing. The witch 
described to him <an old man with a mantle, and Saul recognized
 the description as corresponding with that of the Prophet
 Samuel. The witch was guided by the demons, however 
much she might have supposed that the visions she saw and 
the words she heard were from the dead prophet. Her prophecies
 were all from the evil spirits, the demons. (1 Samuel 
28:7-19; 1 Chronicles 10:13, 14) So in all heathen lands, the 
demons have had to do with the people. 

"The lesson to God's people is full loyalty to God, strict 
attention to his inspired words through the prophets and 
the apostles. These are the only sure protection against the 
wiles of the adversary. How glad we are that the lessons to 
angels and to men, built upon God's permission of a reign 
of sin and death for the paj3t six thousand years, will soon 
be finished! How glad we are to know of a surety that the 
end will justify the permission of all the evil which has come 
to pass! How glad we are to know that eventually all the 
blinded ones will be enlightened and that eventually all the 
wilfully evil shall be destroyed, and that without remedy!*' 


THE HEAVEN-CENTERED MIND 


"Center your mvnd on things 

One thing is certain: we cannot have everything. If we 
let our minds go wandering off down the pleasant by-paths of 
human interest we shall never reach the Celestial City. Even 
in the world choice between things must constantly be made. 
A young man approaching life's responsibilities must choose 
his vocation. He cannot hope to become highly proficient in 
more than one field; at best he may have an avocation, or field 
of secondary interest. 

The Apostle's words are perfectly plain: "Center your mind 
on things above/' or, as the King James' version states it: 
"Set your affections on things above." The same thought of 
■concentration is expressed by the Master when he said: "If 
thine eye be single, thy whole body will be full of light." 

The" first chapter of Paul's letter to the Church at Colosse 
deals with Christ the Head ; the second admonishes the church 
not to be led away from Christ the Head, either into false 
Greek speculations or into ascetic Jewish practises; chapter 
three urges those who have risen with Christ to live as they 
should live — in fellowship with their exalted Head. 
RISEN WITH OHBIST 

Of the first seventeen verses of chapter three the first 
four contain general exhortation, placing before the mind 
the glorious privilege, the manifest ideal of the new creature
; verses five to eleven suggest the things to be discarded; 
and verses twelve to seventeen enumerate the things to be 
acquired. 

Our motives for action are drawn from the past, present
 and future. We were raised from that burial with Christ 
in baptism (2:12) ; we do seek for the heavenly things; and 
our Lord is represented as at God's right hand in assurance 
of rest after conflict and victory. 

"Seek" points but vaguely to the outward conduct. One 
might seek after the rainbow; but the exhortation, "Center 
your mind," is subjective and definite. It tells how we can 


5 above." — Colossians 3:2. 

most effectively accomplish what we need. Seeing then that 

at our conversion we shared not Christ's death only but his 

resurrection also, let us go where he sits at God's right hand* 

Let our whole thought be set on heavenly, not on earthly 

things. 

Again, in the third and fourth verses the Apostle's consecrated
 mind sweeps the past, present and future of our experiences
. We died the death to self; our new life is hid with 
Christ in God; and when Christ, our life, shall appear then 
shall we also appear with him in glorv. 

NEW CAPACITIES OF HIND 

When we were raised from our consecration burial to walk 
in newness of life, the new life which we there began was not 
new from the standpoint of outward environs, but rather new 
because a new dominating force was in control, a new standard 
for thought and conduct — the will of God. This change is 
perhaps feebly illustrated by the taking off of colored glasses. 
The scenery is the same as it was before; but it looks different
, the perspective has changed, the color relationships are 
altered. Again, the newness of life may be pictured by & 
change of presidents in the White House. The chairs, the 
tables, the pictures on the wall are the same, but the president 
is different; foe has different policies of government to carry 
out. TTius the new will comes into the same mind that existed 
before ; it uses the same mental machinery, so to speak ; but its 
aims are different. 

From another standpoint, it may be said that we receive 
new capacities for every organ of our brain. By our spirit 
hegettal we receive the capacity to consider and work upon, 
spiritual things instead of merely natural matters. But this 
new capacity does not operate with ease. It requires the exertion
 of force on the part of the new will to set or center 
our attention on heavenly things when all our natural desires 
and proclivities cling to things on the earth. Then when the 


[6335] 


'295-296) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


bhookiyn, n\ y. 


attention grows lax it requires the exertion of more energy 
to redirect the mind to spiritual thoughts. The Apoatle speaks 
fif this new capacity of mind when he says: "Eye hath, not 
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into tlhe h *art of mant 
the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. 
But God hath revealed them unto us by his spirit, for the 
spirit soarcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God." — 
1 Corinthians 2:9, 10. 

We died with Christ and our union with him is a hidden, 
life in God. It ia not always to remain hidden. At Christ's 
second coming, it will be revealed; for Christ is our very life, 
so that hiB manifestation involves ours. 

MOBTUTT THESE THINGS 

To whatever we give our heart's devotion, that we make 
our God. A story is told of an old minister and a youthful 
one. The young man was perplexed because he found it impossible
 to get the young people to listen to his earnest preaching
. The old man said, "That is easily explained: they worship
 elsewhere." One may pay homage to various desires of 
his own flesh, be they sinful or proper in themselves. 

We should realise the experiences already ideally ours, by 
putting our sins to death, impurity and covetousness, those 
hidden vices which draw down God's wrath, and which we 
once practised, or the tendency to practise which we find in 
our flesh. God's wrath is the expression of his disapproval, tlhe 
attitude which he must bear toward sin and unrighteousness. 
It should be kept separate in our minds from the manifestations
 of man's puny wrath, which are, as likely as not, mere 
acknowledgments of impotence. 

The Apostle exhorts us to put away anger, wrath, malice, 
blasphemy, abusive speech, lying; for the old self has been 
discarded and the new self has been put on, whioh is being 
renewed by a deeper knowledge into conformity witfh. the Creator
's image. 

Blasphemy may be committed unknowingly. It consists 

(1) in ascribing to God what should not be ascribed to him; 

(2) in not ascribing to God things which should be ascribed 
to him; (3) in ascribing to another what should be ascribed 
to God. It will he seen, therefore, that the worst form of 
blasphemy is not that thoughtless profanity which one may 
hear on the street, but such misascriptions of divine power 
or purpose as may be made by intelligent men in responsible 
positions. 

RENEWED BY KNOWLEDGE 

The Apostle tells us that the new man is renewed, refreshed
, invigorated by knowledge. But can he mean knowledge
 of a general character? No; for such knowledge is a 
mere array of facts, the possession of which may only encourage
 a spirit of pride of self-sufficiency. The kind of 
knowledge which is here referred to is mentioned in the ninth 
verse of the first chapter of this same epistle of the Colossians
. 

There the loving and faithful Paul expressed his joy at 
hearing of the progress in the truth which the Colossian 
brethren had made. He expressed his desire that they might 
be filled with a knowledge (epignosis, exact or accurate knowledge
) of God's will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. 
A knowledge of God's will means more than the knowledge that 
he has a will. It indicates an intimate acquaintanceship with, 
a deep appreciation of the motives of the Almighty. It 
means such an acquaintanceship with God's holy will which 
would lead us, if we had the power, position and authority of 
God, to do exactly the same things that he does, and which 
knowledge or acquaintanceship does lead us to do the same 
things that he does, in the measure that we have power, position
 and authority of any kind. 

Such knowledge as this is surely refreshing and invigorating
 to the new creature. This new creature iB God's creature
, God's child, though the creative work is not yet complete
. Every influence which tends to perfect this new man 
brings him iato closer and closer conformity to Christ, the 
image of the invisible, the express image of the Father's person
. — 2 Corinthians 3:18. 

Wttiere there is such a new nature, and to the extent that 
it is ascendant, all previous distinctions of race, religion, 
civilization and social position are annulled, and Christ is all 
and in all the relationships of life. 

ACQXTIEE THESE THINGS 

As probationary members of the body of Christ our characters
 should be graced with sympathetic deeds of mercy, with 
kindness, with humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, 
forbearance, love, peace, thankfulness, AU of these are 
heavenly qualities in the sense that they emanate from God 
arid have his approval. If our minds are centered upon these 
graces and our attention turned to their admiration and their 
development, we are fulfilling the Apostle's command in the 


only feasible way. He does not wish us to be gazing at the 
clouds by day and the stars by night. 

Surely the world is in need of sympathetic deeds I Our 
opportunities for practical assistance may be very limited 
now, but the sympathy can well be shown for the poor world 
in its distressed condition. In this matter we have need of 
wisdom that our attitude be not patronizing. 

The word here translated kindness means to supply what 
is needful. It therefore suggests tact, suavity, and goodness 
of heart. To be truly kind we must have the welfare of others 
at heart. Their happiness must occupy a place in our hearts 
at least as great as our own happiness, so that we 'shall have 
the tendency to share what we have, if other people's supply 
of happifying medium falls below the average. 

Humbleness of mind, or humility, suggests a willingness to 
occupy our appropriate position in respect to the Lord and his 
providences. If the Lord's providence leads us into the limelight
 and our natural preference is for the quiet shadows, it 
is not humility but self-will, if we resist Mb leadings and Btay 
in the shadow. If we love the limelight, but find ourselves 
in the shadow of social obscurity and the Lord does not lead 
us out, we would be on very dangerous ground indeed to 
take matters into our own hand and seek to bring ourselves 
forward. We may have, in fact very likely will have, our own 
preferences, prejudices or judgments concerning a matter; but 
if the Lord's Word or the Lord's leading indicates another 
path than that we would naturally tread, the only humble way 
is to say: "Not my will, but thine be done." 

Meekness is teachableness of mind and traetablenesa of 
heart. It is closely identified with submissiveness. Meekness 
is the kind of conduct which a humble heart inspires. It is 
possible to think of being meek for policy'3 sake, without 
being truly humble ; but it would seldom, if ever, occur unless 
for purposes of deception. 

Longsuffering is a quiet carriage in the midst of exasperating
 circumstances. It implies the control of natural combativeness
. Forbearance comes from a proper regulation of the 
organ of destructiVeness. We have plenty of things to destroy 
— the spirit of tihe world, the deceitfulness of the flesh and the 
wiles of the devil— ias these influences operate against our 
Christian progress. 

Forgiveness means a complete dispensing with a charge 
against a person, without regaru to what brought about the 
satisfaction. The Anglo-Saxon prefix for suggests a completeness
 of the action described in the verb. The word 
therefore means literally to give completely away — to rid 
one's self entirely of something, and, by custom, of something 
objectionable or unpleasant* especially an unpleasant or unfavorable
 attitude of mind which we may hold toward a person
 who has. done us wrong. 

Jehovah holds sinners in disfavor because, wittingly or 
unwittingly, they have transgressed the laws which his justice 
framed. He can forgive or Change his attitude toward the 
sinner only when some kind of satisfaction is made for hia 
outraged laws. Since man was unable to make this satisfaction
 for his cardinal sin, God in his goodness sent his own 
Son to die for us, that we might live. On the basis of this 
redemptive work the prophet long ago foretold: "He will forgive
 your transgressions and remember them no more." When 
an account is once settled, God is too courteous ever to refer to 
it again. It is completely dismissed from his calendar. 

The Apostle continues, in substance: And let love, which 
binds Christians in one, do its perfect work. Let the peace 
of God control your life; do nothing to ruffle it, and be 
thankful. 

Love is that good will which, apart from obligation, delights
 to give. It appreciates the privilege of sacrifice. It delights
 in every good principle. Peace of mind is a condition 
which is made possible by the operation of justice in our conduct
. When we have done justly, then we have peace of mind, 
we have a good conscience. 

Thankfulness is repeatedly urged upon us by the Apostle 
Paul. In his first epistle to the Thessalonians he says: "In 
everything give thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ 
Jesus concerning you." Thankfulness is the habitual expressing
, by word or demeanor, of the spirit of gratitude in the 
heart. Gratitude is appreciation for boons and blessings 
which we did not expect or which we had no right to demand. 

Wisdom is the discreet application of God's word to our 
own hearts and to our own life problems. It should dwell jn 
us richly; for the discernment, the discretion which enables us 
to apply the Word to ourselves and ourselves to the Word, may 
l>e had for the trustful asking. 

IN WORD OR IN DEED 

Divine power is called forth by the admonition: "Whatsoever
 we do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord 


[6336] 


October 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(297-298) 


Jesus." Love prompts, wisdom devises, justice directs, but 
power performs. 

If we habitually and persistently set our thoughts on things 
above, surely we shall have accomplished in us that which 
the Master desired to see. No matter how improbable the 
outlook may seem, it is not our power but hia that is pledged 
to the fulfillment of all that which he has purposed in Christ 
Jesus. He shall change this body, now so humiliated, and 


fashion it unto his glorious body, according to the working 
whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himBelf. 

The lotus bulb' finds itself in the mud and slime of the 
river bed. The sun shines through the water upon it. Figuratively
 speaking, it sets its heart to respond to the light. 
It reaches up, disregarding the slime of its native rooting, 
and finally bursts, a pure and lovely flower, to glorify its 
Maker. 


THE WORK OF THE MESSIANIC KINGDOM 

"The creature itself shall be delivered from the bondage of sm and death into the glorious liberty of the 

sons of God." — Romans 8:21. 


Death, not eternal torment, was the penalty which God 
placed upon Father Adam. (Genesis 2:17) Over four thousand
 years after the fall of man, our Lord Jesus came into 
the world to pay that penalty; and thereby with his own 
life he made arrangements for the ultimate purchase of all 
mankind. He has laid down the price, and eventually will 
take over the purchase. He has not yet completed his work, 
but thus far has merely made an imputation of the merit of 
his sacrificial death on behalf of the church class. As soon 
as the church shall have been completed, they will be glorified
 as the body of Christ, his associates in the heavenly nature
, glory, honor and immortality. Then will come the time 
for the Christ — Jesus the Head and the church his body — tot 
inaugurate the great Messianic Kingdom, which God has long 
promised, and for which we pray, 'Thy kingdom come; thy 
will be done on earth, as it is in heaven." 

Attentively considering the transaction by which Jehovah 
is to turn over the world to become responsible to his Son 
Jesus Christ, we perceive that it is pictured in the Jewish 
day of Atonement. When the high priest had completed 
his work of making satisfaction, for the sins of the Israelites, 
he forthwith had the divine authority to begin to bless the people
. So when Christ, the great antitypical High Priest, shall 
have finished tthe work of offering the "better sacrifices," and 
when the last member of the body of Christ shall have been 
glorified, then the merit of those "better sacrifices" will be 
made applicable to the whole world. (Hebrews 9:23} As in 
the one man Adaon all mankind were constituted sinners, bo in, 
the one Man Jesus Christ both Adam and all of his children 
will be justified from the original condemnation, that which 
came upon the human race because of Adam's disobedience. 
TRANSFER OF ADAM'S ACCOUNT 

This squaring off .of accounts will be accomplished by the 
transfer of Adam's account to the account of Christ. The death 
of Christ will be found to be the full equivalent for the 
sin of the whole world; and as far as the divine judgment 
is upon the world, mankind will be set free from the sentence 
which came upon father Adam in Eden. Forthwith Christ will 
take possession of the whole world. His Millennial Kingdom 
is for the very purpose of lifting the Adamic race out of 
sin, degradation and death, and of restoring them to human 
perfection. But he does not purpose, nor is it the Father's 
plan, that any one be forced to receive the divine blessing. 
"Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely." — 
Revelation 22:17. 

Under the beneficent rule of the Messianic Kingdom 
the light of the glory of the goodness of God will be manifest
 to all mankind. They will be made to know that restitution
 to all lost in Eden is God J s provision for the world. 
When they shall have come to the knowledge of the divine goodness
, it will be their part to conform their lives to purity and 
righteousness. They will retain their own individual will, 
however; and if any one should will to do otherwise than 
what is right, he will have the opportunity to do so. But he 
will not be permitted to do that which is injurious to others; 
for the power of Messiah will be exercised at such a time, 
and will not permit any one to work injury. Under the full 
light and opportunity of that blessed time, a sinner who makes 
no progress towards perfection will be cut off from life at 
the end of a hundred years of trial. Having had every possible
 incentive to do right under that glorious Messianic reign, 
he will have no excuse for wrong-doing. If he does not yield 
to the regulations of that righteous rule, he will thereby 
demonstrate that he loves iniquity. — Isaiah 11:9; 65:20. 
WORK OP THE MILLENNIUM OUTLINED 

God purposes to give life everlasting to those only who 
manifest a disposition to become loyal and obedient to him, 
and who by patient perseverance will develop -a character 
worthy of being raised up to perfection of life. Those who 
manifest the right disposition will be lifted up out of their 
fallen condition to the full standard of human perfection as 
it was originally in father Adam. This work of human uplift
 will be the work of Christ and the church through the 


various agencies of that time. The world will then be free 
from the condemnation which came upon Adam because of 
his disobedience in Eden. God is willing to give them everlasting
 life upon condition of obedience to his righteous law. 
But they will bo expected to cooperate in this matter; and in 
their endeavor to rise out of sin and degradation they will 
have everlasting life; but the unwilling and disobedient will be 
cut off from life — in the second death. 

Manifestly, then, there will be an interim between the 
time when mankind are legally forgiven and the time when 
they will either reach perfection or die the second death. During
" this interim they will still be of the Adamic race. So 
when the hosts of sleeping dead are awakened, they will not 
come forth from the tomb as children of Christ, but as children
 of Adam. Under the arrangements of the Messianic 
Kingdom they will be given the opportunity of renouncing 
their allegiance to Adam and of accepting the life everlasting
 that Christ will give those who demonstrate their loyalty 
to God and to tfhe principles of righteousness. So far as the 
world is concerned, this work of Christ will continue until 
the end of the thousand years of the Messianic reign. Then 
mankind will be perfect, ready to be turned over to the Father, 
as the Apostle Paul points out. — 1 Corinthians 15:21-28. 

During those thousand years the Father will ignore humanity
 altogether. He will have turned the whole Adamic 
race over to the Christ, who will have full charge of mankind
. While the Messianic Kingdom is in power, neither 
the Father himself nor any one else except the Christ will 
have anything to do with humanity. But when at the end of 
the Millennium, Christ will present the perfected race to the 
Father, it will then be for God to receive them, 
ALL CONDEMNATION SET ASIDE 

Speaking of the human family, the Apostle Paul says, 
"The creature himself was made subject to vanity [frailty!, 
not willingly." (Romans 8:20) That is to say, the Adamic 
race did not become imperfect through any will of their 
own. Father Adam got out of touch with his Creator. Sin 
invaded his domain, and he was led astray. Condemnation 
to death came upon him; and through the law of heredity all 
of his posterity were involved in his condemnation. But "God 
so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that 
whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting
 life." (John 3:16) Our Lord Jesus is ready to redeem
 these who have come unwillingly into sin, if they will 
accept his terms and conditions. The first-fruits of his work 
form the church of the Gospel age. (James 1:18) The expression
 "first-fruits" suggests others — after-fruits. In other 
words, the church are not the only ones who are to be saved, 
but a first gathering only. It is theirs to share with their 
Lord in his kingdom of glory, honor and immortality. Then 
all mankind will have their opportunity — the creature itself 
which was made subject to frailty, and which is to he delivered 
from the bondage of corruption. — 1 John 2:2. 

Eventually the whole world will have the opportunity of 
getting away from the bondage of death. First, there is tljte 
legal phase of the condemnation upon the race. This legal 
condemnation will be set aside at the beginning of the Millennium
, Then there is the actual condemnation^ — death and. all 
of its concomitants. Mankind have become so infected with 
the virus of death that their bodies have become diseased. 
"There is none righteous, no, not one." Everybody is wrong, 
imperfect, out of the way; and the race will still be in this 
condition of imperfection after the legal phase of the condemnation
 has been set aside. 

When at the beginning of the Millennium Christ presents 
the merit of his sacrificial death on behalf of the world, 
forthwith the race will be turned over to him. But, on being 
raised from the dead, the world would soon come into condemnation
 again, were they not in the hands of the Mediator 
between God and man. (1 Timothy 2:5, 6) If any one had 
his sins forgiven and then stood forth in his own strength 
before God for even one day, by nightfall he would again be 
under condemnation unless he could live sinless for that one 


[6337] 


(298-299) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


day. Because of their inability to stand before him, God will 
pass the world over to the ministry of Messiah, and will ignore
 mankind until the end of the Millennium, 

SONS OF OOP OH THB HUMAN FLAJTE 
The work of the Christ will be to effect the deliverance 
of humanity from the bondage of corruption, from which 
they are unable to deliver themselves. Christ will set the 
groaning creation free from the power of sin and death, and 
will bring the willing and obedient back into the full liberty 
of the sons of God. Whoever will then may become a son of 
God on the human plane, perfect as was Adam before he fell 
from divine favon When Adam was a son of God, he was not 
**sold under sin"; but, on the contrary, he was perfect, the 


image and likeness of his Creator — "very good." And so it is 
with the holy angels. They are the sons of God on the spirit 
plane. Thus does God design that it shall be with his human 
sons. Tthey shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption
 into the full liberty of the sons of God. — Romans 8:19-21. 
Father Adam was originally called the son of God. (Luke 
3:38) So when humanity shall have been restored to perfection
, "then shall the Son deliver up the kingdom to God, even 
the Father," when he shall have put down all insubordination
. Then all those wfoom God will receive will enter into 
the glorious freedom of the children of God. They will be 
perfect, in the image and likeness of their heavenly Father. 


HOW TO PLEASE OUR NEIGHBOR 


"Let every one of us please his neighbor 
Suavity, or the quality of being gracious and pleasing to 
others, is a good trait, especially when properly used, as the 
Apostle here suggests. There are some people naturally so 
constituted that they desire to please others. This may at 
times, however, become a trap and a snare to them. There is 
too great a willingness to please. In order to please, one 
might do things that would not be wise or right. There are 
some, for instance, who indulge in joking, seeking thus to 
please and entertain others. There may be harmless jokes, 
but there are some that are not harmless. Those who are thus 
constituted are in danger of carrying the thinjj too far or of 
being frivolous and thus greatly injuring their influence for 
good. The Lord's children .are instructed to be sober-minded. 
Others are naturally inclined to be crusty and taciturn. 
Some are fault-finding, naturally inclined to be combative. 
Both classes need to curb their dispositions in these directions. 
They need to learn to be more suave and kindly in manner, 
to have a greater desire to please others and to make themselves
 agreeable, to be gentle and considerate, to avoid strife. 
Our text addresses the Lord's people— "Let every one of us 
please his neighbor for his good." The neighbor may be a 
brother in the church, those with whom we are particularly 
identified. We are to seek to be pleasing to them, that our 
company maty be desirable, that we may be a comfort to the 
brethren, helpful to them. The same principle, however, will 
apply to our intercourse with our worldly neighbor. To whatever
 extent we have opportunity we should seek to do the 
things pleasing to our neighbor rather than the things displeasing
 to him. There are plenty of things in this world that 
are irritating. We should desire to do what will give pleasure 
to others, bo far as is wise and proper. We must not deny 
toor compromise the truth nor do what is wrong to please our 
neighbor. We must not go to places fcbat are contrary to the 


for his good to edification," — Romans 15:2. 

spirit of the Lord, in order to please man. Principle is always
 to rule with the church. But we should have a loving, 
kindly sentiment, which desires, so far as loyalty to God will 
dictate, to give happiness to all. 

This principle is referred to in the latter part of the text. 
We are to please our neighbor for his good, for his edification
. We might tell him something that would be very disadvantageous
, very ill-advised. It might be pleasing to him to 
hear the thing, yet it might be sowing seeds of discontent or 
pride or evil-surmising. We are to endeavor to please by politeness
, by kindness and neighborliness — seeking to be helpful
. We are to remiemiber the standards of the Lord — justice, 
purity, truth. We are to do only those things that would be 
for the real good and edification of our neighbor. 

The word edification has in it the thought of instruction, 
benefit. In our relationships with each other as the Lord's 
children, we are exhorted by the Apostle to build one another 
up on the most holy faith. It is so easy to tear down faith 
by some suggestion of error or doubt. The children of God 
should do only good works* The adversary has plenty of devices
 for tearing them down. We all need to be constructive, 
building each other up and helping to be strong in the faith. 

The church of God are not to be scandal-anongers, not 
to do or say things that would be destructive to character, 
but the very reverse. We are to assist one another in the 
upward way, which is toilsome and often very difficult. Those 
who are seeking to upbuild others of the Lord's flock are sure 
to be upbuilding themselves at the same time. Thus we are 
coming nearer and nearer to the perfect standard. St. Paul 
also exhorts in another place, "Let no evil communication proceed
 out of your mouth, but that which is good, to the use of 
edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers". — Ephesians
 4:29. 


APPETITE AND GREED 

November 3. — Genesis 25:27-34. 
a marked illustration of divine foreknowledge— twin brothers who were very unlike in disposition — the attitude of 
each toward the great abrahamic covenant — different views regarding the sex-ling of the birthright — a 
reasonable question and the reply — how spiritual israelites may sell their birthright — esau a type of careless
 christians — why this incident is recorded in scripture. 
"Every man that striveth in the games ecterciseth self-control in all things. Now they do it to receive a 
corruptible crown; but we an tncorruptible" — 1 Corinthians 9:25. 


Isaac and Rebecca had two sons, Esau and Jacob, twins, 
Esau being the elder by a moment or so. These sons became in, 
due time the heads or fathers of two nations nearly as dissimilar
 as were the twins themselves. Jacob's family became
 known as Israel, the peculiar people of God, inheritors of 
the great Abrahamic Covenant, through their father. Esau's 
posterity were subsequently known as Edomites, and are well 
represented today in the Bedouin tribes of the Arabian desert. 
At the birth of the twins the divine prophecy was that the 
elder should serve the younger. The Apostle Paul called attention
 to this prophecy as an indication of God's foreknowledge
 of the difference in the characters of the two children 
and of the divine choice as to the one through whom the 
Abrahamic promise would descend. — Romans 9:12, 

When the twins were about thirty-two years of age, an 
incident occurred which had a most important bearing upon 
the interests of both for all future time. Esau had been away 
on a hunting expedition, and had returned ravenously hungry 
at a time when Jacob had prepared for himself a dinner of red 
lentils, of which both brothers were very fond. Alexander 
White thus graphically relates the incident: 

"Esau was a sportsman, boisterous, wild, clumsy, full of 
the manliest interests and purposes. He was a proverb of 
courage and endurance, a success in the chase. His eye was 
like that of the eagle. His ear never slept; his arrow never 
missed the mark. A prince among men, a prime favorite with 


men, women and children, he was all the time more animal 
than man." 

SELLING THE BIRTHBIOHT 

Esau's tastes and appetites, his desires and pleasures, were 
surely of an earthly kind. He had little interest in his father's 
God and in the great Abrahamic promise that through Abraham
's posterity all the families of the earth would one day 
be blessed. Being naturally of a less religious turn of mind 
than was his brother Jacob, he set more store by his inheritance
 of his father's possessions than in his rights as the 
firstborn to the divine covenants and mercies pertaining to 
the future. Jacob on the contrary, had an opposite estimate 
of values. He was quite willing that his brother should have 
every earthly advantage; but he coveted the special blessing of 
God, whdch had been promised to his grandfather Abraham and 
in which his father Isaac trusted. 

From this viewpoint Esau had already sold his birthright, 
in that it had already in his estimation lost all of its great 
value, that it was not comparable with the sensuous pleasures 
in which he delighted. On the contrary, Jacob inherited more 
of his father's disposition of steadfastness and earnestness, and 
had great respect for the Abrahamic Covenant, deploring the 
fact that by the apparent accident of birth he had lost the 
birthright which his brother did not appreciate. Doubtless, 
too, through his mother he had heard the prophecy that the 
elder should serve the younger, which implied that in some 

[6338] 


October I, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(299-300) 


sense of the word it might be God's will that he should eventually
 become the heir of the promise. 

The incident related in today's lesson, which should be 
considered together with chapters 27 and 28, is one which 
is generally viewed as casting great reproach upon Jacob, while* 
Esau is regarded with sympathy and pity. Jacob is supposed 
to have been an unprincipled deceiver, and Esau an innocent 
dupe, overpowered by unfortunate circumstances and by his 
brother's ambitious cunning. But since the special favor of 
God attended the transaction, it is evidently wise to reconsider 
the matter, lest haply our conclusions may be found to be 
against God as well as against Jacob. And so we do. We 
find that which God could commend and reward, and which 
when properly viewed was entirely right. 

BIGHT OF PRIMOGENITURE 

In patriarchal times, the birthright, the chief inheritance 
in estate and authority, belonged naturally to the eldest son 
of a family. In the case of Isaac, the father of Jacob and 
Esau, it included not only personal possessions, but also covenant
 blessing which God had especially promised to Abraham 
and which had been inherited by Isaac. As Isaac reached advanced
 age, he began to realize that this great covenant blessing
 was not to be fulfilled in himself personally, but was to be 
transmitted to his posterity. This was also indicated to Rebecca
, Isaac's wife, when she was told that "the elder should 
serve the younger." Thus Jacob was shown to be the divinely 
chosen line through which the covenant blessing should be 
realized. 

How Jacob's heart must have dwelt upon the possibilities 
of so great an inheritance, the blessing of God, ,and of the 
blessing of all the families of the earth through his own 
posterity I Doubtless for years he had Bought opportunity to 
purchase from Esau the birthright which the latter evidently 
did not appreciate. Now, when Esau was hungry and desired 
the mess of pottage, was not this Jacob's opportunity for 
giving Esau what the latter preferred and for getting from 
him what he did not appreciate — the birthright which Jacob 
esteemed beyond all things of earthly value? 

On this point Mr. WJiite says: "Everybody knew that 
Esau's birtihright was for sale. Isaac knew, Rebecca knew, 
and Jacob knew. Jacob had for a long time been watching 
his brother for a fit opportunity." At last this canne when 
Esau returned hungry from tiie chase just at the time w*hen 
Jacob's dinner was ready. So when Esau said in substance: 
'Jacob, I am ravenously hungry. Figuratively speaking, I 
am famishing for some of those delicious red lentils of your 
cooking/ Jacob's answer was in effect: *Yes, you may have 
them, and I will go hungry, but on one condition: You are 
the elder, and therefore will have the right to inherit the 
birthright and blessing. But what do you care for Grandfather
 Abraham's covenant? If now you want this pottage 
more than the blessing, say so; and it shall be yours.' 

In effect Esau's reply was: Take it, Jacob, It may be 
good some day, although I confess that I do not have much 
faith in it. To me these people round about, whom our 
father calls heathen, seem to be good neighbors; and I might 
say without prejudice that your doting over that promise 
has made you too sober, almost morose. Why do you not 
come out and (have a good time with tine rest of us ? However, 
if you want my share in the Abrahams promise in exchange 
for that soup, you are welcome to it. I prefer tiie soup.' 

'Wait a moment,' said Jacob. *Let us do this thing 
properly. Make an oath to the effect that this is a bona 
fide transaction for all time.' 'I will do it!' cried Esau. 'Now 
give me the soup.' Thus was bartered the great oath-bound; 
covenant of God and the wonderful blessings which it embraces
, present and future. Neither man knew fully what 
he was doing ; for not until this Gospel age has the mystery 
of God in respect to that covenant been disclosed. Even now, 
as the Apostle tells us, it is made known only to the saints, 
to those who receive the holy Spirit of adoption. 
A EEASONABLE QTJBSTION 

Some one may ask: 'Why did Jacob take from his brother 
the birthright and the blessing? Why did he not give Esau 
the pottage, since the latter was hungry?' 

We think it fair to infer that both Jacob and Esau were 
hungry; for if Jacob were not so, he would not have prepared
 the pottage. Since we have bo evidence to show that 
one was hungrier than the other, let us suppose that they 
were equally so, and that there was not pottage enough to 


furnish a meal for them both. After Esau had made it known 
that he desired something to eat, Jacob evidently thought this 
a proper time for him to secure something which Esau had, but 
which he did not really appreciate, did not value. 

Ihe transaction was a fair one. If one buys a house at 
a bargain, and if botflh buyer and seller are satisfied with the 
transaction, we would not say that it was cheating or robbery. 
And so it was with Jacob. St. Paul calls our attention to the 
matter and declares that Esau was profane. That is, Esau did 
not account tine promise which God made to Abraham as 
worth anything. He was willing to sell it for a mess of pottage
, as though he were getting the better of the bargain. 
Probably he reasoned thus with himself: 'This poor brother 
of mine does not know what life is. If only he would take 
a few lessons from me, he would begin to live. He actually 
believes something which God said to our grandfather, and 
he thinks that some day he will get something wonderful out 
of it. For m3 T part I do not think it worth considering.' And 
so he probably thought that he was the gainer in getting the 
savory meal. 

ESAU OARED ONLY FOB EARTHLY THINGS 

Jacob knew that lie would get into trouble if he would try 
to get the blessing; and yet lie was so desirous of obtaining 
it that he was willing to forego everything else. As a matter 
of fact Esau did not value the birthrignt except from the 
earthly standpoint. He had no confidence in the promise. Of 
course it is possible that there is something not written in 
the record that might give a different view of the matter, one 
more easy to comprehend. The Apostle Paul commends Jacob
's faith, but counts Esau's act of selling the birthright as 
reprehensible, and warns the church not to be like the "profane
 person who sold his birthright." In this statement the 
Apostle seems to intimate that there may be some who 
will desire to sell their birthright, and others who may wish 
to buy. — Hebrews 12:16. 

In our Lord's day the Jews who failed to accept the invitation
 of the Lord, and who were not Israelites indeed, sold 
tlheir spiritual opportunities for the mess of pottage of earthly 
blessings and earthly favor. As a result we who are Gentiles 
by birth, and to wlhom this right did not appertain by nature
, have been invited in to see whether we shall appreciate 
the privileges and win the prize. Those who have the right 
appreciation of the heavenly favor will he more than conquerors
, and will get the birthright. But the Esau class will 
not "so run as to obtain." 

ESAU A TYPE OF C ABE LESS CHRISTIANS 

It will be remembered that after Esau had sold his birthright
, the name Edom was given to him* This name was also 
subsequently applied both to the people descended from him 
and to the country in which they lived. Consequently the 
name Edom is an appropriate symbol of a class who during 
this Gospel age have similarly sold their birthright for a consideration
 as trifling as was the mess of pottage wfhich influenced
 Esau. The name Edom is frequently used by the 
prophets in reference to that great company of professed 
Christians sometimes called the Christian world, or Christendom
. 

Like Esau, the masses of Christendom have sold their 
birthright of special and peculiar- advantage. By the term 
masses we mean the great majority of worldly professors of 
the religion of Christ, who are Christians in name only, but 
who lack the life of Christ in them. These have preferred 
the mean morsels of present earthly advantage to all the 
blessings of communion and fellowship with God and Christ, 
and the glorious inheritance with our Redeemer promised 
to those who faithfully follow in his steps of sacrifice even 
unto death. 

The Lord made types of these twin children of Isaac and 
Rebecca in order to illustrate what he foreknew would be the 
condition among his professed people hundreds of years after 
Jacob and Esau had died. The election of Jacob to be a type 
of the overcoming class was certainly a blessing to him, even 
though it cost him considerable. But the election of Esau 
to be a type of tine earthly-minded was nothing to his disadvantage
. It did not mean that he would go to eternal torment
; nor did it mean that he would suffer anything as a result
 during the present life. On the contrary he was blessed, 
even as worldly, natural men today have blessings of a kind 
which the Lord graciously withholds from the New Creation, 
as being less favorable to their spiritual interests. 


"COULD YE NOT WATCH WITH ME ONE HOUR?" 

Gethsemane! Gethsemane! the Savior's last dark hours I For some sweet word of comfort from the lips of those he 
In agony of soul he sought to know his Father's will; loved. 

Three times he prayed, and thrice he came unto his Chosen Alas ! with weariness their eyes vere heavy and they slept, 

three Ah, me! did e'er the Man of Sorrows utter sadder words 

[6339] 


(300-301) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


Than these: "Could ye not watch with me one hour?" And 

then in tones 
Of tenderest sympathetic love, "Sleep on and take your rest," 
He knew their frame, remembered they were dust, and. hushed 

tthe cry 
Of longing in his breaking heart. But he who never sleeps 
Nor slumbers heard his well-beloved Son in that he feared, 
And sent his holy angel to assure him all was well. 


Dear Lord, oh, let me ne'er grow weairy or lie down to sleep 
While thy dear "feet" are glowing like fine brass in crucible! 
Oil! help me watch with them "one hour" — this last sad 

darksome one. 
Oh ! touch my lips with coals of fire from off thine altar, 

Lord, 
That I may strengthen, calm, inspire and bless thy faithful 

ones, 
Until together we shall hear, "It is enougn, come home!" 


JACOB DECEIVES HIS FATHER 


November 10. — Genes-is 27:18-29. 

obtaining thu blessing esau's angeb at his brother — was jacob's course justifiable? — evidences of divine approval 

of his acts — hi8 faith not then as strong as later in life? — esau's die honesty and violation of his oath — 
st. paul's application of this incident — provision for the spxbrtttally blind. 
u Speak ye truth each one Uftth his neighbor" — Ephesians 4:25. 
Many years rolled around after tihe transactions recorded to have still clearer views of the Lord's will in such matters, 


in our last lesson. Esau, still a hunter, still fraternizing with 
the heathen peoples about, had married by this time two Canaanitish
 women, and despite his profligacy, was his father's 
favorite. Jacob was still a God-fearing man, hoping for the 
realization eventually of his purchase, so highly prized. Isaac 
was old and had become Mind, and considered that it was the 
right time to put the management of the estate into the hands 
of the elder son. Accordingly he made it known that he was 
about to bestow the patriarchal blessing; and under his instruction
 Esau had gone forth to prepare ^ome savory venison 
as a feast for his father before the formal pronouncement of 
t(he blessing. 

Bebecca remembered the prophecy that the elder should 
serve the younger, and Jacob confided to her the fact that 
he had purchased the blessing of his brother and had taken the 
latter's oath. They watched to see whether or not Esau would 
regard this oath and the sale of the blessing; but finding 
that he was disposed to disregard it and to violate all of his 
obligations, both mother and son determined to use their 
every power to secure the fulfillment of -Esau's engagement 
respecting the blessing. But knowing that Isaac would not 
accede to this, they conspired to deceive him. 

As Esau's name indicates, he was a hairy man: so they 
arranged that Jacob should put on Esau's fine raiment, speak 
as much as possible in his tone of voice, and present kid's 
flesh to his father and receive the blessing while Esau was 
still absent hunting. Lest Isaac should mistrust the deception
, Jacob's neck and arms were covered with the fine hairy 
skin of a new-born kid. The deception was carried out. After 
Isaac had said: "The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands 
are the hands of Esau," he gave the blessing to bis younger 
eon. JACOB A FUGITIVE BECAUSE OF HIS FAITH 

Of course the unprincipled Esau, who, after selling the 
birthright and confirming the sale with an oatih, was about 
to take it himself, was angry that his brother should have 
outwitted him and obtained the blessing — not apparently that 
he cared so much, for the Ahrahamic promise and blessing thus 
entailed, but he feared, that in some way his prominence in 
the family would be jeopardized and that he might perhaps 
lose the major part of the inheritance, the two-thirds, and get 
only Jacob's portion, namely, one-third. Anger, malice, hatred, 
strife, envy, murder, were in his heart; and he said to himself, 
'It will not be very long until father dies. Then I will slay my 
brother Jacob, and the entire inheritance will be mine.' 

Esau's murderous intentions reached the ears of Jacob's 
mother, who informed Jacob and advised that he go for a 
time at least and live with her father. Jacob, then over 
fifty-seven years of age, following this counsel, started out to 
carve his own fortune, leaving the entire estate in the hands 
of Esau, holding on only to the covenant promise. Here was 
another demonstration of his faith in God. He might have regretted
 his bargain, he might have renounced the blessing in 
Esau's favor. But no; he would hold to this, cost him what it 
might — possessions, a home, family association. He would go 
out in the fear of the Lord; he would attest his devotion to 
God and his faith in the promise. Is it with any wonder 
that we read that in this journey the Lord appeared to him at 
Bethel and assured him that the Almighty would be his exceeding
 great reward? Jacob's faith and zeal were of the 
kind which God approves, the kind which he has blessed 
from Abraham's day until the present time. 

THE DIVINE STANDARD— FEEFECTIOK 

Do we excuse Jacob and his mother, and approve of their 
telling lies to Isaac both by word and act? No, we cannot 
approve this course; and yet it seems evident to us that 
we must not judge Jacob's actions according to the standards 
which we would apply to ourselves. As new creatures in 
Christ Jesus, begotten of the holy Spirit, we have and ought 


still clearer faith than Jacob exercised. But what more coftld 
we expect of a natural man than we find in Jacob's conduct? 
We must gauge our conceptions of right and wrong by the divine
 standard; and while we cannot suppose that God approved 
the course adopted by Jacob and Rebecca, we must check ourselves
 and others from too rabid denunciation of Jacob's 
proceeding by noting the fact that, according to the record, 
at no time did God charge up this matter against Jacob or 
reprove or punish him for it. On the contrary, we find the 
Lord appearing to him and manifesting favor in visions, revelations
 and assurances of divine protection and care, without 
mention of the deception by which the ends were gained. Where 
God keeps silent, is it wise for us to say very much in the way 
of reproof? 

What better course could Jacob have taken? We answer 
that had be possessed greater faith he might have waited on 
the Lord and permitted divine providence to bring to him the 
blessing which he craved, and which God had foretold should 
be his, and which he had purchased at more than its value according
 to the estimation of Esau, though at far less than its 
value according to Jacob's estimation. 

Some point us to the difficulties, trials and perplexities 
which came to Jacob as a result of fleeing from his brother 
declaring that these were God's punishments upon him. But 
we reply that Jacob did not so regard these; that the Scriptures
 remind us that whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and 
that God particularly told Jacob of his love for him. So it 
is with the best and truest of the Lord's people today. The 
fact that they have trials, difficulties, disappointments and 
persecutions, so that sometimes they must flee for their lives, 
by no means proves that the Lord s favor is not with them. 
Rather these experiences, as the Apostle assures us, are working
 out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory. Similarly, Jacob's trials, difficulties and sorrowful experiences
 worked out for him a blessing of heart and character
. A LESSON FOB SPIRITUAL ISRAELITES 

Jacob was not one of those who made the outside of the 
cup clean while within it was impure. He was at heart of 
the character which the Lord approves. Neither can we say 
that he was graspingly selfish with his brother ; for we find 
in his general character a breadth of liberality rarely anet 
with. Wie recall that he never asked for even the younger 
son's one-third interest in the estate, but that returning later 
he instead proffered Esau a present of cattle, sheep, etc. If 
we must charge Jacob with lying lips, we can at least credit 
him with honesty of heart. He lied in order to secure justice 
and because his faith was not sufficiently strong to permit 
him to trust the Lord implicitly respecting a matter which 
he so highly esteemed and was willing to give everything to 
possess. 

A lesson for the spiritual Israelite is that we not only 
esteem, as Jacob did, the value of the divine promise and 
favor and blessing, but that to a similar zeal we should add 
still more faith, so that we could trust the Lord to give 
us the blessings he nas promised. This was the example 
which Abraham set, but which Jacob evidently had not fully 
appreciated. Abraham was called upon to sacrifice his son 
Isaac, the heir of the promise, through whom, the Lord had 
declared the promise should be fulfilled. Abraham's faith was 
sufficient, and in due time God settled the matter in that 
Isaac was received from the dead in a figure. {Hebrews 11:19) 
We cannot doubt that if Jacob had possessed a similar degree 
of faith God in some manner would have given him the blessing
, despite his father's intentions to the contrary and Esau's 
dishonesty and violation of his oath. 

The Apostle refers to the main incident of this lesson, 
the sale of the birthright, and in very round terms denounces 
the spirit of Esau — the spirit that is not appreciative of 


[63401 


October 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(302-303) 


Cod's mercy and of the blessing which he has in reservation 
for them that love him. He speaks of Esau as that "profane 
person who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright/' (Hebrews
 12:16) He was profane in the sense that all the Gentiles
 or heathen were recognized as profane — godless, not reverent
, unbelieving, preferring the things of this present time, 
the good and the bad, to the better portion of the future, which. 
they have not the faith to realize nor the appreciation to 
enjby. 

DIFFERENCES IN HEREDITY 
The fact that Esau was evidently birth-marked and by 
heredity a wild man, loving the more animal and natural 
things, so far from being to his condemnation is rather in, 
his favor. If his failure to appreciate the spiritual things 
was the result of an inherited depravity of taste, then we can 
say that the redemption provided in Jesus' sacrifice covers 
the entire blemish and guarantees eventually to Esau an opening
 of the eyes of his understanding and an enlightenment of 
his mind to appreciate the better things — when in due time, 
during the Millennial age, the Redeemer shall be the Restorer
. (Acts 3:19-21) For Jacob to nave taken the course 
whicih Esau had taken would have been a much, more heinous 
matter; for by. nature he had a loftier mind, a more reasonable
 soul, less impaired by the Adamic fall. 

So, too, when we apply this principle today we find that 
there are many natural men of the Esau type who have no 
interest in or appreciation of spiritual things. We sympathize
 with them rather than blame them, and look forward 
with pleasure to the time when the Lord's mercy shall be 
extended toward them in measure projJortionate to the degree
 of their share in the fall — to assist them by the judgment 
of the Millennial age (its rewards and punishments) to see the 
right way and to learn righteousness therein, and eventually 
(if they will) to attain perfection and eternal life. On the 
other hand, if by the grace of God we have been favored in 
being born the children of believers, how great is this blessing
, especially if by the grace of God our eyes have been 
opened to an appreciation of the heavenly spiritual promises I 
What advantage we have every way over* the others of the 
Esau type! What manner of persons ought we to be in all 
holy conversation and godliness! Surely the Lord may expect
 much more of us, and we should expect much more of 
ourselves than of our Esau neighbors. 

APPRECIATING OUR SPIRITUAL BIRTHRIGHT 

Examining the Apostle's argument still more closely we 
find that he especially addresses the church, not the world, 
in this exhortation that we appreciate God's grace and do not 
sell our birthright. The world has no birthright to sell at 
the present time; for as children of Adam they were themselves
 "sold under sin." The Lord addresses those who have 
by his grace escaped from this slavery, being justified by faith 
in the precious blood of Christ. We were in bondage, but are 
now made free; and whom the Son makes free is free indeed. 
(John 8:36) After being made free we received, as a further 
grace of God, an invitation to be heirs of the Abrahamic Covenant
 — the very one for which Jacob was willing to sacrifice 
everything. We come into this relationship, as the Apostle 
points out, by our acceptance of our Lord Jesus and our full 
consecration unto death with him. The point of the Apostle's 
argument is that all of the consecrated followers of Christ are 
in the position of these two sons of Isaac. The inheritance of 
that Abrahamic Covenant lies between us somewhere; some 
will get it and some will not. 

The Apostle wishes us to see the character of this class that 
will inherit the promise. They must not be, like Esau, careless
, worldly-minded, thoughtless of God and unbelieving respecting
 the future provision. If they are thus disposed, they 
will be sure to find opportunities for bartering their inheritance
. It would surely slip from them, and be given 
to others who have a higher appreciation of its value, as the 
inheritance of this covenant slipped from Esau and was secured
 by Jacob. 


FAITHFULNESS IN WELL-DOING 


The law of Christ is one of service and of self-sacrifice 
until death. All who wish to do right, to live according to the 
lines marked out by the holy Spirit through the words of Jesus 
and his apostles, should not only start out well by making a 
full consecration to God. but should continue faithful, and not 
grow weary of the battle against sin and unrighteousness. 
God is seeking to develop and to crystallize character in his 
people. Therefore in due time, after they shall have suffered 
awhile, battling against the weaknesses of their flesh, they 
will reap the reward. They will get the new bodies which 
God has promised them, the resurrection bodies. Then their 
trials will be ended; for the new bodies will be in perfect accord
 with the new will, and there will be no cause of conflict 
between them. Then the work of grace will go grandly on, 
for the blessing of all the world. 

For this reason, the Apostle says, let us not merely 


avoid harshness toward those who have been overtaken in 
a fault; let us not merely guard ourselves that we shall sow 
to the spirit and not to the. flesh; let us not merely avoid 
weariness in this good way; but let us additionally, "as we 
have opportunity, do good unto all men, especially to those of 
the household of faith." In so doing, we shall be copying 
the character of our heavenly Father. He is the Fountain of 
Blessing. From him come the blessings of the present life, 
the sunshine and the rain, upon both just and unjust. 

4.9 our heavenly Father is continually giving blessings, 
rather than seeking favors, so we as his developed children 
are to have the same character likeness, the same disposition
, the same mind. Let tis endeavor always to do good to 
everybody, but especially let us earnestly desire to do good 
unto all who are the children of God, members of the household
 of faith. 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 


AN EXHORTATION TO "WALK IN THE LIGHT' 1 

T>kab Friends: — 

I have been deeply impressed by several sentences in 
Volume 3, Studies in the Scriptures, lately brought to my 
attention. In the light of recent events these words of our 
beloved Brother Russell seem almost prophetic. Speaking of 
the Reformation, he says on page 23: 

"Many faithful souls in the days of the Reformation walked 
in the light, as far as it was then shining. But eince their 
dav Protestants have made little progress because, instead 
of walking in the light, they have halted around their favorite 
leaders, willing to see much as they saw, hut nothing more." 

Again, on page 25, we read: 

"Nor is it sufficient that we find ourselves now in the path 
of light ; we must 'walk in the light,' continue to make progress
; else the light, which will not stop, will pass on and 
leave us in darkness. The difficulty with many is that they 
will sit down, and do not follow on in the path of light." 

Moreover, it is a fact that repeatedly our beloved Pastor 
declared: "Perfection of knowledge is not yet here; we are 
not yet in the fullest light of the perfect day." He never 
claimed to have all the truth, or all the light, but simply such 
light and such truth as were due to be revealed at this time 
to the faithful student of the Word of God. 

The foregoing seems to apply to many of those who once 
walked with us, in that they declare their willingness to accept
 and believe whatever Brother Russell wrote, but decidedly
 reject the later truths which are most evidently a 
part of the light now due to the household of faith. My desire
, my prayer, is that I "may walk in the light, may continue
 to make progress and to be daily more and more prepared
 to appreciate and expect still further un foldings of our 
Father's plan, With continued confidence and unceasing prayers
 that you may be guided by His eye, I remain 

Yours in His service. Sister G. W. 8. 

LOSING EARTHLY THINGS, GAINING HEAVENLY ONES 
Dear Brethren: — 

Have just returned home after one of the most blessed 
and happy tours of my life. The blessing of the Lord surpasses
 all our expectations. Inclosed find the usual reports. 
The classes are doing splendidly. Many of them surprise me 
with the number, growth in grace and the keenness of their 
interest. Much of this, no doubt, is because of the very helpful
 character of The Watch Tower articles recently. Surety 
the Lord is gracious and has abundantly supplied all our need 
through this most wonderful medium. The brethren are reading
 and studying it as never before. 

All seem to greatly appreciate the example of our beloved 
brethren along the lines of cheerful submission; and this 
spirit is more and more taking complete control of the church* 
They seem to be fully grasping the thought that, seemingly 
in losing all things, they gain all things, and that they in 
reality do not lose anything. God's name be praised and his 
will be 'done! In much love to you, every one, I am 

Your fellow servant* 0, L. 8. — N. J. 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM THE SOUTH 

Beix)ve3> Brethren; — 

Greetings in our blessed Redeemer's name! It would cheer 


[6S41] 


(303-307) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


your hearts no little to hear the fervent prayers that ascend 
in your behalf at each time of our assembling together for 
worship. 

The last Toweb has been another sup from the Lord's cup 
containing the new wine of our Father's kingdom; and we 
are rejoicing in the blessedness of the "hope set before us." 
Also there seems to be a deep humility and sense of gratitude 
pervading the hearts and minds of the Lord's faithful children
 in our city. 

All seem to be buckling on the armors still closer; and 
with facial expression of peace and joy they group themselves 
together before and after each study hour, discussing these 
wonderful, glorious things now being brought out from the 
storehouse of our Father's Word by those "set" in the body 
for that very purpose. 

Truly do our hearts burn within us as we talk together, 
recognizing our Lord's continued leading through the one 
faithful channel. Praise his holy name! May we each and 
every one be more and more filled with his holy Spirit from 
day to day that we may increasingly honor him now, and be 
fitted for a place in the rapidly approaching kingdom for which 
we have so ardently hoped and prayed. 

With exceeding joy may we now lift up our heads, knowing 
that our deliverance draweth nigih. With renewal of assurance
 of my continued endorsement and my earnest desire to cooperate
 in every way possible in what there may remain to be 
done before we go home, I earnestly entreat an interest in 
your prayers for a fuller measure of the holy Spirit of promise
. 

For many years the friends here have been so handicapped 
by poverty that all we had to give was given to our local expenses
 — hiring halls for public meetings, etc., but now that 
there may be nothing more along that line we hope to send in 
all we can to headquarters in order to cooperate with you. 

The Lord is indeed pouring out upon us spiritual blessings 
and our desire is to show our appreciation in the near future. 
Our Father's abounding grace be with you, beloved fellow-pilgrims
, and grant you always his peace that passeth understanding
, and courage to press forward all along the line. Your 
sister by his favor and goodness, 

Mrs. C. E. K.— Texas, 
CHRISTIAN LOVE TO ALL WHO SUITER 
MY VERY DEAR BRETHREN: — 

"Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and 
from our Lord Jesus Christ." 

I wish to write you just a few lines to assure you of my 
hearty cooperation to the best of my ability and opportunity 
in all of the work of the Society, no matter who may hold 
the position of visible head. If it is possible to be more convinced
, I am more and more convinced every day that the 
Lord is using that channel, and will continue to use it; and 


therefore that whoever he is permitting to manage the work 
is doing his will. 

Is this all the reason I can have for confidence in you — 
just that I believe that God is using that channel, and that 
therefore it must be all right? No, indeed! Besides this, we 
have abundant evidence that the Lord is with you, and that 
the Society continually lias his approval, not only in what the 
dear friends are permitted to bear for his sake, but also in 
the rich spiritual food they are dealing out to us in conventions
 and in The Watch Tower. I have long been wishing that 
I had the proper words to convey my love and approbation to 
the dear ones here and elsewhere. 

The Lord opened the windows of heaven and poured out 
on the St. Joseph convention a blessing that there was not 
room to contain. He also richly blessed me in permitting me 
to be there throughout the entire four days. Oh, what a 
blessed feast we had! It cannot help but bear rich fruit in 
the Kingdom; and I trust that part of it will be in my own 
heart; for I am sure that I received not only sweet joy there, 
but needed strength as well. 

Feeling that I must not take more of your time, I will 
close now, hoping that in the Kingdom I shall be able to tell 
your more perfectly how much I love you all. 

Your Sister by "his grace, L. W. — Mo. 

THE CONSOLATION OF THE KINGDOM 
Dear Brethren: — 

Being blessed by the ministries of yourself and your colaborers
, whom the Lord has ordained to serve his church 
after the departure of dear Brother Russell, the special messenger
 of the last epoch of the church, we take the opportunity
 of sending you this note, which we hope will help to impart
 a word of comfort in this hour of trial which is upon 
the church, as well as upon the world, and which the Scriptures
 call "the hour of temptation." 

We pray for you always, that in the hour of stress you 
may remember that this is the condition of our consecration. 
(Rom. 8:17) We know, dear Brethren, that in all our experiences
 the Lord has a purpose to be served, even as it was 
in the case of St. Paul and the other faithful apostles. So 
may you take comfort and courage from the examples of our 
Master and those gone before. Tthe glorious Messianic Kingdom
, which shall furnish the desire of all nations, will soon 
be here, and its honors will more than repay for all our 
trials. So we are consoled. 

"For God has marked each sorrowing day, 

And numbered every secret tear; 
And blissful ages yet shall pay 
For all his children suffer here." 

With much Christian love to you and all the dear Bethel 
Family, I remain 

Your brother in Christ, G. W. T. — Canal Zone. 

