Benefit From Studying Draw Close to Jehovah
1 At the “Zealous Kingdom Proclaimers” District Convention, we were thrilled to receive the book Draw Close to Jehovah. Many read the book immediately. Many more were no doubt moved to do so by the yeartext for 2003: “Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you.”​—Jas. 4:8.
2 In March we will begin our consideration of Draw Close to Jehovah at the Congregation Book Study. How may we get the most from our study? Preparation is essential. Two weeks will be devoted to each chapter, with a relatively small number of paragraphs scheduled for study each week. This will allow ample time for your heartfelt comments based on your study of and meditation on the material. Additionally, fewer paragraphs will be considered during the weeks in which the concluding portion of a chapter is reviewed, to allow time to use a special feature of the book.
3 Starting with chapter 2, a box entitled “Questions for Meditation” appears near the end of each chapter. After considering the last paragraph in the chapter, the book study overseer will have the group discuss the box. He will draw out the members of the group, seeking the fine fruitage of their meditation on the Scriptures. (Prov. 20:5) In addition to the questions provided in the box, he may at times pose questions such as the following: “What does this information tell you about Jehovah? How does it affect your life? How can you use it to help others?” His goal will be to draw out heartfelt comments, not to quiz the group regarding relatively minor details.
4 Draw Close to Jehovah is unique. Although all the publications of “the faithful and discreet slave” glorify Jehovah, this book is devoted entirely to a discussion of Jehovah’s qualities. (Matt. 24:45-47) What a thrilling opportunity lies before us! We will richly benefit from an in-depth study of Jehovah’s personality. May the study help us to draw closer to our heavenly Father, and may we become more effective in helping others to do the same.

