Regular Meeting Attendance​—A Priority
1 Christian families give priority to attending congregation meetings regularly. But the demands of life today can present a challenge. Are household duties, secular work, or schoolwork starting to encroach on time that has been set aside for the worship of Jehovah? Looking at things from Jehovah’s standpoint will help us to maintain our priorities.​—1 Sam. 24:6; 26:11.
2 By gathering wood on the Sabbath, one Israelite man deliberately failed to consider Jehovah’s point of view. He may have reasoned that he was providing for his family or that it was just a small thing. By means of the judgment rendered, however, Jehovah showed that pursuing mundane activities during times designated for worship is a serious matter.​—Num. 15:32-36.
3 Meeting the Challenge: For many it is a battle to keep secular work from interfering with meeting attendance. Some have met this challenge by speaking to their employer, trading shifts with workmates, seeking a more suitable job, or simplifying their life-style. Assuredly, such sacrifices in behalf of true worship are well-pleasing to God.​—Heb. 13:16.
4 Schoolwork can also pose a challenge. “I do some of my schoolwork before the meetings and the rest after I come home,” said one youth. If all assigned homework cannot be completed on meeting nights, some parents have explained to teachers that attendance at Christian meetings is a priority for their family.
5 Cooperation and good planning are keys to accomplishing household chores in preparation for attending meetings on time as a family. (Prov. 20:18) Even younger children can be taught to be dressed and ready to leave for the meeting at a specified time. By their example, parents can impress upon their children the importance of meetings.​—Prov. 20:7.
6 As the pressures of the present system of things increase, it is vital that we attend congregation meetings regularly. May we continue to view matters from Jehovah’s standpoint and make regular meeting attendance a priority.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.

