Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting February 9
Song 225
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 8, demonstrate how to present the February 15 Watchtower and the February 22 Awake! In each case, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured. In one of the presentations, demonstrate how to handle the conversation stopper “I have my own religion.”​—See Reasoning book, pages 18-19.
10 min: “Benefit From Studying Draw Close to Jehovah.” A talk by a Congregation Book Study overseer based on the article. When considering paragraph 2, draw attention to the study schedule. When considering paragraph 3, read and discuss paragraph 23 on page 25 of the publication.
25 min: “Keep Telling About Jehovah’s Wonderful Works.”a (Paragraphs 1-10) To be handled by the service overseer. Use the questions that are provided. Build enthusiasm for increased field service activity during the Memorial season.
Song 90 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 16
Song 41
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “A Work Backed by God.”b Include comments on the Proclaimers book, pages 547-8.
20 min: “Keep Telling About Jehovah’s Wonderful Works.”c (Paragraphs 11-17) Use the questions that are provided. Include a brief demonstration of a publisher inviting a return visit to the Memorial.
Song 75 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 23
Song 118
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Using the suggestions on page 8, demonstrate how to present the March 1 Watchtower and the March 8 Awake! In each case, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured. At the conclusion of one of the presentations, raise a thought-provoking question that can be answered on the next visit using the Require brochure.
15 min: “Regular Meeting Attendance​—A Priority.”d Arrange in advance for one or two to comment on the measures they have taken to be present at each congregation meeting.
20 min: Praise Jehovah “in the Middle of the Congregation.” Audience discussion based on September 1, 2003, Watchtower, pages 19-22. (1) How does Psalm 22:22, 25 highlight our reason for commenting at meetings? (2) Why is prayer helpful? (3) Why is preparation needed? (4) What goal should all of us have at meetings? (5) Why is our being seated toward the front helpful? (6) Why is it important to listen to what others say? (7) How can we answer in our own words? (8) How can we encourage others with our comments? (9) What responsibility rests on the conductor?
Song 81 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 1
Song 156
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for February. Mention literature offer for March, and briefly review one of the suggested presentations from the January 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry insert.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “We Can Do What Jehovah Asks.”e Use the questions that are provided. As time permits, highlight the cited scriptures.
Song 98 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

