From Our Readers
Safe Driving
As Illinois Secretary of State, I would like to commend you and the staff of Awake! for your recent publication that advocated safe driving. (January 8, 1988) The statistical reports and safety tips used in the articles were noteworthy and stressed that safe driving habits are not only a national concern but also an international one. . . . Civic and religious organizations such as yours have created a greater public awareness of the seriousness of this problem. . . . Again, you are to be commended for your efforts to encourage safe driving. A human life is much too precious to be put in danger by careless behavior. I personally extend my congratulations and thanks for your group’s involvement.
Jim Edgar, Secretary of State, Illinois,United States
Short Temper
One evening when I was sorting out the “Young People Ask . . ” articles, I stopped on seeing the question “Why Do I Lose My Temper?” (April 22, 1987) After reading the article through twice, I began to wonder why the counsel about not getting angry fitted me so exactly. I am 22 years old, and yet, on that day, I discovered for the first time that I am short-tempered. I had never thought of myself like that before. Until recently, my way of reacting to my feelings was, ‘It is proper to get angry in this case,’ but from now on, I will do my best to suppress my anger.
Y. O., Japan
Religious Reporting
I was unhappy to see in the December 8, 1987, Awake! the article in the back dealing with the “Pope’s Visit Commercialized.” I felt the statement​—“A reported favorite sold to priests and nuns features a ‘canine beer mascot . . . in papal hat and robe.’” Come on now​—do you really believe this? I feel this constant barrage of anti-Catholicism is uncalled for. All religions should respect that they are Christians and one in the Father. Any religion that does not is not truly Christian and has no right to preach degrading material about others. Very poor, I’d say!
S. H., United States
In the July 8, 1988, Awake! “B.P.” of France dresses you down for backbiting and abusive speech. I find it hard to believe that this person has really been a reader of Awake!, for Awake! writes consistently with gentle love about truth from the Bible. Where this disagrees with the practices of world religions, I have yet to see an angry accusation against anyone! The differences are given to us. Quoted testimonials are carefully quoted. I appreciate the way Jehovah’s Witnesses present the facts and leave the intelligent reader to draw his own conclusions. From science to the sari, I have learned to trust your research and careful writing.
C. K., United States
We can only add to C. K.’s remarks that reader S. H.’s problem seems to be with “Newsweek” (June 29, 1987), whose report we summarized and quoted without comment. As to whether it is “truly Christian” to call attention to religious shortcomings, we must look to the example of Jesus Christ himself, who criticized the religious leaders of his day in terms far stronger than have appeared in “Awake!”​—Matthew 15:1-14; 23:2-32.​—ED.

