How True Faith Can Help You
“ARE churches becoming irrelevant?” So asked free-lance writer Paul Fromm after attending the Sixth Assembly of the World Council of Churches held in 1983 at Vancouver, Canada. The reason for his question? The fact that this council had dwelt almost exclusively on politics. Said Fromm: “The mainline Protestant churches . . . have replaced the Gospel of Jesus Christ with the trendy gospel of leftist politics.”
Religion’s plunge into politics appears to be a desperate attempt to rekindle a waning interest in long-established religions. Reports from around the world indicate that faith in organized religion has indeed declined over the last few years.
This, however, does not surprise students of the Bible. Jesus prophesied that “because of the increasing of lawlessness the love of the greater number will cool off.” (Matthew 24:12) As a result of this ‘cooling off,’ relatively few allow religion to have much influence in their lives, even if they do make an occasional trip to church for a wedding or a funeral.​—Compare Luke 18:8.
But while faith in most organized religions leads to disappointment, Jesus observed: “Every good tree produces fine fruit, but every rotten tree produces worthless fruit; a good tree cannot bear worthless fruit, neither can a rotten tree produce fine fruit. Every tree not producing fine fruit gets cut down and thrown into the fire. Really, then, by their fruits you will recognize those men.” (Matthew 7:17-20) Note that just as there is a form of worship that produces ‘bad fruit,’ there is a religious way of life that produces “fine fruit.” The latter brings real benefits to the person of faith. What is such faith, and what are some of its benefits?
Basis for Faith
For millions, one’s faith is something into which one is born. But for true Christians, faith is something that is acquired and cultivated. For them, faith is not “firm belief in something for which there is no proof,” as one dictionary defines faith. On the contrary, the early Christian evangelist Paul wrote: “Faith is the assured expectation of things hoped for, the evident demonstration of realities though not beheld.” (Hebrews 11:1) This means that our faith is based on reality.
For example, one approaching God “must believe that he is.” (Hebrews 11:6) Many ridicule the idea that there is a God. ‘Why believe in a God you cannot see?’ they say. Yet the same ones have no trouble believing in television waves that are just as invisible. They, of course, can turn on their television sets and see the results of these invisible waves! Likewise with true Christians, our faith in God is not mere credulity or blind faith. Paul explains about God: “His invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship, so that they are inexcusable.” (Romans 1:20) Though God is invisible, all around us there is abundant visible evidence of a Master Designer, a superhuman intellect, a Creator with unmatched power.
Our faith, though, must go beyond mere belief in God if it is really to benefit us. (James 2:19) We must also have faith in the Holy Bible as the Word of God. (John 17:17) This faith should be based, not on mere emotion or early religious training, but on a knowledge of the many features of the Scriptures that point to divine authorship. The Bible itself encourages its readers to “make sure of all things.”​—1 Thessalonians 5:21.
How can you do this with regard to the Holy Scriptures? You might first consider the fact that the Bible is a series of writings by some 40 different servants of God. Though writing over a period of 1,600 years, the writers followed a common theme​—God’s Kingdom. Never did they contradict one another. Does not this indicate divine authorship? Also, the Bible shows remarkable accuracy in describing such things as the order of the appearance of living things on earth, a fact that is confirmed by modern science. (Genesis, chapter 1) Even more amazing is the fact that the Bible records future events! Some of the writers themselves confessed that they did not understand what they were writing; but what they wrote was truth, for they wrote under divine inspiration!​—Daniel 12:8; 2 Peter 1:20, 21.
For many, however, the most persuasive reason to have faith in the Bible is that its counsel works! As you study and apply it, the Bible will exert a powerful motivating force for good in your life. This can help you to make changes that may amaze your friends and acquaintances. No wonder Paul said that “the word of God is alive and exerts power”! (Hebrews 4:12) True faith, therefore, has a rock-solid foundation. How, though, can you cultivate that faith?
Growing in Faith
A farmer plants his seed when the season and weather are right. Soon plants begin to sprout. With proper care they will grow to be strong and mature, blossoming and producing fruit. So it is with faith. When a person’s heart is right and the seed of faith is planted, this faith must be cared for if it is to grow. What are some ways in which this can be done?
The Bible explains that faith is one of the nine fruits of the holy spirit. (Galatians 5:22, 23) And how does one receive God’s spirit? Jesus said to listeners in his day: “If you, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will the Father in heaven give holy spirit to those asking him!” (Luke 11:13) So ask God for his spirit in prayer! Faith will develop as a natural result of having God’s spirit.
It is also important to develop a close relationship with Jehovah God. That means making a conscientious study of his Word and endeavoring to follow it. The psalmist developed such a longing for God’s Word and declared: “How I do love your law! All day long it is my concern.” (Psalm 119:97) When you are truly concerned about following God’s Word, you begin to take on the attributes of the Creator. God’s spirit begins to bear fruitage in your life. No longer will you be attracted to wrongdoing, but God’s spirit and a desire to maintain a happy relationship with God will turn you away from vile “works of the flesh.”​—Galatians 5:16, 19-21; Psalm 15:1, 2.
As your appreciation for God and the truth expands, you are further moved to share your faith with others. Because “faith is not a possession of all people,” this sharing of God’s truth may expose you to attack or ridicule. (2 Thessalonians 3:2; 2 Peter 3:3, 4) Still, so confident can you be about the basis for your faith that you will be able to declare, as did Paul: “I am not ashamed of the good news; it is, in fact, God’s power for salvation to everyone having faith, to the Jew first and also to the Greek.” (Romans 1:16) What a joy it is when someone responds to this message and the growth cycle begins all over again! God makes such growth possible.​—1 Corinthians 3:5-9.
The Benefits of Faith
How, though, does faith help a person? Jesus Christ pointed to one long-term benefit at John 3:16: “God loved the world so much that he gave his only-begotten Son, in order that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.” This alone is a marvelous reward for having faith. Faith in God’s promise to reward his servants with everlasting life gives you a fresh perspective on life. The trials and problems of life no longer seem quite so important or overwhelming. You are freed from the philosophy “let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we are to die” that dominates this pleasure-mad world. (1 Corinthians 15:32) Even death no longer seems quite so frightening when you have firm faith in a resurrection.​—Hebrews 2:15; Luke 12:4, 5.
Faith also helps one cope with economic stress. “What are we to eat?” and, “What are we to drink?” are real concerns for many today. Jesus, though, exhorted his followers to have faith in God’s ability to provide. If you have such faith, you can “stop being anxious” over such things. (Matthew 6:25-34) Such faith spares you the pains that a pursuit of riches is sure to bring.​—1 Timothy 6:10.
But what if a person has a serious problem and needs direction? People spend millions of dollars on self-help books and professional counseling. While the advice thus found may sometimes be helpful, a Christian’s faith leads him to a far better source of aid. Says James: “So, if any one of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep on asking God, for he gives generously to all and without reproaching; and it will be given him. But let him keep on asking in faith, not doubting at all, for he who doubts is like a wave of the sea driven by the wind and blown about.” (James 1:5, 6) A Christian’s faith is the guarantee that such divine aid will be provided. He has no hesitancy about approaching God in this way, for ‘he has this freeness of speech and an approach with confidence through his faith in [Christ].’​—Ephesians 3:12.
Admittedly, the direction God gives us can at times seem difficult​—perhaps even impossible—​to implement. Abraham, for example, received God’s promise that he and his wife were to have a son. Considering the fact that their reproductive powers were ‘dead,’ attempting to have this child seemed futile. Yet, says Paul: “Although [Abraham] did not grow weak in faith, he considered his own body, now already deadened, as he was about one hundred years old, also the deadness of the womb of Sarah. But because of the promise of God he did not waver in a lack of faith, but became powerful by his faith, giving God glory and being fully convinced that what he had promised he was also able to do.” (Romans 4:19-21) The reward for such faith? The blessing of having a son who would continue the line leading to the Messiah!
While God is not at this time performing such direct miracles, Christians today find that if they ‘do not waver in a lack of faith,’ they, too, can enjoy success when they apply God’s direction. Said Jesus: “All things can be to one if one has faith.”​—Mark 9:23.
Safeguard Your Faith
Faith is therefore the key to enduring these trying times. But we must jealously safeguard it. If we allow our faith to weaken, we can find ourselves without direction in life. We can fall prey to the anxieties and problems that afflict mankind in general. So like Jesus’ disciples, let us continually ask for more faith. (Luke 17:5) Let us regularly study God’s Word and associate with people of like faith. (Romans 10:17) And let us zealously engage in the work Jesus assigned his followers to do, preaching the “good news of the kingdom.”​—Matthew 24:14.
The fact that this work is now being carried on in 203 lands should, in itself, build our faith, for this fact indicates that the prophesied “end” is near! Among these zealous preachers, Jehovah’s Witnesses, we find people manifesting the fruits of God’s spirit. They excel in faith, but also in love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, mildness, and self-control. (Galatians 5:22, 23) They are living testimonies to the value of having faith, for it has enriched their personal lives, family relationships, and above all, their relationship with Jehovah God.
So in answer to Jesus’ question, “When the Son of man arrives, will he really find the faith on the earth?” we can confidently say, Indeed he will! (Luke 18:8) May we prove to be among the many who daily demonstrate the value of a living faith!
[Picture on page 23]
Television and radio waves are invisible. Yet their effects testify to their existence
[Picture on page 24]
Prayer is one powerful means of building faith

