The “Nation” That Feeds Famine-Stricken Millions
 1, 2. (a) What genuine need should be felt by earth’s population? (b) To which people can we look in this regard?
THE billions of earth’s population should be hungering for “food” that will nourish them for life unending here on earth, when the earth is converted into a global paradise. But to whom or where will they turn? The Republic of Israel is not attempting to fulfill the Bible prophecy in Isaiah 27:6 about filling the earth with “produce” for the lasting benefit of mankind.
2 The nation of Israel in the first century of our Common Era lost its commission to benefit all mankind. Thus it was merely to a small remnant of the natural Jews that the Messiah addressed his words: “All authority has been given me in heaven and on the earth. Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit . . . And, look! I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.” (Matthew 28:18-20) But what about 19 centuries later? Who in our time have in mind the fulfillment of Isaiah 27:6? And how are you and your loved ones involved?
 3. Who in our century experienced God’s “rage” mentioned in Isaiah 27:4?
3 Even though we are decades removed from the specific events, we do well to examine briefly certain developments during the years of World War I. At that time Jehovah God had valid reason for feeling “rage” against the nations of Christendom because of their engaging in that blood-spilling conflict. (Compare Isaiah 27:4.) They did that rather than yield their national sovereignties to the Most High God when his Kingdom was set up in the heavens in 1914 in the hands of his glorified Son, Jesus Christ. They added fuel to his rage by persecuting the remnant of spiritual Israel, deliberately hindering these devoted Christian Bible Students from proclaiming freely his established Kingdom. But many of the remnant of spiritual Israel did, in fact, yield to the worldly pressures, thus coming short of their responsibility as chosen people taken out from this worldly system of things. They did not then see the issue of absolute neutrality toward the conflicts of this world, so they came under some bloodguilt, and for a time they merited a degree of God’s “rage” too.
 4. How did God’s “rage” affect his Christian servants, and what lesson might we learn from this?
4 Had you lived back then, how do you think you would have reacted to those wartime pressures? You should consider such things, for by doing so you may firm up your resolve as to what you would do in the face of any future pressures. Back then it might have seemed to be a time to desist from Kingdom proclamation and to lie low. Many tended in that direction, feeling that they should simply wait for their early glorification to be with the enthroned Jesus Christ. (Luke 22:28-30) However, receiving some of Jehovah’s “rage” was a disciplinary experience that was not lost on true Christians of the period, and so it was not fruitless. It strengthened them for the oncoming work of declaring the day of vengeance of our God against the one whom the prophet Isaiah calls “Leviathan” in Isaiah 27:1, where we read:
 5. In modern times, how has Jehovah turned his attention to “Leviathan” mentioned in Isaiah 27:1?
5 “In that day Jehovah, with his hard and great and strong sword, will turn his attention to Leviathan, the gliding serpent, even to Leviathan, the crooked serpent, and he will certainly kill the sea monster that is in the sea.”
Back in ancient times, Jehovah turned his attention to the captors of his people. As we have noted previously, that included the empire of Babylon, as well as Egypt and Assyria. (Isaiah 27:12, 13) Can you see a modern application of the symbolic words at Isaiah 27:1? In the period around World War I, God’s people were not captive to any one nation or empire. But Jehovah did need to give attention to a symbolic Leviathan, namely, Satan the Devil. He glides in a wily manner through the sea of humanity and uses things on earth to endanger or obstruct God’s servants.​—Compare Revelation 17:15.
 6, 7. (a) What in modern times became like “thornbushes and weeds”? (b) What can we expect regarding them in the future?
6 When in the year 1919 the remnant of spiritual Israel enthusiastically resumed their Kingdom preaching, it was the time for Jehovah to say:
“There is no rage that I have. Who will give me thornbushes and weeds in the battle? I will step on such. I will set such on fire at the same time.”​—Isaiah 27:4.
7 After the close of World War I, the League of Nations was set up in rejection of the Kingdom of God by Christ. We can liken this to “thornbushes and weeds” placed in the pathway of Jehovah God, as an obstruction or deterrent. Now the United Nations organization has replaced that League. By the United Nations the various member nations disclose their determination to hold out against the proclaimed Kingdom of Christ and their purpose to preserve their own world sovereignty. In “the war of the great day of God the Almighty” at Har–Magedon, he will figuratively step on all “thornbushes and weeds,” crushing them and finally setting them on fire, as it were, to reduce them to mere ashes. He thus will demonstrate who really is the Universal Sovereign. You can, then, see that even if you were not alive among the anointed Christians back around World War I, you may be affected​—for good or for bad—​in the final results of events paralleling Isaiah 27:1.​—Revelation 16:14-16; 17:1–18:4.
‘Taking Hold of Jehovah’s Stronghold’
 8. On what do many nations today rely?
8 The members of the United Nations are relying on their own strength and trusting in their man-made stronghold. Yet, their confidence in it has not been strong enough to deter them from inventing the most deadly of weapons, the ultimate of war weapons, the nuclear bomb. Likely, fear of reprisal by use of the nuclear bomb is what deters them, not the United Nations.
 9, 10. Why is it wise for us to rely on another “stronghold”?
9 As we noted, though, what really threatens the continued existence of the nations is “the war of the great day of God the Almighty.” What can the nations hope to do against God the Almighty, the One who put the awesome power within the nucleus of each atom of matter? You may well be convinced that the Creator is incomparably more powerful than the nations with all their weapons. Those who appreciate this fact​—and Jehovah’s Witnesses do—​have only one recourse available. That is set forth in the further words of Jehovah:
“Otherwise let him take hold of my stronghold, let him make peace with me; peace let him make with me.” (Isaiah 27:5)
No human agency is the stronghold to which to resort for security or prevention of war on earth, and certainly not the stronghold for the families of the earth to flee to for keeping safe.
10 You likely know that many people today become emotionally involved with debates and movements concerned about nuclear weapons and disarmament. Sadly, that distracts them from the reality that the inevitable war of God the Almighty at Armageddon is what threatens destruction of all the nations. If you appreciate that reality, then the wise course for you involves turning to Jehovah. His “stronghold” is the thing upon which all safety seekers should take hold, namely, his own inexhaustible possession of strength. The entire organization of Satan the Devil will not be able to conquer the individual Christian who has taken hold of that “stronghold.”
11. How can we apply Jesus’ words at Luke 14:31-33 as we take hold of God’s “stronghold”?
11 Jehovah and his armies under the Captain, Jesus Christ, are now, as it were, on the march. While they are yet some distance away, the course that common sense, if not real wisdom, dictates is for a person to send, figuratively speaking, a peace mission ahead and to sue for peace in the face of overwhelming odds. The undefeatable Captain of Jehovah’s hosts counseled such a course when he was down here on earth. (Luke 14:31-33) And if you examine closely what Jesus there said, you will see that he tied in our attitude toward our “belongings.” Whether we live in an advanced and prosperous land or we live in a Third World country where it takes a real struggle to gain financial security, we should scrutinize our outlook. Ask yourself: Am I really putting my reliance on Jehovah’s strength as my stronghold or letting “belongings” take the most prominent place? In this connection, please read Luke 12:15-21.
12. What evidence is there that many today are taking hold of Jehovah’s strength?
12 Around the earth, many thousands of Jehovah’s Witnesses have already turned unreservedly to Jehovah, seeking peace with him. Many are arranging their affairs to devote scores of hours each month to the disciple-making activity. Each one who truly exerts himself in serving Jehovah is in a position to experience the promised “peace of God” that surpasses all human thought and understanding. (Philippians 4:7) While there is still time, they keep helping others to enter into this peaceable arrangement of Jehovah of hosts. What place does such lifesaving work have in your life?
Filling “the Productive Land” with “Produce”
13. What does Isaiah 27:6 indicate could be expected in our time?
13 What was to be the world role of spiritual Israel after its being restored to divine favor following World War I? This is indicated for us in these heartening words of Isaiah 27:6:
“In the coming days Jacob will take root, Israel will put forth blossoms and actually sprout; and they will simply fill the surface of the productive land with produce.”
Examine the reality of those words today. Doing so will give you added reason to become one of God’s people or, if you already are, to become even more firmly resolved to remain among true worshipers no matter what tests or problems arise.
14. How has Isaiah 27:6 found a fulfillment on God’s people?
14 A situation such as prophesied in Isaiah 27:6 has increasingly been found among worshipers of Jehovah since the year 1919, when the first general convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses was held at Cedar Point, Ohio. For example, it was not long after this that the Watch Tower Society began printing its new magazine, The Golden Age, now called Awake! It was as though spiritual Judah was then taking root.
15. What thrilling prospect was presented to true worshipers starting in 1918?
15 Thus in the opening years of liberation and reinstatement in Jehovah’s favor, true Christians began to blossom as “the planting of Jehovah.” (Isaiah 61:3) In 1918, the final year of World War I, the astounding lecture “Millions Now Living May Never Die” was publicly delivered by J. F. Rutherford. With merely a small remnant of spirit-begotten disciples of the reigning King, Jesus Christ, left on earth to undertake the God-ordained work that then devolved upon them, was that an overestimation of matters?
16. (a) How did the remnant react to the prospects before them? (b) What “produce” did they rejoice in, and with what results?
16 How would Jehovah use such Christians to fill the surface of “the productive land with produce”? The remnant of spiritual Israel took the initiative, but what about the “produce” with which the productive land was to be filled? The remnant found the “produce,” which included the good news of Jehovah’s established Kingdom in the hands of Christ, so tasty and nourishing that they wanted to share it with their fellowmen. Jehovah had foretold that the little one would become a thousand and the small one a mighty nation, and this proved to be no miscalculation on God’s part. (Isaiah 60:22) Soon the remnant of spiritual Israel was joined by “a great crowd” of “other sheep” of the Fine Shepherd, Jesus Christ.​—Revelation 7:9-17; John 10:16.
17, 18. What can you attest to regarding ‘filling the surface of the productive land with produce’?
17 You may be aware of the situation as to true Christianity today. The Watch Tower Society now has 94 branches all around the globe. The organized active congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses now number some 48,000, and these are to be found in 203 lands. To the true God goes all the credit for this, and these noteworthy developments stand in vindication of his infallible Word, whereas “the end,” as foretold in Matthew 24:14, is not yet.
18 Yes, there are nearly three million Christians working along with the Watch Tower Society around the globe. These millions are mainly those of Christ’s “other sheep,” who have long been carrying the brunt of the worldwide witnessing work, and ‘the joy of Jehovah has been their strength, or stronghold.’ (Nehemiah 8:10) Hence, each of us today has the opportunity to be well filled spiritually and to participate in ‘filling the surface of the productive land with produce.’
19. What might you enjoy as to “the productive land,” and how do you feel about that?
19 We can be sure that Jehovah will never permit the present “produce” of “the productive land,” the field of activity of his Witnesses, to be destroyed. The work of his preaching Witnesses will never have been done in vain! The spiritual fruit, or “produce,” as cultivated by true Christians is for the feeding of all who want to avail themselves of it. This will include, in time, the billions of the human dead that are to be resurrected under the Millennial Reign of Jesus Christ. Imagine what that may mean for you in the future! In time, many natural Israelites of the past will be resurrected. Some of them may have been involved in the initial fulfillment of the prophecy in Isaiah chapter 27. Would it not be fascinating for you to be alive then, enabling you to explain how you participated in the larger, present-day ‘filling of the productive land with produce’?​—Compare Revelation 22:2, 3.
The Course of “Leviathan” Brought to an End
20. What lies ahead for “Leviathan,” and with what result respecting God’s sovereignty?
20 Then the figurative Egypt, the present wicked system over which Satan the Devil has dominated as its god, will not exist. Jehovah will have turned his attention to the symbolic Leviathan, the gliding, crooked serpent that is in the midst of the sea of humanity. He and the nations, and even unions of nations, will be gone. He will not be around as a free, active corrupter of mankind for whom Jesus Christ died. (Isaiah 27:1) Yes, Satan the Devil will be abyssed throughout the Thousand Year Reign of Jesus Christ, the Son of David and the rightful Heir of the Kingdom. The 144,000 spiritual Israelites will be joint heirs in heaven with him, the figurative Lion of the tribe of Judah. (Romans 8:16, 17; Revelation 5:5, 9, 10; 7:1-4) Jehovah God the Most High will have been vindicated forever as the Sovereign Lord of the universe. Jehovah’s universal organization in heaven and on earth will joyously experience lasting peace and harmony. To endless time, even forevermore, Jehovah will rejoice over his unified universal organization.
Can You Recall?
□ Why did true Christians feel Jehovah’s “rage” earlier in this century, and what can we learn from this experience?
□ In contrast to the nations, how can we ‘take hold of Jehovah as our stronghold’? (Isaiah 27:5)
□ How has “the productive land” been filled with “produce” in our time? (Isaiah 27:6)
□ What future fulfillment of Isaiah 27:1 can we confidently expect?
[Picture on page 17]
Some hope that humans will resolve the nuclear threat, but wise ones of all nations are ‘taking hold of Jehovah’s stronghold’
[Pictures on page 18]
The increase in spiritually well-fed Christians is reflected in the expansion of branches of the Watch Tower Society
Spain
Brazil
Canada

