Announcements
PRISONERS SECURE FREEDOM WITH HELP—Rom. 8:21, NW.
Efforts of men to secure real freedom for themselves have met with limited success. However, Jehovah God is now assembling the nucleus of an incoming new world society of freemen in the truest sense. He uses his witnesses to preach a message of liberation to all men of good will, calling this old world’s prisoners to ‘come forth’. (Isa. 49:9) During September Jehovah’s witnesses will offer to the public the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures and a bound book, on a contribution of only $2. All persons are invited to participate in this work of helping prisoners secure freedom by spreading vital knowledge. Also, if you would like to have a small tract that will enable you to help honest persons break the shackles of false religion’s grip, send for a packet of tract No. 2, “Hell Fire—Bible Truth or Pagan Scare?” The cost of 200 is only 25c.
1953 CONVENTION REPORT OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
Did you attend the New World Society Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses at Yankee Stadium, New York city? Did you hear about it? Or read about it in your local newspaper? Well, why not write for the complete report on that convention and get firsthand all the important details of the assembly? This report of 96 pages will contain many pictures of the various features and departments of the convention. It will have something to say about the organization of Jehovah’s witnesses and the world-wide activity of the Watchtower Society. To be sure you receive a copy of the report, send your order immediately. Specify clearly the number of copies of the 1953 Convention Report of Jehovah’s Witnesses that you want and enclose a remittance of 25 cents a copy. Type or print your name and address plainly. If your address should change between now and October 1, please be sure to advise us so that we know where to send your report. Write today!
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of September 13: Living Now as a New World Society, ¶1-18.
Week of September 20: Living Now as a New World Society, ¶19-33.
Week of September 27: Living Now as a New World Society, ¶34-38; also, “Make Sure of All Things” and Resolution.

