From Our Readers
Hospice Care—What Is the Goal? (July 2011)  As a social welfare assistant, I trained at a hospice, and I can personally verify that what you say in the July 2011 Awake! is true. Facilities that are fully prepared to care for the terminally ill are necessary in the world in which we live. I eagerly await God’s government to come, when no one will say, “I am sick,” and God will dry the tears from our eyes.—Isaiah 33:24; Revelation 21:3, 4.
M. R., Italy
I was a little disappointed and dismayed to see “adult diapers” mentioned in the article. The term is very demeaning to anyone who is in the situation of having to wear protective underwear. Not one of the commercial packages containing “protective helps” uses the word diaper.
Name withheld, United States
“Awake!” responds: Thank you for bringing this point to our attention. Our heart goes out to anyone who is dealing with serious health problems, and we certainly do not want to add to a person’s suffering by using terms that some may consider to be demeaning. We apologize for any distress this may have caused our readers.
Young People Ask . . . What Should I Know About Social Networking? (July 2011)  Thank you for this article. I am 26 years old. I had been planning to open a [social networking] account, not because I wanted to have more friends, but because many were encouraging me to do so. This article helped me a lot. You can gain friends without belonging to a social networking site.
M. P., Philippines
I expected the article to present a negative view of social networking. But the article was balanced. It looked at the positive and negative aspects and provided advice on how we can protect ourselves from the potential dangers of social networks. It impressed on my mind the need to use caution when posting personal information on the Internet.
C. W., United States
Secrets of Family Success (October 2009)  This special issue has been a great help to our family. I especially enjoyed the boxes “Try this exercise” that were provided with each of the seven secrets. The specific suggestions that were offered have already been put to use in my family.
H. H., Korea
For Family Review  Thank you very much for this regular feature. Our six-year-old daughter enjoys the Children’s Picture Search and especially likes coloring the pictures. These articles accentuate the parents’ role in training their children from a very early age. The work that you are doing for the little ones is invaluable.
M. P., Poland

