Part 10​—Conducting Progressive Bible Studies
Training Students in the House-to-House Ministry
1 When the elders determine that a Bible student qualifies as an unbaptized publisher, he may begin to share with the congregation in the public preaching work. (See Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will, pp. 79-81.) How can we help the student to meet the challenge of preaching from house to house?
2 Preparing Together: There is no substitute for good preparation. Show the student where he can find suggested presentations in Our Kingdom Ministry and the Reasoning book, and help him select a simple approach that is practical for the local territory. From the start, encourage him to feature the Bible in his ministry.​—2 Tim. 4:2.
3 Practice sessions are very beneficial for a new publisher. As the student rehearses the presentation, show him how to handle tactfully the responses that are common in the territory. (Col. 4:6) Assure him that Christian ministers do not need to know the answer to every question that a householder might raise. Often it is best to handle such questions by offering to do research and to return to discuss the matter further.​—Prov. 15:28.
4 Preaching Together: The first time the student shares in the house-to-house ministry, let him observe as you give the presentation that the two of you prepared together. Then get him involved. In some cases, it may be best to have the new publisher give only part of the presentation, such as reading and commenting on a scripture. Take into consideration the personality and abilities of the student. (Phil. 4:5) Be generous in giving commendation as you progressively train him in the various aspects of the preaching work.
5 It is important to help a new publisher establish a regular schedule for participating in the ministry, doing so weekly if possible. (Phil. 3:16) Make definite arrangements to work together in service, and encourage him to work with other zealous ones also. Their example and association will help him to develop skill and find joy in preaching from house to house.

