Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting June 13
Song 198
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Use the suggestions on page 4 (if appropriate for your territory) to demonstrate how to offer the June 15 Watchtower and the June 22 Awake! Other realistic presentations may be used. In one of the presentations, demonstrate offering the magazines in some informal setting.
15 min: Help Others to Become Unbaptized Publishers. Talk and audience discussion by an elder based on Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will, pages 79-81. Discuss the arrangement for determining whether a Bible student meets the Scriptural requirements for sharing in field service with the congregation. Next week we will consider how we can train Bible students who qualify as unbaptized publishers to begin participating in the house-to-house ministry.
20 min: “Preaching Helps Us to Endure.”a Invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures as time permits.
Song 149 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 20
Song 206
10 min: Local announcements. Review key points from the July 2003 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 4. Explain how publishers can obtain literature in a foreign language. Discuss how this information applies to the local territory. Any request for foreign-language items should be made through the literature servant, even if it is for just a single item, so that the needed literature can be obtained without unnecessary delay.
15 min: God’s Word Exerts Power. (Heb. 4:12) Talk based on the November 15, 2003, Watchtower, page 11, paragraphs 13-17. Relate experiences showing how Bible instruction can move people to make changes in their way of life. (w00 1/1 pp. 3-5) Encourage all to make good use of the Bible in all features of the ministry.
20 min: “Conducting Progressive Bible Studies​—Part 10.”b Include a demonstration showing a practice session in progress. As the student rehearses a presentation, the conductor, who is playing the role of the householder, gives a common objection and, when the student is unsure of what to say, explains how it might be handled. In addition, arrange in advance for one or two to comment on the training they received when they began sharing in the house-to-house ministry.
Song 208 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 27
Song 113
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for June. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Using the suggested presentations on page 4 (if appropriate for your territory), demonstrate how to present either the July 1 Watchtower or the July 8 Awake! Another realistic presentation may be used. After the demonstration, restate the opening comments that were used to arouse the householder’s interest.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Offering the Worship God book in July and August. Talk and audience discussion. Review the following points from “How to Use Sample Presentations,” found on page 8 of the January 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry: (1) We will usually be more effective if we put presentations in our own words. (2) We must use good judgment and adapt our presentations according to what is acceptable locally. (3) We need to take into account the background and thinking of the people in our territory. (4) We should carefully read the chapter that we plan to feature and look for points that may stir interest. (5) We are not limited to using only the approaches outlined in the sample presentations. Discuss presentations that can be used to offer the Worship God book. You may use the sample presentations that appear on page 5 of the January 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, adapt those presentations according to the customs and thinking of people in the territory, or use other presentations that are effective. Demonstrate two or three presentations.
Song 196 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 4
Song 70
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Are You Benefiting From a Family Schedule? Review the suggestions in the May 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, and invite the audience to comment on the efforts they have made to apply the suggestions and on the benefits they have received from doing so.
20 min: “Witnessing Effectively in Public Places.”c Make application to the local territory. Remind publishers to use the Please Follow Up (S-43) form when appropriate.​—See the February 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry, p. 6.
Song 120 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

