Announcements
● The secretary will see to it that Memorial invitations are ordered now so that your congregation will receive them well in advance of the Memorial celebration Thursday, March 23, 1978. Invitations may be ordered in lots of 250, 500 and 1,000, using the special order blank provided for ordering Memorial invitations. Please do not remit with your order. The Memorial invitations will be charged to your congregation’s literature account. Payment for invitations should be included with the amount of money remitted for literature. Please do not list payment separately on Remittance form. Make sure that your congregation number is shown on the order form.
● Literature offer for January: Watchtower subscription (with any 384- or 416-page book free to new subscribers) for $2.00; or subscriptions for both Watchtower and Awake! (with two 384- or 416-page books free to new subscribers) for $4.00. A half-year subscription with a pocket-size book may be offered for $1.25. If the subscription is not accepted, a pocket-size book along with two magazines may be offered for 45c. February and March: Special offer of three books for 60c.
● From January through April, the 384- and 416-page books will be available to publishers for use in field service for 15c each. Congregations may request 30c credit for each of these books. (Pioneers, at regular rate.) With new one-year subscriptions obtained during January and April, a 384- or 416-page book will be given free; publishers are requested to remit $1.85. Credit for books taken by pioneers will be requested in the regular manner. For 384- or 416-page books taken by publishers, request credit by putting on Remittance and Credit Request form a line under “Other items” saying, “384- and 416-page books to publishers during campaign,” and then state the total number for the month.
● At circuit assemblies having the new program, starting on February 5, 1978, district overseers will give the public talk “Have Faith in the Good News.” Starting in March, circuit overseers will give a public talk with the theme: “How Should You Serve God?”
● A special public talk will be held on March 26, 1978, in all congregations. The subject: “The True Religion​—How to Identify It.” In due time a manuscript (or outline) will be sent to each congregation.
● New Publications Available:
God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good​—French
Is This Life All There Is?​—Greek, Hungarian, Zulu
Your Youth​—Getting the Best out of It—​Afrikaans, French
Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Question of Blood​—Dutch, German
“Singing and Accompanying Yourselves with Music in Your Hearts” Deluxe edition​—French

