Presenting the Good News​—By Being Resourceful
1 There is much to be learned when we study the example of Jesus Christ. Jesus taught us to follow his example in ‘letting our light shine.’ (Matt. 5:14-16) To achieve this in an effective way we must be resourceful.
2 When a sister goes to a laundromat, could she take her Bible, some literature and​—particularly this month—​some subscription blanks? Could it be that with a little initiative on her part she could strike up a conversation on world conditions, a recent local happening or something that someone else says? Those who use public transportation, who regularly visit a doctor’s office or who otherwise are in contact with people, can be prepared to take advantage of these situations too.
3 For example, you might be reading the January 1, 1978, Watchtower in the presence of a co-worker during your lunch break and comment on how peoples’ attitudes toward one another have changed in recent years. Then you might ask if your co-worker feels that the lowering of moral standards is a contributing factor. After getting his response, you could explain that the reason you asked was that you were just reading an article that shows how an accused murderer of a number of people got his “inspiration” from pornographic literature. Then you could call his attention to the scripture in the panel in the middle of page three, Romans 12:9, 10. Pursue the conversation and, if time and circumstances favor it, you could offer the subscription.
4 In our regular field activity from house to house this month, we can show resourcefulness. For example, a brother in house-to-house witnessing met a woman who said: “I am Greek. Can’t speak English.” He smiled, showed her the second page of The Watchtower where it states that it is published in Greek. He briefly stated with meaningful gestures that she could get it regularly in the mail. She subscribed.
5 Another brother met a woman at the door who said that she did not have much time. He stated, “Well, maybe we can get a chance to speak with you at length the next time we come. We are showing people from the Bible that the Kingdom is a righteous government under Jesus Christ that will soon bring peace to people of all races and nations. Before leaving I did want to mention that you can get The Watchtower, which explains these things in detail. It comes out twice a month.” This took only a minute and a half, but she subscribed.
6 At times, discerning what a particular situation calls for can make the difference between success and failure. (Prov. 25:11) Each of us should meditate regularly on situations that confront us. Deciding how we can best take advantage of these situations with the goal of helping others get salvation is what is involved in our being resourceful in presenting the good news.​—1 Cor. 9:19-23.

