Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 1
25 min: Song 16. Announcements. Benefits from a year’s subscription to The Watchtower. Speaker to assign specific points in advance. Have brothers prepare one- to two-minute comment with view to showing householders value of The Watchtower​—what it brought to its readers during the year 1977. Use some of suggested points below, others if desired.
(1) How Bible is true and transmitted faithfully to us: w77 2/1 p. 92 ¶ 2, 3 w77 3/15 p. 189 ¶ 6; w77 4/1 p. 216 ¶ 5, 6.
(2) Verse-by-verse discussion of Bible book. (Make comments about value of having verse-by-verse, contextual study of book. Gives understanding of what writer really meant; can follow argument and get main idea of book. Then call for comments as examples.) Ecclesiastes: w77 3/15 p. 186 ¶ 2; w77 6/15 p. 378 ¶ 1-3.
(3) Everyday life, family problems, and so forth. Value of truth, honesty, morality: w77 10/15 pp. 621-623; dealing with depression; w77 5/1 p. 259; marriage: w77 3/15 p. 172; alcoholism: w77 8/15 p. 483.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Being Resourceful.” Handle by discussion with audience, assisting the brothers to make local application of the material. Stimulate discussion on the following points:
(1) To be effective in ‘letting our light shine,’ what must we learn to be? (par. 1) What does it mean to be resourceful?
(2) Experiences had due to taking advantage of situations coming up during daily routines. (Select meaningful experiences in advance in accord with situations like those mentioned in paragraph two.)
(3) Have some from their seats tell how they have started conversations with neighbors, co-workers or schoolmates.
(4) Remind brothers that they can offer a half-year subscription to The Watchtower along with the Truth book or other pocket-size book, for $1.25.
15 min: Discuss Branch Letter. Comment on local congregation’s activity in recent months, warmly commending and encouraging the brothers. Song 27 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 8
20 min: Song 26. Announcements, including accounts report. Women Who Feared Jehovah. (Speaker give brief introduction, then ask questions, discuss scriptures cited. Use what material you can in time allotted.)
While men generally have duties that bring them more prominently before the congregation, women can, in eyes of God and Christ, be just as beloved if they serve well in ways that God has provided. Many different services open to them. Consider Anna. (Luke 2:36-38) How was she in “constant” attendance at temple? (She evidently did not stay there day and night, but was never absent at appropriate or usual times for public worship, and went privately at other times.) What was she doing? (Comment that Israelites and proselytes from all parts of earth, as well as being of all ages and walks of life, came to worship. Then read Luke 2:38 for answer.)
Then, there was Lydia of Philippi. (Acts 16:13-15) What traits were outstanding in Lydia? Entertain audience comment on Lydia’s personality and zeal for true worship, her humility, desire and readiness to learn; what she did to promote the spread of the good news by her hospitality to those proclaiming it.
Dorcas of Joppa was commended as faithful. (Acts 9:36-39) What valuable contribution did she make to Christian congregation?
Outstanding also was Priscilla, wife of Aquila. (Use material in Aid, p. 1343, particularly reading scriptures cited and entertaining audience comment on her valuable activities and zeal.) Many sisters today engage in helping others. Then, let audience comment on things that sisters, young and old, can do to be loved by God and congregation as those women were.
20 min: Review the articles “New Literature Rates” and “Special Combination Book Offer.” Questions and answers.
20 min: Demonstrations and interviews on practical ways parents can get to know their children better: (1) Father invites son to assist him in repairing toaster. As they work, father tactfully draws out son on his views toward field service and meetings. Discussion is casual with friendly atmosphere. Son not put on spot with questions that are too pointed. Closer bond results. (2) Mother asks daughter if she would like to accompany her in field service. Cheerful conversation as they walk from door to door. Daughter is asked how things are going at school. Pauses at first, hesitant, but then slowly reveals she was offered drugs by a boy she likes. Didn’t know what to do, tempted to accept. Mother maintains calm composure. Cheerfully suggests that later they can talk about it further. Daughter pleased. (3) As time permits, interview several teen-agers about how they feel about school, congregation, and other matters pertinent to area. Song 27 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 15
18 min: Song 30. Announcements. Question-and-answer coverage of article “All Day Long I Will Bless You.” Have brothers open Bibles to Psalm 145. Read verses covered by paragraph before asking question on paragraph. Get local application of points.
22 min: “Love One Another Intensely from the Heart.” Talk and discussion. What sisters and younger ones can do. If any have been helped as article mentions, call on them to recount how they were helped and to express appreciation they have. (Not necessary to mention names.)
20 min: Field experiences in local territory. Have at least two publishers prepared in advance. Draw out audience on joys experienced by those who engage in a variety of features of service. Also discuss field situations that publishers encounter such as the following: Witnessing in high crime areas; making time count in covering rural areas; how to contact householders rarely at home; calling on people in areas where permission needed, such as trailer courts, military bases, nursing homes, and so forth. What to do if police ask you to leave. Song 45 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 22
18 min: Song 82. Announcements. “What Did the Wise Man Mean?” (w77 8/1 pp. 469, 470.) Talk and discussion, using scriptures. Give examples of how one may be ‘overly righteous.’ Why such course unwise: Making big issues over matters of strictly human procedure that are not set forth in Scriptures. More concern over rules than doing what is merciful and loving. (Rom. 14:1-4, 10) Practicing self-denial to harm of one’s health. Should not be overly critical of others, meddling in their problems.​—1 John 1:8.
25 min: Talk and discussion on article: “Make Wise Use of Your Elders.” Highlight following scriptures: 1 Cor. 3:21-23; Eph. 4:8, 11; Jas. 5:13-16. Ask audience: Why should even the meekest congregation member not hesitate to approach an elder for help? How should elders feel toward the flock? (Belongs to Jehovah, in need of tender care, and a joy to work in their interests.) How can we best take advantage of their experience? (In field service, with personal problems and so forth. Include other appropriate examples.)
17 min: Talk on article in October 1, 1977, Watchtower: “Do Not Become ‘Enraged Against Jehovah.’” Involve audience. Apply the following scriptures and points in your discussion: What kind of person becomes enraged against Jehovah? (Prov. 19:3) Why God cannot be blamed for our problems. (Eccl. 9:11) If one misses meetings due to being offended by another, what is he really saying? To whom is disloyalty being shown when congregation is rejected? (Ps. 119:165) Necessary to safeguard heart and keep balance. (Prov. 4:23; 1 Pet. 1:13) Song 15 and prayer.

