“All Day Long I Will Bless You”
1 Those inside and outside the Christian congregation are in need of spiritual encouragement. Family members need it. Older brothers and sisters as well as those new in the truth need it. Those who are depressed or facing other problems need it. (1 Thess. 5:14, 15) You can prove to be a blessing to many of them. How? By being a person who makes opportunities to talk to them about spiritual matters.
2 At Psalm 145:2 King David said to Jehovah: “All day long I will bless you.” How refreshing this must have been to other spiritually-minded persons who associated with David. David found that he had much to talk about because as verse three of this Psalm states: “Jehovah is great and very much to be praised, and his greatness is unsearchable.” Are not all who grow in appreciation of Jehovah’s greatness moved to feel the same way?
3 How does a person acquire such heart appreciation for Jehovah? Psalm 145:5 answers when David states: “The glorious splendor of your dignity and the matters of your wonderful works I will make my concern.” Yes, to be moved to praise Jehovah “all day long,” a person must take time to meditate on Jehovah’s works of creation. Making time to study regularly Jehovah’s “wonderful works” of the past, described in the Bible, will also enhance our heart appreciation. Constantly including expressions of praise in our prayers to Jehovah will further warm our hearts toward him. However, care must be exercised that time-consuming things or those that could endanger our spirituality, such as the excessive watching of television, are not allowed to interfere. It is good to remember that what we talk about is a good reflection of what is in our heart. A good spiritual input obviously will make us a blessing to one another.​—Luke 6:45.
4 As we grow in appreciation of Jehovah’s marvelous qualities, including his goodness, we will find ourselves ‘bubbling over’ about him, in accord with Psalm 145:7. No one will have to urge us to speak about spiritual matters to those inside or outside the Christian congregation. We will praise Jehovah on every appropriate occasion because our hearts will be full of deep-rooted feeling for Jehovah due to our knowledge and appreciation of him and his Son.​—Col. 2:6, 7.
BENEFITS
5 What will result if we are generous in our expressions of praise about Jehovah? Those in our family will be encouraged and strengthened. Other brothers and sisters to whom we speak will be incited to “love and fine works.” (Heb. 10:24, 25) Those outside the Christian congregation to whom we give a witness can be motivated to “look hopefully” to Jehovah due to developing faith in him. (Ps. 145:15) All who listen can, therefore, be protected from the frustrating economic problems, unwholesome recreational activity and other pressures that can weaken our faith and cause us to lose sight of our relationship with Jehovah.​—Prov. 18:10.
6 In the family arrangement parents who regularly discuss spiritual matters with their children will help them learn to love Jehovah. By responding to the spiritual needs of others in the congregation, speaking “consolingly to the depressed souls,” we will benefit our Christian brothers. And we should seek opportunities to give a witness on every occasion, conversing with people about Jehovah and his promises, thus benefiting many more in the field.
7 The person with deep appreciation for Jehovah looks for opportunities to “bless” him. He has something in his heart he wants to tell. (Ps. 40:8-10) We are richly blessed and are able to be a blessing to others when we become servants, who, like King David, desire to bless Jehovah “all day long.”

