Service Meetings for September
Week Starting September 7
Song 84
15 min: Local announcements and pertinent Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Discuss the article “Can the Interest Be Rekindled?” and give brief demonstration of how such a call may be made.
15 min: “Praise the God of Creation.” Question-and-answer coverage of article. Arrange in advance for exemplary youths to relate experiences from publications cited in paragraph 4, and another publisher can relate experience mentioned in paragraph 5. Emphasize need to use discernment in offering this valuable publication.
15 min: “Presentations That Stimulate Interest.” Discuss with audience how to implement the suggestions in your local territory. Arrange for two or three realistic, well-​prepared demonstrations.
Song 96 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 14
Song 79
10 min: Local announcements. Include accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Commend congregation for generous support of local needs as well as Society’s worldwide work. As time allows, call for prepared experiences related to offering the Creation book.
20 min: “Safeguarding Your Children From Misuse of Blood.” Elder gives talk on paragraphs 1-11. Make clear the reasoning behind the conclusion that parents’ agreeing to have a physician treat their child under the circumstances stated in paragraphs 5-7 need not be viewed as a compromise.
15 min: “Be Sure to Call Back.” Question-and-answer discussion. Feature a well-​prepared demonstration covering information considered in paragraph 6. Highlight need to call back on interested persons contacted earlier in month.
Song 10 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 21
Song 125
 5 min: Local announcements. Relate a brief local field experience or mention talking points that could be used this week in field service.
15 min: “Safeguarding Your Children From Misuse of Blood.” Question-and-answer discussion of paragraphs 12-28. Focus on answers to questions appearing in paragraphs 12 and 20. Emphasize that advance preparation by parents in getting medical care for their child is often the key to success in avoiding a transfusion.
15 min: “Studying The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived.” Questions and answers. Build enthusiasm for study in this book to begin week of October 12.
10 min: Reviewing the Congregation’s Activity. Using the figures on the front of the Congregation Analysis Report (S-10) that was sent to the Society earlier in the month, presiding overseer and service overseer discuss highlights of the congregation’s activity for the past year. Warmly commend publishers and pioneers for their self-​sacrificing efforts in the service and their faithfulness in meeting attendance. Specifically mention areas where they have excelled. Comparisons can be made of the activity in past years if the reports are in the file. Also, point out areas in which improvement can be made during the 1993 service year.
Song 43 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 28
Song 51
15 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Announce which magazines are available for use in field service, and suggest one or two talking points that should have local appeal. Demonstrate how current magazines can be offered using a Scriptural presentation, such as one of those outlined in the article at the top of the back page. Remind all to bring personal copy of Greatest Man book to Service Meeting next week.
15 min: “Baptism,” Reasoning book, pages 54-8. Introductory talk based on “Definition.” Demonstrate how an elder might talk with one who has held back from baptism. Highlight information on page 54. Emphasize importance of making dedication and symbolizing it by water baptism. Speaker concludes by briefly considering information on baptism with holy spirit, baptism for the dead, and baptism with fire.
15 min: Feature Magazines During October. Brief talk highlighting value of Awake! and The Watchtower. Publishers should read new issues promptly so as to speak with enthusiasm when recommending them to others. Should be sure a person is genuinely interested before offering subscription. Demonstrate how publisher may offer magazine and arrange to return with next issue, thus starting magazine route first.
Song 48 and concluding prayer.

