Studying The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived
1 During the week of October 12, we will begin studying The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived in our Congregation Book Studies. What a joy it will be to review the life and ministry of Jesus Christ! Since the book is designed somewhat differently from other books we have studied, a few guidelines will be helpful.
2 The book has no page numbers, so the schedule published in Our Kingdom Ministry will list the chapters to be studied, usually three or four each week. Chapters 35, 111, and 116 are longer and will be divided into two studies each. After having a qualified brother read an entire chapter (or an entire subheading, as in chapters 35, 111, and 116), the study conductor will ask the questions at the end of the chapter that correspond to the chapter or portion just read. The answers do not always follow progressively in the chapter. Brief and pointed comments should be based on material in the lesson.
3 After that, as time allows, all scriptures cited at the end of the chapter should be read. Longer scripture citations may be divided into smaller portions in order to allow various publishers to share in the reading, and then comments can be given on what was read. Pointed questions prepared by the conductor will help to draw out meaningful comments that show how the scriptures that were read relate to what has been highlighted in the book. All questions and comments should help those attending to focus attention on Jesus Christ, his life course, and his teachings.
4 The Greatest Man book considers the life of Jesus in chronological order. Visualizing events and fixing in mind where they occurred can be a real help to remembering them. Therefore, be sure to consider the colorful illustrations and make frequent reference to the map that appears in the beginning of the book, following the introduction.
5 The introduction of the book will be considered the first week. After reading all the paragraphs under the subheading, the conductor will ask appropriate questions that he has prepared. This initial consideration will set the stage for the studies to follow during the coming year. The degree of success in covering the material will depend to a great extent on the preparation of all who attend. The conductor especially should be well prepared each week so as to help the group become well acquainted with the greatest man who ever lived, our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.

