Be Well Prepared for Teaching
 1. Why should we focus on building appreciation when conducting a Bible study?
1 When we are conducting a Bible study, we must be well prepared if we are to move the student to serve Jehovah. We must make our efforts count by building appreciation for Bible truth. This will in turn motivate the student. (Deut. 6:5; Prov. 4:23; 1 Cor. 9:26) Just how may we do this?
 2. What role does prayer play in good preparation?
2 Prayerful Preparation: Since it is Jehovah who makes the seed of truth grow in the student’s heart, it is appropriate that we begin preparing for the study by praying specifically for the student and his particular needs. (1 Cor. 3:6; Jas. 1:5) Such prayer may also assist us in determining how we can further help to fill his heart “with the accurate knowledge” of Jehovah’s will.​—Col. 1:9, 10.
 3. How may we prepare with the student in mind?
3 Consider the Student: Jesus knew that effective teaching involves taking into consideration the audience. On at least two occasions, Jesus was asked the same question: “By doing what shall I inherit everlasting life?” Each time when answering, he used a different approach. (Luke 10:25-28; 18:18-20) We should have the student in mind as we prepare. Which of the cited scriptures will we read with him? How much material will we endeavor to cover? What points in the lesson might the student find difficult to understand or to accept? If we can anticipate some of the questions that might be raised, we will be better prepared to respond effectively.
 4. What does good preparation include?
4 Review the Material: No matter how many times we have studied the material in the past, it will be the first time we study it with the student. If we are to reach his heart, good preparation for each study is vital. This means doing what we encourage our student to do. Review the material, including the cited scriptures, with the student in mind, and perhaps underline key points.​—Rom. 2:21, 22.
 5. How may we imitate Jehovah?
5 Jehovah is keenly interested in the progress of each Bible student. (2 Pet. 3:9) By taking time to prepare for each Bible study, we demonstrate the same loving concern.

