Our Ministry​—A Reflection of Our Love for God
 1. What did love for God move Jesus to do?
1 Love moved Jesus to carry out his ministry. Every aspect of Jesus’ ministry is an undeniable testimony of his love for Jehovah. Jesus said: “In order for the world to know that I love the Father, even as the Father has given me commandment to do, so I am doing.” (John 14:31) As footstep followers of Jesus, we also have the privilege of reflecting our deep love for God in our ministry.​—Matt. 22:37; Eph. 5:1, 2.
 2. How does love for Jehovah affect our ministry?
2 “Let Your Name Be Sanctified”: When we zealously take advantage of every opportunity to speak to others about Jehovah and his Kingdom arrangement, we show our love for God and, in effect, we are contributing to the sanctification of his name. (Ps. 83:18; Ezek. 36:23; Matt. 6:9) As was true of Jesus’ ministry, our ministry is an ongoing reflection of our sincere desire for Jehovah’s name to be sanctified and for his will to be done.​—Matt. 26:39.
 3. In what way does our love for Jehovah help us to overcome obstacles?
3 Love Moves Us to Overcome Obstacles: Love for Jehovah transcends all barriers. (1 Cor. 13:4, 7) Jesus faced a number of circumstances in life that could have deterred him from carrying out his ministry. However, when he encountered obstacles, his profound love and his desire to do Jehovah’s will enabled him to prevail. (Mark 3:21; 1 Pet. 2:18-23) We too face many challenges, which our love for God can help us to overcome. By adhering closely to the model set by Christ, we may feel confident and undeterred in fulfilling our ministry. Although family opposition, failing health, advanced age, or apathy on the part of people in general may affect us, it does not stop us from showing our love for Jehovah by carrying out our ministry as effectively as possible.
 4. What privilege does our love for Jehovah afford us?
4 Love is powerful, and we are blessed to have the ability to reflect our whole-souled love of God in our ministry. (1 Cor. 13:13) As we swiftly approach the time when Jehovah’s name will be sanctified once and for all, may our ‘love abound yet more and more.’​—Phil. 1:9; Matt. 22:36-38.

