Filling Colombia with the Knowledge of Jehovah
LIKE her Spanish-American neighbors, Colombia is a land of contrasts. Or, as some prefer to express it, there are two Colombias, the urban and the rural. While much of the country remains out of tune with this twentieth century, her large, mushrooming cities identify themselves with modern cities the world over. Bogotá, the capital, because of her numerous universities and cultural activities, has long been known as “the Athens of South America.” Contrastingly, though, in the rural provinces of Córdoba and La Guajira, 60 to 80 percent of the populace is illiterate.
Not many years ago, the Christian witnesses of Jehovah were virtually unknown in this predominantly Roman Catholic land. In 1942 just two native Colombians actively engaged in the Bible educational work that today readily identifies Jehovah’s Witnesses everywhere. In comparison, in the enlarged Colombian field of today there are 16,286 of “God’s fellow workers.” (1 Cor. 3:9) Outstanding is the fact that 8,902 of these Witnesses were baptized during the last three years alone.
COLOMBIANS TURN TO THE BIBLE
Interest in Bible reading has increased noticeably since Pope John XXIII convoked the Second Vatican Council in 1962. To meet the demand for Bible knowledge, last year alone the Colombian branch office of the Watch Tower Society shipped out 351,764 Bibles and Bible study aid books. Twenty years ago the year’s total was a mere 7,815.
But what prompts so many people to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Christian witnesses? As the following experiences reveal, the reasons are varied. For example, though in bondage to false religion, many are very sincere in their religious devotion. ‘What they are unknowingly giving godly devotion to, this Jehovah’s Witnesses are publishing to them,’ just as the apostle Paul did.​—Acts 17:23.
In imitation of Paul, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses was speaking the good news from house to house, and in the same block, but going in the opposite direction, was a Catholic woman collecting money for her church. When they met on the same doorstep, both were invited in. Although the householder manifested no interest in the Kingdom message, the church lady did. She accepted a copy of the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life, and a study was started with her that very week. Now, as a dedicated servant of Jehovah God, she still goes from house to house, but with an entirely different motive. She is now fully aware of the One to whom she renders sacred service.​—Matt. 4:10.
While many Colombians today have more in a material way than their parents ever had, for many others life remains basically a hand-to-mouth existence. Seeking to alleviate the sufferings of their underprivileged countrymen, many compassionate Colombians devote themselves to social work. To such lovers of justice, the message of God’s kingdom often appeals.
Here is a case in point. A nun in the religious community “Daughters of Mary the Savior” of San Juan, Costa Rica, dedicated six years to the study of philosophy and critical interpretation of the Sacred Scriptures. But she confesses:
“I did not find God in the convent. The selfishness, the spirit of competition, the meaningless materialistic activities that were all a part of convent life did not correspond to the sublime, desirable life I thought should result from serving God. My conclusions were that there was no God, hence the Bible was the product of men.
“Returning to my home in Medellín, Colombia, I soon became concerned about Colombian social problems. I studied native groups in the province of Chocó for a year and then decided to join company with the leftist movements. But after eight months of dialogue with several of their leaders, I came to appreciate that their predominant interest was personal advancement and prestige. Unsuccessful in finding substance and quality in life, I decided to leave the country in pursuit of money.
“Arriving in Bogotá to prepare for my trip, I came in contact with one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and a friendship developed between us. Once when visiting her, I agreed to accompany her on some Bible studies she had near her home in the country. Among such simple folk I was surprised to find such an ability to understand and apply the Bible so fitly in every aspect of life. I asked myself, ‘Was the Bible divinely inspired after all?’
“When I returned to Bogotá, my first impulse was to look up the Witnesses. The answers they showed me in the Bible convinced me that they are preaching the Word of God and, therefore, the truth.”
Now, as a dedicated, baptized servant of Jehovah, this former nun happily proclaims God’s kingdom as the only solution to social injustice.
YOUTHS RESPOND
Less than four years ago, a tall, black American hippie living in Cali, Colombia, held the opinion that Jehovah’s Witnesses were too calm in their attitude toward the world’s injustices. The first time he accompanied his girl companion to a Bible study with a Witness missionary, his attitude was like that of a watchdog. However, he mellowed when he realized that what he was hearing was the only realistic remedy for world conditions. He and his girl companion got married, and, within ten months of their first study, were baptized.
These new Witnesses wasted no time in telling fellow hippies what they were learning. As a result, a sixteen-year-old member of a rock band from a well-to-do family was soon making remarkable changes in his life-style. His appearance improved markedly when he had three years’ growth of hair cut off and changed his see-through feminine blouses for something more becoming. His thirst for the truth far overshadowed any craving he may have had for drugs as he received a Bible study almost daily. Just six months from the time of his first study, he was baptized with the other two former hippies and, ever since, has devoted his full time to spreading the knowledge of Jehovah.
When in high school in Barranquilla, a youth aged fifteen got started on drugs. He describes how they affected his mind:
“I couldn’t coordinate my thoughts. My mind worked so fast that I couldn’t sleep at night. I thought of taking my life, I felt so frustrated.
“Then one Saturday night, looking for something to read, I found the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life in my closet. One of Jehovah’s Witnesses had tried unsuccessfully to study it with me. But now I didn’t want to put it down; it was six o’clock the next morning when I finally did. It awakened in me the hope that I was going to find something better in life. I was so enthused over what I had read that I told everyone within earshot. However, my reaction made my parents very nervous and they decided to take me to a psychiatrist on Monday.
“That Wednesday the Witness returned and started a Bible study with me. When the psychiatrist found out though, she pleaded with me to study with any other group but not with Jehovah’s Witnesses. ‘They’ll really make you crazy,’ she said. Yet I could see that the Witnesses were sincere in helping me. They wanted me to have the same hope they have. And, indeed, it’s a hope that should move anyone to make a change!”
The young man never did return to the psychiatrist but continued studying and associating with the Witnesses. Now fully devoted to doing the will of God, he is currently studying His Word with another young man with a drug problem.
The insistence on the part of the Witnesses, young and old, to live in accord with their knowledge of God often results in opportunities to help others to learn the way of the truth. For refusing to stock tobacco products in his store, a Witness in Bucaramanga had this experience:
A man asking for cigarettes was informed that they were not sold there. After thinking a moment, he said: “If you don’t sell tobacco, there has to be a reason, and I’d like to know what it is.” The Witness explained that his Bible-trained conscience would not allow him to sell his neighbor an enslaving product that is injurious to health. (Matt. 22:39) Impressed, the man asked for more information. A Bible study was commenced and he is now attending the meetings.
“PROGRESS AT AN ACCELERATED SPEED”
By reason of their filling the land with the knowledge of Jehovah, the Witnesses have acquired favorable recognition from various sectors of the community.
Recently, for example, a municipal judge, in writing to the branch office requesting a Bible, said:
“Above all, we desire to congratulate you for the commendable work you are effecting among all the peoples of Colombia, without any discrimination and, in not a few cases, at the expense of great difficulties and opposition. . . . We send you our word of encouragement in your work, hoping that the new religious equal rights legislation facilitates your job.”
And a reporter, writing in one of the nation’s leading newspapers, El Espectador, had this to say:
“While the apostolic Roman Catholic religion continues to decline, other religious sects or communities progress at an accelerated speed. In Colombia, for example, the community known as ‘Jehovah’s Witnesses’ grows daily, obtaining more followers. The Witnesses possess notable moral and intellectual qualities and daily set excellent examples for Catholics.
“Even though we do not belong to Jehovah’s Witnesses, we can affirm that these Christians are distinguished by their honesty, their respect for others, their preoccupation for the acquisition of useful knowledge, their discretion and desire always to do good. . . . They never have difficulties finding places for their meetings because they are characterized, besides, by their order and cleanliness.”
FROM BACKYARDS TO COLISEUMS
The reporter’s statements were made on the occasion of the “Divine Victory” International Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Bogotá in January 1974. The new Covered Coliseum was taxed to the limit to accommodate the 23,409 who attended. Formerly, Witness assemblies in this land were held in backyards and workshops, any place large enough to contain the small crowds expected. In contrast, they now have them in the largest convention facilities the cities have to offer.
Up until ten years ago the city of Barranquilla refused to grant civic properties to the Witnesses for their conventions. When permission was finally obtained for the use of that city’s Covered Coliseum, the price stipulated was prohibitive. Further applications, however, did, in time, result in consent at a more reasonable cost, and the Coliseum was used. On the occasion of the last assembly held on the same premises, there was no charge whatsoever. Why not? Because, according to the official decree from the Mayor’s office, ‘the meetings realize no profit, the admission is completely free and, besides, Jehovah’s Witnesses customarily improve the installations.’
For the truth imparted and the warm fellowship enjoyed at their assemblies, it is not unusual for the Witnesses to make great sacrifices in order to be on hand. From the Zapata, Antioquia, Congregation, twenty-two men, women and children walked eleven hours to board a bus that took them to their circuit assembly.
KINGDOM HALLS REFLECT EXPANSION
Also reflecting the expansion of the organization in this land is the acceleration in the construction of Kingdom Halls. Ten years ago there was hardly a congregation that owned its own meeting place. Today about a third of them do and many of these share their halls with other congregations.
This acquisition of very presentable, spacious Kingdom Halls has contributed immeasurably to the acceptance of Jehovah’s Witnesses as part of the community. Many more have been attracted to investigate the organization. Furthermore, since it is not unusual for the attendance to be double the number of Witnesses, the halls have provided much needed seating accommodation. This year at the memorial observance of Christ’s death, 56,924 attended, which is almost four times the number of Witnesses in all of Colombia!
Whether they are educated city people or humble, hardworking campesinos or country folk, all of Jehovah’s Witnesses in this country are “standing firm in one spirit, with one soul striving side by side for the faith of the good news.” (Phil. 1:27) Their zeal with regard to “the faith of the good news” is well illustrated by the El Caimán, Antioquia, Congregation. To send the monthly report of their witnessing activities to the Colombian branch office, one of them must walk eight hours, then ride the bus four more hours, just to reach the post office!
‘TAKING IN KNOWLEDGE OF THE ONLY TRUE GOD’
Is it still the Lord’s will that a greater measure of the “water of life” flow forth to the Colombian people? There is every reason to believe so.​—Rev. 22:17.
Recently, three of Jehovah’s Witnesses traveled two hours from their home in Barrancabermeja, Santander, to the small community of Yarima. Knowing that the area was notorious as a center of guerrilla activity, they went with some feeling of reservation. But what a reception awaited them! Within a short time they had distributed all their Bible literature. Returning better equipped a few days later, they again soon exhausted their supplies. In just five hours they placed in the hands of those humble people over 300 Bibles and books and hundreds of magazines.
After drinking of “the water of truth,” an isolated person in Antioquia was moved to write the following to the branch office:
“I am writing to ask you a favor, that you visit my home to study the Bible. I have known many religious sects but none has given me the spiritual peace that I desire, which is to know the true way in order to one day come to enjoy the reward that our Heavenly Father offers to all of us who do his will. Reading one of your books, True Peace and Security, has given me the intense desire to invite you to visit us here in Yalí.”
Yes, Jehovah continues to ‘open hearts wide to pay attention to the things being spoken’ by his true servants. And just as long as these sincere truth seekers say, “Visit my home to study the Bible,” Jehovah’s Witnesses will be happy to do so because they know that “this means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.”​—John 17:3; Acts 16:14, 15.

