Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will doubtless remember these points:
● Why did Jesus not insist on remaining in the country of the Gadarenes (Gerasenes) when it became clear that he was unwanted?​—Luke 8:37-39.
There were worthy ones elsewhere to whom Jesus could minister. He had also left behind a believing man whom he had freed from demon possession, and this man was able to bear witness to his relatives and others living in the Decapolis.​—P. 13.a
● In what ways is the new covenant superior to the old Law covenant?
Under the new covenant arrangement, Jesus Christ is the immortal High Priest, needing no successors. His perfect human sacrifice needs no repeating and makes true forgiveness of sins possible. In the case of those under the new covenant, Jehovah has put his laws in their hearts and minds; there is no extensive written law code.​—P. 47.
● In what way can overeating, heavy drinking and anxieties of life ‘weigh down the heart’?​—Luke 21:34.
Excesses in food and drink overload the heart with feelings of guilt and crowd out good motivations. One’s becoming overly concerned about making a living can cause the motivations of the heart to become centered on materialistic things. Thus the heart is robbed of the assurance that Jehovah God will care for his servants.​—Pp. 57, 58.
● What does the “name” of Jesus stand for?
It stands, not only for the person bearing the name, but also for his authority to carry out and execute God’s will. This authority embraces Jesus’ position as King and God’s “Chief Agent of life.”​—Pp. 102-104.
● Why do Jehovah’s witnesses take a definite stand against drug abuse?
Though not mentioned by name in the Bible, drug abuse endangers one’s relationship with Jehovah God. Not only can it lead to physical harm, but it can also dull thinking faculties, preventing one from approaching God with one’s full “power of reason.” (Rom. 12:1) Drug users often become involved in spiritistic practices. According to Galatians 5:19-21, the “practice of spiritism” is a work of the “flesh” that debars one from gaining God’s approval and life.​—Pp. 178-181.
● What is meant at Proverbs 10:7 by the words “the very name of the wicked ones will rot”?
The name or reputation of the wicked ones becomes, not a pleasant memory, but something sickening, putrid. This is evident from the contrasting statement made in the first part of the verse: “The remembrance of the righteous one is due for a blessing.”​—P. 210.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1973.

