Vol, XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., MAY 15, 1918 


No. 10 


FAULTLESS BEFORE HIS PRESENCE 

"But ye, beloved j building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit , keep yourselves in the love of 
God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life." — Jude 20, 21. 

HTTMHJTY OF FIRST IMPORTANCE 
The first essential to serving God in an acceptable manner 
is to have a proper appreciation of one's own self, and to have 
in mind always that Jehovah is the great first cause, with 
whom none can be compared. It is he who measures the waters 
of the deep in the hollow of his hand, and metes out the heavens
 with a span; who comprehends the dust of the earth and 
weighs the mountains in scales and the hills in the balance; 
with whom the nations of earth are counted as the small dust 
of the balance — he who is the author of the great plan of the 
ages that is working out in an orderly progressive manner, 
each attribute acting in its proper time and in exact harmony
 with the other attributes. His love was bo wonderfully 
manifested by Bending his only-Begotten Son to die, that man, 
the very worm of the dust of the earth, might have life and 
partake of the riches of glory. — Isaiah 40:12-17. 

Such contemplations enabled Brother Jude to have a 
proper appreciation of his position. He was a preacher of 
God's Word ; yet he applied to himself no high-sounding titles, 
such as Right Reverend, Doctor of Divinity, Bishop or Cardinal
, but delighted to designate himself a slave of Jesus Christ. 
To be the Lord's slave is much to be preferred to all the titles, 
honors and emoluments that can be conferred upon one man. 
From this example of humility manifested by Jude we learn a 
lesson of much value. As our knowledge of the character of 
our loving Master increases, the more we rejoice to be his 
slaves. That such an attitude of mind is pleasing to the 
Father, we are assured by St. Peter's words; * God resisteth the 
proud, and giveth grace to the humble." Pride and ambition
, the very opposite of humility, have been the cause of 
many falling away from the love of God. With confidence, 
then, we can say that humility is of first importance to keep 


While the storm against God's little ones increases in fury, 
those who are anxious to see the heavenly Father's face are setting
 the things of their house in order, that in due time they 
may be presented faultless before the presence of his glory. 
That will be the climax of all Christian experience. The child 
of God. loves to contemplate that blessed time. At the moment 
of awakening in the morning, the first thought is: "Dear 
Father, keep me this day so near to thee that, if this be my 
last on eartn, it may please thee to permit thy child to see thy 
glorious countenance." And when the day's tasks are done, 
when we have squared our accounts with the Lord and know 
that all is well, then, as we are folded in the embrace of sweet 
rest, our last thought is: "As for me, I will behold thy face 
in righteousness; I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy 
likeness." 

Seeing by *f aith this glorious prospect before us, ,what can 
we do to make sure of attaining that prize? The above Scripture
 answers :. "Keep yourselves in the love of God." The importance
 of being kept in the love of God cannot be overstated. 
St. Jude emphasizes this by pointing out certain stumbling 
stones or pitfalls that will take God's children out of hia love, 
and announces certain rules which, if followed, will keep one 
in the love of God. The writings of all the apostles are for the 
building up of the church on the foundation of holy faith. They 
wrote aforetime for the benefit of those upon whom the end of 
the age has come. Jude was not an apostle of the Lord, but 
one of his brethren, and his epistle contains a message of great 
value to the church. How like the loving Father to make provision
 for his dear children, that they might be sustained in 
the hour of greatest test upon them! With ea^er mind and 
thankful heart should each consecrated one avail himself of 
such provisions. 


VII— 28 


[6253] 


(148 I 49) 


T 11 E W A T C 11 TO W E R 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


ourselves in the love of God. The more wo realize our dependency
 upon the Lord, (he safer is our position. — 1 Peter 5:5. 

"Keep thou my way, O Lord ; 
Myself I cannot guide; 
Nor dare I truBt my falt'ring steps 
One moment from thy side." 

MERCY, PEACE AND LOVE 
Jude, the loving slave of Jesus Christ, addresses his words 
not to the world, nor to those who have merely named the name 
of Christ, but "to them that are sanctified by God the Father, 
and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called. Thus we are sure 
that the entire epistle applies to those who claim, at least, to 
be in the Lord. Sweetly to the brethren, he says, "Mercy unto 
you, and peace, and love, be .multiplied." Clearly, then, this 
shows that one who would be kept in the love of God must be 
merciful to his brethren, not magnifying the faults of his 
brother and holding him up to the ridicule of others ; but looking
 with loving compassion upon his brother's shortcomings 
and weaknesses, and having always a keen desire to render 
him aid as a new creature in Christ Jesus. "Blessed are the 
merciful ; for they shall obtain mercy." St. Jude makes it 
clear that mercy is one of the essential rules to observe, saying
, "Keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy 
of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life/* 

The degree of one's consecration is often determined by the 
sincere effort made to keep the commandments of the Lord, 
The servant of God is enjoined that he shall not strive with 
his brethren. Strife indulged in would ultimately exclude one 
from entering the kingdom. (Galatians 5:21) Sad it is to 
note that some of those who profess full consecration to the 
Lord seem given to strife and contention. After having been 
long in the narrow way, after the brethren have traveled together
 in harmony for a long time, suddenly strife arises 
amongst them. This is one of the means the adversary seizes 
upon to keep the Lord's little ones away from him and to keep 
them out of God's love. St, Peter wrote: "Follow peace with 
all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the 
Lord." Would that the dear friends, who have desired to see 
the Lord, would keep this admonition ever before their minds! 

We offer the suggestion that whenever strife arises in the 
class those engaged in it at once meditate upon the question: 
Will this help me or prevent me from being presented faultless
 before the presence ol his glory with exceeding joy? "Let 
nothing be done through strife or Vainglory; but in lowliness 
of mind let each esteem other better than themselves." Following
 this rule, peace would prevail amongst the brethren. God 
has made it clear that he will grant life everlasting to none 
except those who grow in love. Those who will be granted the 
privilege of seeing his face must develop the highest degree of 
love — a love that leads one to sacrifice his own rights, privileges
 and comforts, yea, even life itself, that others may be 
blessed. Such is the kind of love manifested by Jesus, who 
died for us. To those who will be the members of his body 
and whom he will present faultless before the Father, he says: 
"A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another
 even as T have loved you," With these Scriptures before 
us it is easy to see why St. Jude says that mercy, peace and 
love should be multiplied unto those who are following in the 
Master's footsteps. 

FAITH OF THE SAINTS 

Only the faithful unto death will be present ed faultless before
 the presence of his glory with joy unspeakable. The positive
 promise is that such shall see the Lord In his beauty and 
glory. (Hosea 2:10, 20; "Revelation 2:10) Then the author 
of the epistle emphasizes the necessity of continuing faithful: 
"Beloved, when T gave all diligence to write unto you of the 
common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you 
and exhort you that ye should earnestly contend for the faith 
which was once deliverrd unto the saints." 

The common salvation here mentioned is not an ordinary 
one, but is that salvation which is common to all the saints. 
"Ye are all called in one hope of your calling" to membership 
in the royal family of heaven. None is called to any other 
position. Our hope of attaining to that exalted place is based 
upon faith in God's arrangements, all of which radiate from 
the great ransom sacrifice. The faith once delivered to the 
paints thp Apostle Paul specifically mentions in 1 Corinthians 
ln:3-5. To contend for this faith does not mean that one 
should indulge in strife or manifest a bitterness of spirit; but 
it means steadfastly holding to the great doctines of ^truth 
which the Lord has graciously given to us. Every doctrine or 
theory offered can be measured and its truth or falsehood definitely
 determined by the ransom. If out of harmony with the 
philosophy of the ransom, then we may always know that it is 


false. Holding fast to these fundamental truths is absolutely 
vital to keeping ourselves in* the love of God. Abiding in him 
faithfully to the end will assure us of being presented faultless
 before the glory of his presence. 

ENEMIES OF THE TEUTH 
Satan has seized upon every means to destroy the seed of 
promise; and one of the methods he has employed has been to 
corrupt the faith once delivered to the saints. Jude mentions 
this in verse 4 of his epistle. First there came into the church, 
at tfre instance of Satan, heathen philosophers, who embraced
 the name of Christ for a purpose, but who denied the 
merit of his sacrifice. Such men substitute their own theories, 
acquired from Satan, for those of Christ Jesus and the apostles. 
Stealthily they caane in, until they acquired power; and then 
they boldly proclaimed their God-dishonoring doctrines before 
the world. Satan's original lie — the doctrine of inherent immortality
 of man — came prominently to the front; and then 
his kindred doctrines — the mass and the trinity — followed 
quickly after, these denying the wonderful and beautiful plan 
of God, and indirectly, if not directly, denying the value of the 
great sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

It has ever been the policy of Satan to thrust in amongst 
good men some ungodly men, against whom St. Jude in this 
epistle warns the church at all times. He describes them as 
"ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness
." Lasciviousness njeans looseness; and therefore the 
words mean a loose handling of the Word of God, or wresting 
the Scriptures for a selfish purpose. It seems that the Adversary
 has at all stages of the church succeeded in getting some 
such men amongst the true sheep. How may we know them 7 
"BY their fruits ye shall know them." (Matthew 7:16-20) 
Such manifest the fruit of the flesh and not the fruit of the 
spirit. (Galatians 5 : 19, 20) Only those who accept and 
serve the truth in the love of it and who continue in the faith 
unto the end are safe from this snare of the Adversary; and 
such only will ultimately receive the approval of the Lord. 
FOEEWAEKED OF PITFAKLS 
Jude then enumerates a number of things which will take 
the Christian out of the love of God and that will make it impossible
 for him ever to be presented faultless before the presence
 of his glory. Verses 5-16, inclusive, give examples of 
these things* Unfaithfulness and disloyalty lead certainly to 
disaster. The experiences of Israel foreshadowed such results
. The people of Israel in Egypt typed, or illustrated the 
church in the worid. The Christian is here reminded that after
 God had miraculously delivered the Israelites out of Egypt, 
he destroyed them because they believed not; that is to say, 
because they failed to continue faithful to the Lord. The child 
of God has been translated from the kingdom of darkness (of 
this world) to the kingdom of God's dear Son; he by faith 
dwells in the light of heavenly things. To fall into the pit of 
unfaithfulness means certain destruction. All the trying experiences
 through which the Christian passes are permitted to 
test his faith and loyalty. "This is the victory that overcometh
 the world, even your faith." 

DEMONS AS EXAMPLES 
"The angels which kept not their first estate, but left their 
own habitation, he 'hath reserved in everlasting chains, under 
darkness, unto the judgment of the great day.'* ' It seems clear 
that this fact concerning the demons is here recorded to teach 
a valuable lesson to the new creatures in Christ Jesus. These 
angels at one time were creatures of glory and beauty. The 
first estate of such was that of usefulness, in which Jehovah 
placed them. Having assumed human bodies, they yielded to 
the baneful influence of Satan, debauched the daughters of men 
and filled the earth with violence. So great was their wickedness
 that God imprisoned them in tariarus until their judgment
 time, at which time those continuing in wickedness will 
be forever destroyed. The Lord Jesus, through the Revel ator, 
foretold the loosing of these angels and intimated that such 
loosing would take place after the saints of the living God were 
sealed. It seems clear that the sealing is now completed and 
that the demons are loose. The evidence of this is daily increasing
. Without a doubt the judgment of these evil ones 
is now in progress. — 1 Corinthians 0:3. 

The first estate of the Christian is that of blessedness, as by 
faith he rests in the finished work of Christ Jesus and looks 
forward to the time when he may possess his glorious body and 
he faultless. From the time he is begotten and anointed 
he may be said to be a spirit being. "If any man be in 
Christ Jesu=< 4 he is a new creature; old things have passed 
away, all things have become new." "Ye are not in thp 
fiosh. but in the spirit, if so be that the spirit of God 
dwell in you," (Romans 8:9) Truly, then, he is a spirit 
creature, having his habitation in an earthly vessel. Should 


[6254] 


Mw 15, 191S 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(MO 1*50) 


such a new creature willingly return to the things of the world, 
lie may for a, time be kept in darkness concerning God's great 
plan. He may come to the point where he will even deny that 
there is such a thing as the second death. Satan and the fallen 
angels may induce him to believe that God will save every one 
and that, therefore, he is in no danger of destruction. He" may 
continue in this attitude and condition of darkness until his 
final judgment. Xhiis is explained how some, once rejoicing in 
the merit of Christ's sacrifice, become blind. The safety of the 
Christian from such a pitfall is to avoid all demon influence or 
fellowship with any one who is under the influence of demons, 
not even engaging such in conversation. "I will keep my 
mouth with a bridle while the wicked is before me." — Psalm 
30:1. 

Further illustrating pitfalls, the writer of the epistle refers 
to the people of Sodom and Gomorrah, who, "giving themselves 
over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set for 
an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." Fornication
 as applied to the new creature refers to illicit relationship 
w T ith things inimical to the new creature. Once enlightened 
with the truth and tasting of the heavenly things, any voluntary
 fellowship with evil spirits would lead such a one ultimately
 into destruction. Even the beginning of this for the 
satisfaction of curiosity is exceedingly dangerous. Our vow of 
faithfulness particularly emphasizes this point, and we call 
upon the Lord to enable us to resist everything akin to spiritism
 and occultism, knowing that such influence is from the Adversary
. 

SPEAKING EVIL AND DESPISING DOMINION 

"likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise 
dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Yet Michael the archangel
, when contending with the devil, he disputed about the 
body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation
, but said, The Lord rebuke thee. But these speak evil 
of those things which they know not; but what they know naturally
, as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves
." Christ is the head of the church; God is the head of 
Christ. "God has set the members in the body as it pleased 
him." Any arrangement the Lord has made in the church is 
therefore a part of his dominion. The disposition to despise the 
Lord's arrangement, disorderly conduct, walking disorderly, all 
lead to the pitfalls here mentioned. 

A dignity, or dignitary, is one who stands high amongst 
the people. All the members of the body of Christ will ultimately
 be kings and priests unto God and unto Christ. Those 
this side the vail who are faithfully running for the prize are 
counted in as members of the body, being designated now as 
"the feet of him." Therefore all such are "dignitaries" within 
the meaning of this text. To speak evil, then, of such means 
to speak evil against the Lord. The Lord loves the members 
of his body, and Jehovah looks upon all of them as the apple 
of his eye (Zechariah 2:7, 8) j and thus we can understand 
how displeasing it is to tie Father and to the great Master 
for one claiming to be consecrated to speak evil of the brethren
. Discussing this same matter, the Apostle James says: 
"Speak not evil one of another, brethren. He that speaketh 
evil of his brother, and judgeth his brother, speaketh evil of 
the law, and judgeth the law; but if thou judge the law, thou 
art not a doer of the law, but a judge. There is one lawgiver, 
who is able to save and to destroy: who art thou that judgest 
another?" — James 4:11, 12. 

Law means a rule of action. God has provided his own 
law as a rule of action which governs and controls the members
 of the body of Christ. Therefore any one who speaks evil 
against God's children speaks against the law of God and sets 
himself un as a judge of God's law. And any one who takes 
this position cannot be fully obedient to the law; for it is 
contrary to God's law to indulge in evil-speaking. Thus the 
Apostle makes it plain that Jehovah is the lawgiver and he 
has the power to destroy, and that he is the judge, and that 
no member of the body is authorized to pronounce judgment 
against another. 

In verse 9 Jude says that Jesus in his prehuman existence 
as God's representative did not indulge in a railing accusation
 even against Satan, but merely said, "Jehovah rebuke 
thee." From this we gather the lesson that the new creature 
in Christ is never to indulge in bringing a railing accusation 
against any one. It is not our business to rebuke or pass sentence
 upon others. The province of the Christian is to proclaim
 the message of God's truth always manifesting the spirit 
of love, remembering that Jehovah is the judge. "Recompense 
to no man evil for evil. Provide things honest in the sight of 
all men. If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably
 -with all men. Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves ; but 
rather give place unto wrath ; for it is written, Vengeance is 
mine; I will repay, saith the Lord." — Romans 12: 17-19. 


In verse 10, St. Jude proves that one who indulges in evilspeaking
 is using the natural mind, the mind of the flesh ; and 
that in thus doing he corrupts himself as a new creature in 
Christ. Basing a conclusion upon evil surmising and giving expression
 to that surmising by evil words shows an evil condition
 of heart. Without a pure heart it would be impossible to 
be kept in the love of God. Therefore wc are admonished, 
"Speak evil of no man." ''Keep thy heart with all diligence; 
for out of it are the issues of life." 

THREE CLASSES DESCRIBED 

In verses 11-13, inclusive, St. Jude gives a description of 
three classes that come in amongst the Lord's people, namely, 
Cain, Balaam and Core. Cain yielded to evil suggestions from 
the Adversary and permitted his heart to be poisoned against 
his own brother. Hatred was developed there, which led him 
on to murder his brother. The new creature in Christ who is 
once illuminated, and who afterwards harbors evil in his heart 
against another, may he led to the point of hatred. Of such St. 
John says, "Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer; and 
ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him."— 
1 John 3:15. 

Balaam was a teacher of falsehoods for profit. And thus 
is pictured a class who, even though enlightened and knowing 
better, willingly teach that which is false, that they might receive
 profits from men in the way of emoluments and honor, 
or position and preferment. Thus is the Christian warned 
against taking any course that is prompted by a motive other 
than that of a pure, loving desire to serve the Lord and his 
people. 

Core, or Korah, pictures a class that refuses to hold the 
head ; that is to say, who have not the proper respect or regard 
for Christ Jesus, the head of the church, but who walk after 
their own selfish desires and insist on their own selfish ways. 
These at one time had places amongst the elect in the church. 
The Adversary injects into the mind a thought leading to the 
desire to have one's own way; and where such a one manifests 
a selfish and stubborn disposition he is in danger of the pitfall
 described in Core's experience. 

How many of the Lord's people may be drawn into one of 
these classes is not known, but we hope very few. To enable 
his people to escape these pitfalls, the warning evidently was 
recorded in the Scriptures. It is always helpful for each one 
to examine himself or herself to see that none of these examples
 apply, that he is free from any such manifestations of the 
wrong spirit. "SPOTS IN YOXTB FEAST" 

If one finds himself disposed to go to the class for any selfish
 purpose, as for instance, for the purpose of asking catch 
questions, for criticism, or fault-finding, or for the purpose of entrapping
 or confusing any of the Lord's little ones, he should 
awaken to the fact at once that this is a pitfall into which the 
Adversary is leading him. St. Jude describes such as "spots 
in your feasts of love, when they feast with you, feeding themselves
 without reverence." Any assembly of God's people for 
the purpose of building one another up on their most holy faith 
is a feast of love; and any one who permits himself to mar 
such a feast by a wrongful course is here described as a spot 
upon such feast of love. Continuing in such a course would 
take him out of the love of God. The Apostle admonishes all 
of the Lord's little ones, saying, "By love serve one another." — 
Galatians 5:13. 

Again, these unruly ones are described as "clouds without 
water." Clouds are vessels bearing water, and are distributed 
over the earth that they might drop the refreshing rain upon 
the fields and flowers. In the hot, dry seasons, when refreshment
 is needed, a cloud without water is useless. Water is a 
symbol of truth. The Lord's people are vessels for bearing 
the truth one to another to refresh the thirsty souls. Concerning
 such, the Apostle says: "Be ye filled with the spirit," 
meaning that we should be full of the Lord's love and his message
 of truth and gladly give it out for the refreshing and 
bleasing of others. Thus the new creature grows and develops 
by serving others in love. 

The writer also pictures this class as "trees without fruit." 
If a tree fails to bring forth fruit the gardener digs it up by 
the roots and casts it into the fire for destruction. One of the 
Lord's little ones that fails, after much opportunity, to bring 
forth the fruits and graces of the spirit is useless, and therefore
 would be removed. "Herein is my Father glorified, that 
ye bear much fruit." (John 15:8) Those who have been once 
enlightened by the Holy Spirit and who afterward lose it are 
described in verse 13 as "raging waves, . . . foaming out their 
own shame." And thus are we warned against any development
 of spirit which leads in this direction ; and thus may we 
know how to avoid those who are manifesting the wrong spirit. 
One who repudiates the truth and turns against, the lord's II tr
6265l 


(150-151) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Baoo/aYK, N« Y. 


tie ones becomes far more violent and more severe in persecution
 than those who have never known the Lord. 
"MTOMUBEBS, COMPLAINERS" 
The three classes above mentioned are again referred to in 
verse 16 as "murmurers, complainers, walking after their awn 
desires; and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having 
men's persons in admiration because of advantage/' Such prefer
 the approval of men rather than the approval of God. They 
murmur and complain when they have not the honor and approval
 of men. Verses 14-16 clearly show that this epistle has 
its special application in the close of the age. The Adversary 
has even sought to destroy The Christ; and it is reasonable to 
expect that he would make a last desperate effort to destroy 
the "feet" members. This is particularly borne out by the 
words of the Lord addressed to Satan, "Thou shalt bruise his 
heel." The "heel" members are the last of his body to pass beyond
 the vail into the kingdom. The lesson, then, which we 
gather from this warning of St. Jude is that we should avoid 
the spirit of murmuring or complaining; that we should not 
seek our selfish desires; and that we should not desire to 
please men, but rather to please God. 

Lovingly, then, Brother Jude reminds the church of the 
words of admonition and warning spoken aforetime hy the 
apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ; "How that they told you 
there should be mockers in the last time who should walk after 
their own ungodly lusts/' This describes a ciass once having 
a knowledge of the truth, who later repudiate the messenger 
and tMe message of the Lord sent to the church through him. 
Moved by a wrong spirit they, he stated, would manifest the 
cunning disposition of the wolf, not sparing the flock, but 
seeking with perverse talk to draw away diaciples after themselves
. "These be they who separate themselves, sensual, not 
having the spirit." Such forsake the truth in its beauty and 
simplicity. Such depart from its spirit and, exercising the 
fleshly mind, gratify the ambitions and tastes of the old nature
. Warning against such a disposition and showing that 
such a spirit would take one out of God's love, St. Jude adds : 
"But ye, my dearly beloved, building yourselves up on the 
basis of your most holy faith -and praying in the Holy Spirit, 
keep yourselves safe in the love of God, waiting for the mercy 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which will result in life everlasting." 
Then St. Jude clearly intimates that there will be Borne 
who will have a greater degree of wilfulness, and these will 
succeed in entrapping others to follow after them. He then 
advises that there is a clear distinction which we should observe
 in dealing with them. In proportion as we find the 
brethren to be copies of the Lord in heart, in motive, in intention
, in loving zeal for righteousness and truth, we should 
-manifest greater love and consideration for them. The Lord 
Jesus set us an example in this behalf. He thus shows us that 
he desires his followers to treat such as walk after the flesh 
in a different manner from that in which we treat those who 
manifest a greater degree of his spirit. Toward all we are 
to be tender-hearted, and even though their garments are much 
spotted, our efforts should be by word and precept to try 
to save them as brands plucked from the fire. "Above all, 
exercising fervent [overspreading] love, because such love covers
 a multitude of defects." (1 Peter 4:7, 8) With fear and 
trembling should we walk before the Lord, watching and praying
, being at all times of sober mind, avoiding the pitfalls 
and observing the rules that will keep us in the love of God. 
At times the journey becomes wearisome and we long for 
home. Our wise and loving Father knows just what things 
we have need of that we might be made meet for his use in 
glory. He is too wise to err and too loving to be unkind. The 
conditions imposed are exacting upon all who will ultimately 
occupy the favored position of joint-heirship with Christ Jesus 
in his kingdom. Snares and pitfalls are many along the way; 
yet a means i3 provided of escaping from them all. The rules 
for keeping ourselves in the love of God are made plain and 
explicit. Constant vigilance and diligent perseverance are required
 ; and these are accompanied by many fiery trials, under 
which conditions the child of God must serve. And yet, all 
is but a reasonable service. We must share the ignominy of 
our Lord and be faithful followers in his footsteps that we 
might share his dignity and majesty. 


Often we feel so weak, so inadequate to meet our enemies, 
because they are legion and very subtle. We know we must 
continue this warfare even unto death. We know we must 
suffer persecution. And yet, when we look at self, we often 
think, How could God perfect one like me to be meet for 
his use in glory? And then there comes to us great consolation
 in the words of St. Paul: "It is sown in corruption; it 
is raised in incorruption [immortality]. It is sown in dishonor
; it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness; it is raised 
in power. It is sown a natural [animal] body; it is raised a 
spiritual body." And then we know that if we hold fast the beginning
 of our confidence with rejoicing firm unto the end, such 
glory, and immortality will be our portion, through the merit 
of him who bought us and justified us before God. 

All who have fled for refuge to this glorious, hope set before
 us And great consolation in the promises upon which this 
hope is based. With abiding confidence we feel that our anchorage
 is sure within the vail, in Christ Jesus, our Lord and 
head. The character of each one in the body of Christ must be 
perfected by fiery experiences, that the dross might be destroyed
 and the gold made manifest. How beautiful, then, 
will these creatures be! God predestinated that it should be 
so. The beloved St. Paul strengthens and consoles us with 
the words, "He hath chosen us in him before the foundation 
of the world, that we should be [ultimately] holy and without
 blame before him, in love; having predestinated us unto 
the adoption of children by Je3us Christ to himself, according 
to the good pleasure of his will, . . . that in the dispensation 
of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all 
things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on 
earth ; even in him : in whom also we have obtained an inheritance
, being predestinated according to the purpose of him 
who worketh all things after the counsel of his own will ; that 
we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in 
Christ."— Ephesians 1:4-11. 

"BEAOTmrii ABE THE FEET OF HIM" 

Dear, loving, tired feet members of the body of Christ, despised
 and rejected as was the Head, hated of all nations for 
his name's sake; yet beautiful they are and how blessed their 
portion! Beautiful as they declare the message of Messiah's 
kingdom to the nations of earth now in travail. Beautiful as 
they bear the reproaches that fall upon them because of their 
faithfulness and loving devotion to the cause of their king! 
Beautiful as they bring good tidings of good, declaring the 
kingdom of heaven at hand ! Blessed is their portion, soon to 
be inherited. 

In the final conflict upon the members of Christ's body, 
are they able to stand alone? No, not in their own strength; 
but there is One who is able to make us stand and to keep 
us from falling. "The eternal God is thy refuge and underneath
 are the everlasting arms." ( Deuteronomy 33 : 27 ) Weak 
and imperfect now, yet by the eye of faith, behold the conditions
 of glory awaiting the faithful ones; and be of good courage
. Soon that kind, wise and loving Bridegroom will present
 all the members of his bride faultless before the presence 
of Jehovah with exceeding joy. Will there be no flaws then? 
No, not one. No fear? No sorrows? No disappointments? 
No, not even the thought of such things. Faultless then shall 
we be, because we shall be like him — he who is the fairest of 
ton thousand, the one altogether lovely — and be with him, Yea, 
"in thy presence is fulness of joy, and at thy right hand there 
are pleasures for evermore." 

Let us, then, forget the things that are behind. Be not 
dismayed with the trials that now abound; but with the eye 
of faith behold his beauty and glory and the unspeakable joy 
of being in his presence forever. 

"Oh, what wondrous visions wrapped me! 
Heaven's gates seemed opened wide, 
Even I stood clear and faultless 
By my dear Redeemer's side. 

"Faultless in his glory's presence! 
Faultless in that dazzling light! 
Christ's own love, majestic, tender, 
Made my crimson snowy white!" 


"THE DUST OF HIS FEET" 


In beautifully poetic language the Prophet Nahum describes
 Jehovah's part in the present distress of nations: "The 
lord hath his way in the whirlwind and in the storm, and the 
clouds are the dust of his feet." — Nahum 1:3. 

Certainly clouds, which have long since ceased to be the 
size of a man's hand, hang thick over human affairs. To the 


worldly these clouds are sources of uncertainty, apprehension
, dread; but to the watchful child of God these "clouds 
and darkness" are sure harbingers of the establishment of 
Messiah's reign. Like children at evening who watch for 
their father's return from the fields and know him from afar 
by the cloud of dust raised by his equipage, so the Lord's peo- 


[6256] 


May 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(152-153) 


pie now have keenest interest in all the happenings in the 
world, even though some of the dust is blowing into their 
eyes, ears, noses and throats. They recognize the Lord even 
through the clouds, first, because the time has come and, secondly
, because of the character of the work which is being 
performed. 

Our Master warned us and told us we need not expect to 
be spoken well of by all men, because the majority of men, 
being dominated by self interest and selfish institutions, lavish
 their approval upon "the false prophets." {Luke 6:26) 
Whatever the Lord's people do, they will not be understood 
by the world, because they have different standards of judgment
, as well as different aims in life. But while the world 
is losing more and more even that measure of good judgment 
which was formerly possessed by it, the Lord's people should 
strive more and more to keep steady heads and to order their 
conduct with sobriety — giving no reasonable occasion for offense
. 

Our attitude on the war, Red Cross, Liberty Bonds, etc, 
has been misunderstood by many people. Few persons do 
much thinking in war time and what little they do is mostly 
in line with their natural emotions. We cannot therefore expect
 much calm and dispassionate thinking now from the 
worldly. Therefore in our honest effort to render our proper 
dues to the Government under which we are privileged to live 
we should be doubly careful not to "speak evil of dignitaries" 
nor to do anything which would avoidably embarrass them in 
the solution of their weighty problems. See Matthew 17:25- 
27 j Luke 20:22-25; Romans 13:7; 1 Peter 2:13-17. 
OTJB STATEMENT TO THE PBESS 

Statements have been recently made to several newspapers 
which requested an expression from us. But the statements, if 
printed at all, have been so garbled as to be well nigh incoherent
. We therefore print below in full a statement prepared
 by the President of our Association for the Brooklyn 
Eagle at its request: 

"On my return to Brooklyn I learned of the unpleasant occurrence
 at the Brooklyn Tabernacle last Sunday, April 28th. 
Mr. W. T. Baker was in the pulpit and at the conclusion of his 
discourse a request was brought to the platform that the congregation
 hear a speech by some one on the Liberty Bonds. 
Mr. Baker put the matter to a vote and the majority voted in 
the negative. 

"I am sure this action was not intended as any reflection 
on the Government, nor to be taken as against the Liberty 
Loan. Those who worship at the Tabernacle believe in worshipping
 the Lord in spirit and in truth. To them a religious
 service is the most sacred; and while at religious service 
they always refrain from discussing temporal matters. This 
congregation at no time ever held a social tea, a grab-bag 
party, a bazaar, or anything of that kind in the church. The 
Tabernacle auditorium is used exclusively for religious matters
, especially on Sunday. No previous request had been 
made to use the Tabernacle by any one in the interest of the 
Liberty Loan campaign. The worshippers had just listened to 
a helpful spiritual lesson on the Bible. They desired to withdraw
 from the building with these Baered thoughts ia mind 
and therefore deemed it inappropriate to discuss any temporal 
matters whatsoever, or to hear them discussed by any one 
else. We are pleased to grant the use of the Tabernacle for a 
meeting in the interest of the public when the same does not 
interfere with our religious services. 

"The people of our Association are not against the Government
, nor against the Liberty Loan. Our thought is that the 
Liberty Loan is not a religious question, but purely one pertaining
 to the affairs of the Government; and that each person
 should be left to the free exercise of his individual conscience
 as to whether he will or will not purchase Liberty 
Bonds. Our views are very well expressed in a statement 
given to the public press some weeks ago, as follows: 

" 'The International Bible Students* Association is not 
against the Liberty Loan. Many of its members have bought 
and hold Liberty Bonds. Some have not money with which 
to buy. 


" 'The Liberty Loan is not a religious question. It has 
solely to do with the Government. Every person who mails a 
letter supports the Government to that extent by paying the 
additional postage on account of the war. 

" 'The International Bible Students' Association is composed
 of Christians. Every Christian gladly obeys the law. The 
United States has always stood for religious liberty and freedom
 of speech. Every Christian appreciates the privilege of 
living in such a country and gladly meets his obligations in 
the payment of taxes. When the Government asks to borrow 
his money and give3 its promise to pay in the nature of a bond, 
if he can do so he should buy the bond. 

" The Association has no power to direct members thereof 
with reference to buying Liberty Bonds. It certainly will not 
and has not advised any one to refuse to buy bonds. That is 
an individual matter which each person must determine for 
himself according to his ability. The Association believes in 
supporting the Government in every way it can and each one 
should do so according to his ability and his conscience.' 

"Some members of the Brooklyn Tabernacle congregation 
had previously purchased Liberty Bonds. Doubtless all had 
been personally solicited before that time. They are surrounded
 on all hands by opportunities to purchase, and to them it 
seemed inappropriate to transact business in the church on 
Sunday. There are six days in the week for the transaction 
of business and Sunday is regarded by them as a day for sacred
 worship of the Lord. 

"It is to be regretted that one representing the public press 
should so disgrace himself as publicly to encourage mob violence
 against inoffensive people. It seems that any one wearing
 the uniform of the United States Army would have more 
respect for that uniform and for law and order than to disturb
 the peace by loud and uncouth language and in encouraging
 mob violence. We cannot believe that any responsible 
person in the Government would approve of such action. 

"As to the members of the Bethel Home, it is well known 
that those who labor there receive merely their food and lodging
 and a small allowance for incidental expenses. This was 
thoroughly aired in the Brooklyn Eagle libel case, as the 
record shows. At that time the amount received was only 
$10.00 per month, which since, on account of increased cost of 
necessities, is now $15.00 per month. At the opening of the 
Third Liberty Loan campaign, a very elegant gentleman of 
the Borough of Brooklyn called on me with reference to soliciting
 the members of the Bethel Home to buy bonds. I invited
 him to see each one of them personally. He questioned 
me as to their ability to buy; and when I told him ctf the 
amount they received monthly he said, 'Then they cannot buy 
on that amount and it is useless for me to see them. I am 
sure you must be doing much good here in your own way when 
men and women sacrifice their time for such a small allowance
.' It is a well known fact that there are other institutions
 that are not asked or even expected to buy Liberty Bonds 
because of their financial inability, 

"Members of our Association who have some personal means 
have bought Liberty Bonds, including Tabernacle workers who 
are paying 25 per cent, of their monthly allowance to purchase
 a bond. We do not believe the Government would expect
 any one to purchase bonds who receives barely enough 
for his daily expenses. 

"The picketing of the Bethel Home on last Sunday morning 
and accosting every one who passed out and demanding that 
they buy Liberty Bonds seems to be a very uncalled-for and 
unusual thing, when any one authorized to solicit for bonds 
can have free access to the Bethel Home to interview any person
 there at any reasonable hour during the day or evening. 
As above stated, a gentleman had called for that purpose some 
days ago. The action of the men on Sunday morning aeetned 
not only wholly uncalled-for, but was taken designedly for the 
purpose of placing the members of the Bethel Home at a disadvantage
. We cannot believe that order-loving, law-abiding 
people of Brooklyn at all approve such action or conduct." 


BEGINNING THE CHRISTIAN LIFE 

July 7.— Acts 16:13-15, 25-34. 

the gospel call a limited one: — the river of wateb of life a symbol of restitution blessings what it means to be a 

christian — tests of discipleship — relative value of the sacrifice presented by the christian — consecration a 
definite, positive contract with god — blessing of world and church contrasted. 

"Be that will, let him take the water of Ufe freely J* — Revelation 22:17. 
We have already pointed out that according to the Scrip- kingdom established. Then the river of life will flow from the 
tures there is no river of the water of life flowing at the pres- throne, the Millennial kingdom power and authority estabent
 time, nor will there be until the church is glorified and the lished in the earth, and then it will be the glorified bride of 

[6257] 


(153-154) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


Christ with the holy Spirit that will give the invitation to the 
world in general* We have also pointed out the Master's 
words to the effect that whoever now haa the water oi life receives
 it not from a fountain or river or pool, but from the 
Lord himself, "a well of water springing up into everlasting 
life." (John 4:14) Since there is no river of Water of life 
to which to invite any at the present time, our Golden Text 
must belong to the incoming Messianic age. 

In our day, when the public teachings of the ministry of 
nearly all denominations is so different from the teachings of 
the Bible, we believe that the degeneracy of faith and practice
 would be much more rapid than it is were it not that very 
many feel obligated to read a portion of the Scriptures daily, 
even though understanding little of their meaning. In such 
readings the lines of true discipleship are often so distinctly 
drawn that the mere nominal professor is made to shudder as 
he determines by the grace of God to seek so to conform his 
life that he may become more and more a copy of God's dear 
Son. 

The general thought of our day as* expressed in the pulpits, 
in private conversation and at funerals seems to be that in 
civilized lands everybody is a Christian and Bure to go to 
heaven eventually, except moral reprobates, such as are to be 
found in prisons and penitentiaries; and even for these the 
hope is entertained that ere they die they may express some 
regret for their misdeeds. Such regrets are seized upon by 
their friends as evidence that the erring ones became Christians
 and went to heaven. 

KATUEAL CONSEQUENCE OF FALSE DOCTBINE 

While condemning this view as wholly wrong, nevertheless 
we sympathize with those whose confusion of thought is manifest
. Their unscriptural views as to what constitutes a Christian
 are the result of two things : { 1 ) Teachings of the dark 
ages handed down through "the creeds of Christendom, creeds 
inspired by those who in bygone centuries persecuted one another
 to the death because of differences of opinion on doctrinal 
subjects, who tortured one another with rack, sword and 
fagot. (2) To this bad foundation of error there has come 
within recent years a larger spirit of enlightenment and generosity
, in which we rejoice. But the errors of the past and the 
generosity of the present make a very bad combination of doctrine
 for modern churchianity, a doctrine which seeks to be 
reasonable with itself, but which in so doing runs counter to a 
great many Scriptural teachings. 

It is only when we rid ourselves of the smoke, darkness 
and confusion resulting from the creeds of ^he dark ages, and 
return to the pure, unadulterated teachings of our Lord and 
the apostles, and by the grace of God have the eyes of our 
understanding somewhat opened, that we can see these matters
 in their true light. 

With all kindness toward those who are deceiving themselves
 and others, the truth compels us to acknowledge that 
the vast majority of those professing Christ are not Christians
 at all. Remarkably few members of any denomination 
know what they believe. We would not be misunderstood. We 
are not complaining that, there are not noble people connected 
with all the churches. On the contrary, we compliment them 
upon their education, their refinement, their wealth, their influence
, their humanitarian sympathies, as represented in 
hospitals, asylums and other benevolences. But all these 
things are shared by people who are not church members. Participation
 in good worlds is by no means a proof that one is 
a Christian. A Christian is a person who has entered into a 
very special relationship to God through Christ; and this 
relationship exists without respect to education, wealth, color 
or sex. 

ONLY THE TRUTH IS CONSISTENT 

In his discourses our Lord constantly reiterated the fact 
that he was seeking for some who should be accounted worthy 
to constitute his kingdom, to sit with him in his throne, to be 
his joint-heirs, to rule and to judge Israel and all other nations
. Not until we learn to differentiate between this kingdom
 class, otherwise styled his bride, the members of his body, 
his church, and the world that is to be ruled and judged by 
this class in due time, can we get a clear conception of the 
divine purposes progressing throughout this Gospel age. 

From this viewpoint we can most clearly see that no one 
ican be of this kingdom olass unless he reach a standard of 
faith and character development above and beyond that of the 
world in gerferal. We can see why this class should be called 
upon to bear the good fruits of character in a superlative degree
 and to walk the narrow way of self-denial and self-sacrifice
, in order to he fitted and prepared for the great work 
which the Lord has for them to do for the world during the incoming
 Millennial age. It seems peculiarly difficult for the 


majority of people long blinded by false doctrines to see the 
heavenly Father haa special times and seasons for the development
 of the various features of his plan of salvation. 

During the present time the world is getting a certain kind 
of experience which will be very valuable in the future, when 
God's due time shall have come for blessing all the families of 
the earth. Meantime, with those experiences come the disciplines
 of the laws of nature, under which poverty, sickness and 
mental and moral derangements follow excesses of evil doing 
even as pain follows contact with fire. And it is not unreasonable
 to hope that with the lessons of the present time before
 them, the world will act more wisely during the Millennial
 age than at present; that under the favorable conditions 
then prevailing many will not only rejoice in the great plan of 
salvation but will also avail themselves of it; for many are 
now careless in such matters because they can neither see nor 
walk by faith. 

SUEEENDEE SELF— SACRIFICE TO GOB 

According to the Bible no human being is fit for fellowship
 with God or fit for life eternal, for the reason that all 
mankind are sinners. The explanation for this condition is 
that father Adam sinned when he was perfect, in God's image, 
and so came under the death sentence; and that, cut off from 
God, Adam's posterity deteriorated as a race, imperfections 
of mind and body passing from parent to child. Imperfect 
beings would be altogether out of place among the perfeot; and 
as long as imperfection continues, sin will continue, and with 
it of necessity sorrow, pain and death; for these are the consequences
 of sin. — Romans 5:12, 19; 1 Corinthians 15:21. 

God declares his sympathy for the sinner, and has made 
provision through Jesus Christ for man's recovery from his 
present deplorable state. Not only so, but a time has been set 
for that recovery; and the Bible tells us that human uplift 
from sin and death conditions will be accomplished by Messiah
 during his Millennial kingdom. We pray: "Thy kingdom
 come; thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven," 
not with the thought that God will neglect his promise to establish
 that kingdom, but by way of acknowledging the fact 
that the Messianic kingdom is the hope of both world and 
church. 

The church's hope in the kingdom is that of becoming sharers
 with Christ in the glory, honor and immortality of that 
kingdom, for the blessing and uplifting of mankind out of sin 
and death. At the present time there is no attempt being 
made on God's part to convert the world. Few now hear the 
Gospel message, and still fewer believe it. Mankind are deluded
 by the adversary into thinking that for the past six 
thousand years God has been trying to convert the world, but 
has. made a miserable failure of it all along; and that if anything
 is done, man must do it for himself. Thus has unbelief 
been cultivated, and trust in God and in the teachings of the 
Bible thrust aside. 

For nearly nineteen centuries the Gospel message has gone 
hither and thither, quietly, unostentatiously. The world and 
the nominal church would say that it had accomplished nothing
, that everything worth while had been accomplished by 
them. But we prefer to stand by the Bible and to recognize 
that God's consecrated ones have indeed lifted up a light 
which the world has hated, and on account of which the lightbearers
 have frequently been put to death, have had their 
names cast out as evil or have been boycotted socially or otherwise
. If their hopes were merely in the present life, these 
light-bearers would be making a miserable failure of their opportunities
. But not so. They are waiting for their reward in 
the future, in the glorification of the church. 

HOW TO BECOME A CHRISTIAN 

Tlie question asked by the jailer of Philippi, "What shall I 
do to be saved?" is one which presents itself to earnest souls 
who are seeking for rest of heart and mind, who desire to draw 
near to God, if haply they can find him. St. Paul's reply is 
one which commends itself as the proper one. The one seeking 
salvation should believe on the Lord Jesus Christ as his Redeemer
, as the one who died on his behalf, through whose 
stripes he might be healed, saved, and through whose sacrifice 
he might rejoice in atonement with God. Having thus believed
 with all his heart, whether it required a moment or an 
hour to explain and to understand the simple first principled 
of the Gospel, the jailer's next step was to consecrate himself
, to be baptized into death with his Redeemer, and to symbolize
 that consecration into death by a water immersion. 
Moreover, he was encouraged to hope that his family might 
be sharers with him in his salvation, to become disciples of 
Christ. 

Let us learn from this brief statement of the Gospel made 
by the Apostle Paul the wisdom of simplicity and directness. 


L62581 


May IS, 1918 


T H E WA T CH TOWE R 


(154-155) 


lie might have preached a long discourse about the Jewish 
failure to keep the Mosaic Law. He might have discussed the 
various philosophies of the false religions of the Gentiles. 
But while these themes might be proper at the right time, 
evidently this was not the time suitable for them; and hence 
the Apostle confined his remarks to the general statement that 
Jesus was the Christ, the Messiah, that he had died for the 
world, that he must be laid hold upon by faith, and that to 
all who thus laid hold on him he became the power and the 
wisdom of God. 

To become a disciple of Christ is to become his follower, his 
pupil, to walk as he walked. The proposition is self-denial, 
self-effa cement. To become a Christian is to give one's self 
wholly to God. As the Apostle has said: "Present your bodies 
a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, your reasonable service
.'* (Romans 12:1) No one needs to go far to make his 
consecration. Each, at his own bedside, can give his little all 
to God. 

COUNTING THE COST 

It should not require long to count how much more we 
shall receive than we give; for we have only a condemned and 
dying existence to give. We give mental, moral and physical 
imperfections ; and Jesug our Savior, by imputing the merit 
of his sacrifice, makes ours of value in the sight of God. But 
in exchange we receive riches of grace in the present life — 
peace, joy, blessing of heart which the world can neither give 
nor take away; and in the life to come we shall receive glory, 
honor and immortality, joint-heirship with our Savior in the 
heavenly kingdom which shall dominate the world for a thousand
 years, for the blessing and uplift of the Adaraic race. 

Really, after counting the cost, there is a danger that we 
would feel so ashamed of the littleness of our offering that we 
would fear to come to the Lord with it. We gain courage 
to present our bodies a living sacrifice only by a knowledge of 


the Word of God and by a realization of the mercy and favor 
which has prompted his kind invitation for an exchange of 
something of little value for great things of inestimable value. 
But unless we take this very step and definitely and positively 
enter into a contract with the Lord,, we have neither part nor 
lot with him. We are still a part of the world, however much 
we may try to pattern our lives after decent models and to 
avoid the grosser and the finer sins. The covenant /with the 
Lord is the beginning of the Christian life; and to each covenanter
 there comes "grace to help in every time of need." 

But says some one: "Surely this is not the only way of 
coming into God's family, of becoming a Christian!" Yea, we 
reply, it is the only way. "There is none other name under 
heaven given among men whereby we must be saved." (Acts 
4:12) Jesus is the only one who can save mankind from their 
condition of condemnation and bring them back into the family
 of God. The Master himself makes the distinctive terms 
that in order to have the privilege of disciple-ship we must become
 full disciples. 

The limitations and obligations of the Christian are clearly 
defined, in the Scriptures. With regret we must say that the 
facts have been hidden from the people by the clergy, who 
have sought to set aside the words of Jesus because these 
conflict with their theories. For this reason many who have 
been seeking the truth have been unable to find it in the nominal
 churches. Therefore we urge all to return to the Bible 
simplicity of a fully consecrated church of Christ. 

The blessing upon the world will be earthly restitution to 
perfect human nature, instead of a change to the divine nature, 
as promised to the church. All who refuse both the call of 
the present time and the opportunity of the future restitution 
will die the second death, which St. Peter declares is like 
that of the natural brute beast.— Acts 3:19-23; 2 Peter 2:12. 


READING GOD'S WORD 


July 14.— Acts 8:26-31, 35-39; PsA. 19:7-11. 

TFIK FREEDOM WHEREWITH CHRIST MAKES FREE — KNOWLEDGE OF THE TRUTH NOT INSTANTLY ACQUIRED THE TRANSFORMING 

POWER OF THE WORD OF GOD — DIVINE METHOD OF REVEALING THE TRUTH— THE MOST PROFITABLE WAY TO STUDY THE BIBLE 
— THIS METHOD ILLUSTRATED — HELPFUL SUGGESTIONS FOR TRUE STUDENTS. 

"Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." — John 8:32. 
God's approval should be the highest aim of every one who grace, which time and cultivation ripen to a glorious maprofesses
 to believe in him as the Creator, and especially of 
those who have begun the Christian life, who accept Jehovah 
God as their Father, and who claim to hold the precious relationship
 of children to him. HiB will should be their highest 
law j and it should be a part of their daily and hourly pleasure
, as it is their privilege, to seek to know his will and to do 
it. This implies study, consideration, not a mere formality of 
thoughtless reading or of perfunctory worship, but the diligent 
use of every available means to learn what is the will of our 
heavenly Father. 

Divine truth is found only in the divinely appointed channel
, the Word of God as set forth by our Lord, the apostles 
and the prophets. To continue in the doctrines set forth in 
the inspired writings we must study them, meditate upon 
them, trust implicitly in them and faithfully conform our 
character to them. This is what is meant by "continuing in 
the Word of God," and is entirely compatible with the heeding
 of all the helps which the Lord raises up from among our 
brethren in the body of Christ, (Ephesians 4:11-15; 1 Corinthians
 12:12-14) All through the Gospel age the Lord has 
raised up such helps for the edification of the body of Christ; 
but it is the duty of every member carefully to prove the 
teaching of these helps by the infallible Word of God. 

If we thus continue in the Word of the Lord as earnest, 
sincere disciples, we shall indeed "know the truth," be "established
 in the present truth" (the truth now due) and be 
rooted and grounded in the truth. (2 Peter 1:12) Thus we 
shall be firm in the faith, "able to give a reason for the hope 
that is in us," able "to contend earnestly for the faith once 
delivered to the saints," to war a good warfare, to witness a 
good confession," and firmly to "endure hardship as good soldiers
 of Jesus Christ" even unto the end of our conflict. — 1 
Peter 3:15; Jude 3; 1 Timothy 6:12, 13; 2 Timothy 2:3. 
HOW WE ATTAIN THE TBXTTH 

We do not come into the knowledge of .the truth at a single
 bound but gradually, step by step, are we led. Every 
step is one of sure and certain progress to a higher vantage 
ground for further attainments both in knowledge and in established
 character. The truth thus acquired, step by step, becomes
 a sanctifying power, bringing forth in our lives its 
blessed fruits of righteousness, peace, joy in the holy Spirit, 
love, meekness, faith, patience and every virtue and every 


turity. 

Not only shall the'true disciple thus know the truth and be 
sanctified by it, but as the Lord said, the truth shall make 
him free. Those who have received the truth of God's Word 
know by blessed experience something of its liberating power. 
As soon as any measure of the truth is received into a good and 
honest heart, it begins to strike off the fetters of sin, of ignorance
, superstition and fear. Its health-restoring beams begin
 to penetrate the darkest recesses of our hearts and minds, 
and thus invigorate the whole beiflg. It quickens our mortal 
bodies. 

It is good to meditate upon, to ponder, the Word of God ; 
for only in so doing can we receive the nourishment it is designed
 to give. A hasty reading of the Scriptures and a quick 
return of the mind to other thoughts and pursuits makes a 
spiritual dyspeptic, incapable of assimilating the spirit of the 
truth, and lacking the strength and power of mature, developed
 Christian character. 

GOD'S WORD AND ITS EFFECT 

Psalm 19:7-11 refers us to the superior glory of God's 
special written revelation of himself, given through his inspired
 human agents, the prophets and the apostles. This 
testimony not only declares the existence, power and wisdom 
of Jehovah, with a silent intimation of his goodness and 
grace, but with overwhelming force it bears to the thoughtful 
mind the convincing testimony df all his glorious attributes 
and of his love toward us in" Christ. 

Other influences may lead to temporary and partial 
changes of course and action; but nothing else equals God's 
revealed truth in producing a change of being, character, soul. 
It is because other converting agencies and powers are so often
 used that there are very many glossed-over, nominal Christians
, as compared with the few whose entire beings are 
turned and fully consecrated to the Lord. People may be 
converted from savagery to civilization by a general knowledge, 
or from intemperance to sobriety by a study of the advantages 
of the latter over the former, or from dishonesty to honesty by 
learning that "honesty is the best policy." But none of these 
are soul conversions. Only God's truth can produce soul conversion
, as also our Lord indicates in Ms prayer: "Sanctify 
them through thy truth; thy Word is truth."-^John 17:17. 

The testimony of God's Word is not doubtful, but clear 


[6259] 


(156-157) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


and positive, making wise the single-hearted who have no 
will or plan of their own which they wish the Lord to adopt, 
but who seek the Lord's will only. His statutes, M3 appointed 
plans, are right, rejoicing the heart. Yes, indeed! God's 
glorious plan of the ages rejoices the hearts of all who have 
come to a knowledge of that blessed arrangement. The precepts
 or teachings of the Lord are clear, showing Us the unmistakable
 course and end of righteousness and of unrighteousness
. The reverence of the Lord ia a pure and lofty sentiment 
based upon love and gratitude, not upon a servile recognition 
of tyranny and power; and this proper fear, or reverence, will 
endure forever. 

Once, when following the leadings of mistaken teachers and 
of catechisms, we thought of the judgments of the Lord, his 
"eternal decrees," only with horror, supposing that they provided
 for the salvation of but a mere handful of our race 
and for the everlasting' misery of the masses. But what a 
change of sentiment has come since our eyes of understanding 
have been opened to the truth! Now God's decrees are sweet 
to our taste; we appreciate them greatly; we see that he has 
decreed a great Savior and a great salvation, open to the acceptance
 of every child of Adam; and that he has provided 
that all shall be brought to a clear knowledge of the truth, that 
tbey may have the fullest opportunity for everlasting life 
upon the only condition that God can make, that of righteousness
. Moreover, the thoughtful servant of God who meditates 
on God's decrees, judgments, is warned thereby; and in remembering
 and obeying them there is great reward. 
GOD'S METHOD OF TEACHING 

In the story of Philip and the Ethiopian eunuch we have 
an illustration of the divine method of teaching the Word. 
Many believe and teach that God teaches by impressions 
made upon the mind rather than by the written 
Word, the Bible. Others hold that God teaches by impressions 
which illuminate the Bible to each individual student. But 
the lesson of the eunuch's experience agrees with all the tea'chings
 of Scripture on this subject, and sets forth God's usual 
method. He uses his inspired Word as the text, and sends especially
 qualified representatives to expound it as the due time 
for understanding it approaches. 

The hand of divine providence is here agrain manifested in 
the choice of the Scripture reading which the eunuch did not 
understand. Beginning at V at portion of Isaiah's prophecy, 
Philip showed him how Jesus' sacrifice was the propitiation for 
the sin of the whole world; how that in -the clawn and vigor 
of manhood our Lord was cut off from life without any posterity
 to perpetuate his name, and yet is to have a numerous 
posterity; for God raised him from "the dead, and in due time 
would make him the Everlasting Father of all mankind, who 
would be brought back from the dead under the uplifting conditions
 of the Messianic kingdom. 

Philip's teachings must have been very comprehensive. He 
had evidently progressed from the foundation doctrine of justification
 by faith in Christ as the Redeemer to the doctrines 
of the resurrection of the dead and the restitution of all 
things, and then to the special privilege of the fully consecrated
 during the Gospel age, that of becoming joint-heirs 
with Christ and in due time' sharing his crown if now they 
willingly bear his cross. This seems evident from the fact that 
the eunuch was anxious to be baptized at once ; His promptness
 in this respect was another evidence of his acquiescence 
in the will of God and of his desire to be in full accord and 
cooperation with the' Lord. 

The eunuch's meek, teachable spirit made it easy for him 


to receive the Gospel message in its simplicity and beauty. He 
was already a ibeliever to the extent that he knew the truth, 
He was already justified by his faith in the Redeemer promised
. Now that justification became actually his, as his mind 
and his heart grasped the thought that the Crucified One was 
the Son of God who bought us with his own precious blood. 
He was already devoted to the Lord as far as he knew the divine
 will. But now, with clear knowledge sent directly to 
him through Philip, his consecration was revived, renewed, 
enlarged, applied. 

It is not so much the amount of time given to Bible reading
 that counts, but the amount of study done and the information
 gained. We -..il know people who have spent days, 
weeks and years in reading the Scriptures, but who have 
learned little or nothiner about God's plan for human salvation
. It is a great mistake to think that Bible study is merely 
the time spent in handling a Bible and in reading so many 
chapters per day. 

ADVANTAGES OF TOPICAL STTJDT 

The Studies in the ^Scriptures are not merely comments 
upon the Bible, but are practically the Bible itself in an arranged
 form for topical study. Our thought is, therefore, 
that these Scripture Studies are a very valuable help in 
the understanding of the Word of God. These books will be of 
no practical value to us, however, unless we see in them loyalty 
to that Word and, as far as our judgment goes, see them to 
be in full harmony with the Scriptures. Therefore in reading 
them for the first time, and perhaps the second time, and before
 we accept their teachings as our own personal faith and 
conviction, we should prove every point by the Word or disprove
 it, as the case may be. We should be satisfied with 
nothing less than a thorough investigation of the Bible from 
their standpoint. 

This is not a putting of the Scriptube Studies as a substitute
 for the Bible; on the contrary, the Studies continually 
refer to the Bible. Whoever, therefore, is doubtful as to any 
reference, or has forgotten any point in any degree, should refresh
 his memory, and should make sure that his every thought 
is in harmony with the Bible, and not merely in accord with 
the Scripture Studtes, although we firmly believe them to 
be in full accord with the Word of God. 

Quite a considerable number of the friends make it a rule 
to read from eight to twelve pages of the Studies daily ; and 
we might say here that we do not know of one who has followed
 this course and made use of the various means of grace 
provided by the Lord — such as the different meetings, the Berean
 lessons, the Manna text, etc. — and who has gone out of 
the truth. 

Furthermore, we would suggest that merely reading a given 
number of pages of the Scripture Studies would not be 
studying in the proper sense of the word. A proper study 
would be to think of the meaning of every word and every 
sentence. The thought is not to see how much one can read, 
but to make 3ure that one goes no further than he understands
, whether that means one page or twenty pages. We 
would not consider it a Scripture study in any sense of the 
word unless our thought has grasped the matter from the 
standpoint of seeking* to know what the Scriptures teach on 
the subject under consideration. Whoever will faithfully do 
this will not be merely reading; but studying; and whoever 
reads a few pages of Scripture Studies daily, with the suggested
 texts connected with those pages, will do more Scripture 
studying in that time than he could by any other known 
method." 


CHRIST IS ALL 


Though all thy life seem full of care 
And trials seem too hard to bear, 

Upon thy Father call. 
He'll from his Word send message meet 
And grace sufficient, promise sweet; 

For Christ is all in all. 

If little tests thy walks harrass 
And troubles small thy way compass, 
In these thou must not fall. 


Thy Father lets thee have them, so 
Thy character may stronger grow 
And Christ be all in all. 

Tf for a while thy life be bright 
Nor foes assail nor storms affright 

Nor darkened hours appall, 
In heaven above still find thy joy. 
Earth's good is but a transient toy; 

Let Christ he all in all. 


"LET PATIENCE HAVE HER PERFECT WORK" 

"Tjet patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, ivanting nothing." — James 1:4. 
Patience is the fruitage of enduring trust. To many minds ignation. But patience is more positive; it is a trait which 
the thought behind the word would be better expressed by indicates strength and self-discipline. It cannot be predicated 
constancy, perseverance, or cheerful endurance. Patience is of inexperienced perso s. but only of characters which have 
often confused with long suffering. That word is suggestive of been subjected to trials or affliction, pain or loss; and it almeek
, uncomplaining endurance of suffering, with humble res- ways shines brightest when manifested under the glowing heat 

[6260] 


May 15, 1913 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(157-158) 


of severe affliction. This trait takes a very prominent place 
in the galaxy of Christian virtues; for without it the heart 
'would grow "faint, the head weary, and the steps would soon 
falter along the narrow way in which the Church is called 
to walk. 

li ln your patience possess ye your souls," said the Master, 
implying the danger of losing our souls, our existence, if we 
fail to cultivate this grace which is so very necessary to our 
continuance in well doing* 

The Apostle James does not overstate the matter when 
he intimates that the perfect work of patience will make its 
subjects perfect and entire, wanting nothing; for the Apostle 
Paul assures us that God, who has begun the good work of 
developing character in us, will continue to perform it until 
the crowning day — the day of Jesus Christ. (Philippiana 
1:6) All his children will be subjected to just such discipline 
as they need for the correction of faults, the implanting and 
developing of virtues, and for their training and establishment
 in righteousness, so that they cannot be moved. "If ye 
be without chastisement [discipline and correction], whereof 
all [true sons of God] arc partakers, then are ye bastards, 
and not sons; for whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and 
scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. If ye [patiently] endure
 chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; for what 
son is he whom the father chasteneth not?" — Hebrews 12:8, 
G, 7. 

DEVELOPMENT A SLOW PROCESS 

This great work of developing and training character is 
necessarily a slow and tedious one, and not infrequently it is 
a painful process ; and the patience that cheerfully submits to 
it is begotten of a high appreciation of the ends to be attained. 
Patience is begotten of a love of righteousness, truth 
and godliness, and is therefore most noble and praiseworthy. 

But how can we let patience have her perfect work? Just 
by meekly doing the best we can each day, and doing it cheerfully
 and well ; making the best of every thing and going forward
 daily with true Christian fortitude to act the noble part 
in every emergency of affliction, pain or loss. Today's trial 
may bo a light one, perhaps almost imperceptible; or today 
may be one of the sunny days in which God bids our hearts rejoice
 in his overflowing bounty. Tomorrow may bring its cares 
and its petty vexations that irritate and annoy. Another tomorrow
 may witness the clouds gather above our heads, and 
as the days follow each other the clouds may grow darker and 
darker until we are forcibly reminded of that strong figure of 
the Psalmist — "I walk through the valley of the shadow of 
death." Yet never will the valley grow so dark that the patient
, trusting one cannot triumphantly exclaim: "Though I 
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear 
no evil; for thou [my 'Lord] are with me: thy rod and thy 
staff, thev comfort me." Yes, there is comfort in the "rod" 
(of chastisement), as well as in the "staff" (of providential 
care) ; for both are designed for our ultimate profiting. 
TABULATION WOKKETH PATIENOE 

The Apostle Paul tells us plainly that tribulation is necessary
 for the development of patience. "Tribulation worketh 
patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope." 
(Romans 5:3, 4) Consider how your own experience has verified
 this, you who have been for some time under the Lord's 
special care and leading. How much richer you are for all 
the lessons of experience, and for the patience that experience 
has developed in you! Although, like the Apostle, you can 
say that "no chastening for the present seemeth to bo joyous, 
but grievous; nevertheless, afterward it yieldeth the peaceable
 fruits of righteousness unto them which are exercised 
thereby." (Hebrews 12:11) In the exercise of patience the 
lessons of experience have made you stronger. They have increased
 your faith and drawn you into closer communion and 
fellowship with the Lord. They have made you to feel better
 acquainted with him, to realize more and more his personal
 interest in you and his care and love for you. And this 
in turn has awakened a deeper sense of gratitude and an increasing
 zeal to manifest that gratitude to him. Gratitude 
and zeal deepen the sense of fellowship with God, and give confidence
 to the hope of final and full acceptance with him as a 
son and heir, worthy through Christ. 

"Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down and 
[strengthen] the feeble knees" — "Let patience have her perfect 
work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing." 

The Apostle Jame3 urges that we take the prophets who 
have spoken in the name of the Lord for an example of suffering
 affliction and of patience. Then he cites the example 
of Job and the manifest end or purpose of the Lord in permitting
 him to. 'be so sorely tried: how the Lord was really 
very pitiful and of tender mercy, although the pity and mercy 
were not manifest except to the confiding faith that said, 
"Though he slay me, yet will I trust him'* — until the long 
and painful discipline had yielded the peaceable fruits and the 
subsequent rewards of righteousness. 

MORE THAN POLICY 

There is little virtue in the patience that endures merely 
from motives of worldly policy, though even that often has 
much advantage in it. Men in business dealings with fellowmen
 well know that an impetuous, turbulent disposition is 
greatly to their disadvantage, while patient con si deration » temperance
 in judgment, and good self-control are of immense 
value, even from a worldly, business standpoint. But the patience
 that is begotten of deep-rooted Christian principle is the 
kind that will endure all trials and shine the brighter for 
every affliction through which it may pass. 

Job, the servant of God, was accused of selfish policymotives
 for his remarkable patience and faithfulness; and it 
was boldly affirmed that if he were tried by adversity his 
mean motives would be manifest; that he would curse God 
to his face. But God knew better; and it was in Job's defense
 that he permitted him to be tried to the utmost that the 
loyalty of his heart might be manifest. Some of his poor 
comforters viewed Job's afflictions only in the light of chastisements
, failing utterly to comprehend the divine purpose, and 
this only added stings to his afflictions but through them all 
the Lord brought his servant and most fully vindicated him in 
the eyes of all the people. 

Thus will God ever do with all who patiently maintain their 
integrity and trust in him under affliction. If any man recognize
 affliction as a chastisement of the Lord for the correction
 of some evil way in him, let him be quick to learn 
the lesson and repent; or if it be refining discipline, let patience
 under the tedious process have its perfect work. 
PATIENT OKES Or OLD 

The Apostle Paul (Hebrews 11) calls up a long list of 
patient, faithful ones who endured cruel mockings and scourgings
, bonds and imprisonment, who were stoned, sawn asunder, 
were tempted, were slain with the sword, who wandered about 
in sheepskins aoid goatskins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented
; of whom the world was not worthy; who wandered 
in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the 
earth. All this they endured patiently for righteousness 
sake, looking by faith to God for the reward of their patience 
and faithfulness in his own good time. Then a^ain, says the 
Apostle (Hebrews 12:3), "Consider him [Christ] that endured
 such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye 
be wearied and faint in your minds." , Yea, consider him, 
"who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered
, he threatened not; but committed himself to him that 
judgeth righteously." He left us an example that we should 
follow his stepsWhile
 we see the great necessity for pruning, cultivating 
and discipline in' the development of character, it is manifest 
that none will be able to endure it unto the desirable end of 
final establishment in righteousness who do not from the 
beginning diligently devote themselves to the exercise of patience
. "He that shall endure unto the end, the same shall 
be saved." "In your patience possess ye your souls." 


NON-COMBATANT SERVICE DEFINED 


Many have written asking us what constitutes non-combatant
 service within the meaning of the Selective Draft Law. 
We have recently procured a copy of President Wilson's order 
and take advantage of this first opportunity to publish the 
same for the benefit of any who desire to know. It is dated 
Washington, D. C, March 20, 1918, and reads as follows: 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 

1. By virtue of authority contained in Section 4 of the 
a-ct approved May 18, 1917, entitled, "An act to authorize the 
President to increase temporarily the military establishment 

[62 


of the United States/' .whereby it is provided — 

"And nothing in this Act contained shall be construed 
to require or compel any person to serve in any of the 
forces herein provided for who is found to be a member of 
any well- recognized religious sect or organization at present 
organized and existing and whose existing creed or principles
 forbid its members to participate in war in any form 
and whose religious convictions are against war or participation
 therein in accordance with the creed or principles 
of said religious organizations; but no person so exempted 


61] 


(158-159) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


shall be exempted from service in any capacity that the 
President shall declare to be non-combatant," 

I hereby declare that the following military service is 
noncombatant service: 

a. Service in the Medical Corps wherever performed. This 
includes service in the sanitary detachments attached to 
combatant units at the front; service in the divisional 
sanitary trains .composed of ambulance companies and field 
hospital companies, on the line of communications, at the 
base in France, and with the troops and at hospitals in the 
United States ; also the service of supply and repair in the 
Medical Department. 

b. Any service in the Quartermaster Corps, in the United 
States, may be treated as non-combatant. Also, in rear of 
zone of operations, service in the following: Stevedore 
companies, labor companies, remount depots, veterinary 
hospitals, supply depots, bakery companies, the subsistence 
service, the bathing seryice, the, laundry service, the salvage 
service, the transportation repair service, and motor-truck 
companies. 

c. Any engineer service in the United States may be treated 
as non-combatant service. Also, in rear of zone of operations
, service as follows : Railroad building, operation and 
repair j road building and repair; construction of rear-line 
fortifications, auxiliary defenses, etc.; construction of 
docks, wharves, store-houses and of such cantonments as 
may be built by the Corps of Engineers; topographical 
work; camouflage; map reproduction; supply depot service
; repair service; hydraulic service; and forestry service. 

2. Persons ordered to report for military service under 
the above Act who have (*a) been certified by their Local 
Boards to be members of a religious sect or organization as defined
 in Section 4 of said Act; or (b) who object to participating
 in war because of conscientious scruples but have failed 
to receive certificates as members of a religious sect or organization
, from their Local Board will be assigned to non-combatant 
military service as defined in paragraph 1 to the extent that 
such persons are able to accept service as aforesaid without 
violation of the religious or other conscientious scruples by 
them in good faith entertained. Upon the promulgation of this 
order it shall be the duty of each Division, Camp, or Post Commander
, through a tactful and considerate officer, to present to 
all such persons the provisions hereof with adequate explanation
 of the character of non-combatant service herein defined, 
and upon such explanations to secure acceptances of assignment
 to the several kinds of non-combatant service above enumerated
; and whenever any person is assigned to non-combatant 
service by reason of his religious or other conscientious scruples 
he shall be given a certificate stating the assignment and reason
 therefor, and such certificate shall thereafter be respected 
as preventing the transfer of such persons from such non-combatant
 to combatant service by any Division, Camp, Post, or 
other Commander under whom said person may thereafter be 
called to serve, but such certificate shall not prevent the assignment
 of such person to some other form of non-combatant service
 with his own consent. So far as may be found feasible by 
each Division, Camp, or Post Commander, future assignments 
of such persons to non-combatant military service will be restricted
 to the several detachments and units of the Medical 
Department in the absence of a request for assignment to some 
other branch of non-combatant service as defined in paragraph 
1 hereof. 

3. On the first day of April, and thereafter monthly, each 
Division, Camp * or Post Commander shall report to the Adjutant
 General of the Army, for the information of the Chief 
of Staff and the Secretary of War, the names of all persons 
under their respective commands who profess religious or other 
conscientious scruples as above described and who have been 


unwilling to accept, by reason of such scruples, assignment, 
to non-combatant military service as above defined, and as to 
each such person so reported a brief, comprehensive statement 
as to the nature of the objection to the acceptance of such noncombatant
 military service entertained. The Secretary of War 
will from time to* time classify the persons so reported and 
give further directions as to the disposition of them. Pending 
such directions from the Secretary of War, all such persons 
not accepting assignment to non-combatant service shall be 
segregated as far as practicable and placed under the /command
 of a specially qualified officer of tact and judgment, who 
will be instructed to impose no punitive hardships of any kind 
upon them, but not to allow their objections to be made the 
basis of any favor or consideration beyond exemption from 
actual military service which is not extended to any other 
soldier in the service of the United States. 

4. With a view to maintaining discipline, it is pointed out 
that the discretion of courts-martial, so far as any shall be 
ordered to deal with the cases of persons who fail or refuse to 
comply with lawful orders by reason of alleged religious or 
other conscientious scruples, should be exercised, if feasible, 
so as to secure uniformity of penalties in the imposition of 
sentences under Articles of War 64 and 65, for the wilful disobedience
 of a lawful order or command. It will be recognized
 that sentences imposed by such courts-martial, when not 
otherwise described by law, shall prescribe confinement in the 
United States Disciplinary Barracks or elsewhere as the Secretary
 of War or the reviewing authority may direct, but not 
in a penitentiary; but this shay not apply to the cases of men 
who desert either before reporting for duty to the military authorities
 or subsequently thereto. 

5. The Secretary of War will revise the sentences and 
finding of courts-martial heretofore held^of persons who come 
within any of the classes herein described, and i>ring to the 
attention of the President for remedy, if any be needed, 
sentences and judgments found at variance with the provisions 
hereof. 

[Signed] Woodbow Wilson. 

Local Boards composed of men of different temperaments 
have not ruled uniformly in cases where application has been 
made for deferred classification on account of religious belief. 
President Wilson, however, has provided for such contingency 
in tho aforementioned Executive Order, as follows: 

"Persons ordered to report for military service under 
the above Act . . . who object to participating in war 
because of conscientious scruples but have failed to receive 
certificates as members of a religious sect or organization 
from their Local Board, will ibe assigned to non-combatant 
military service as defined in paragraph 1 to the extent 
that such persons are able to accept service as aforesaid 
without violation of the religious, or other conscientious 
scruples by them in good faith entertained." 
It is not the province of The Watch T^web to tell any one 
what he should or should not do; but we can and do say that 
every Christian should be obedient to the law. The order of 
the President is a part of the Selective Draft Law. Where 
one in good faith has applied to the Local Board for classification
 and the Board has not issued to him a certificate granting 
non-combatant service, then when called he should readily respond
 to the call by going to the cantonment and presenting 
himself to the commanding officer, who, under the President's 
order, has the power and authority to issue to him a certificate 
assigning him to non-combatant service. 

The President further provides that it is the privilege of 
such conscientious objectors to request assignment to some 
branch of non-combatant service aside from the Medical Department
. 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


WRESTLING NOT WITH FLESH AND BLOOD 
Dear Brother; — 

Acting on advice I am writing to you of my experience with 
the fallen angels. 

For seven years my brain has been in a vise, my head 
feeling like a rock weighing thousands of pounds — a dull intense
, drawing sensation much worse than pain. My mind 
seems full of colors — green, yellow, blue, pink, and then suddenly
 the whole head will seem to turn blood-red, producing 
hysteria, intense fear, and my mind becomes flooded with 
thoughts vile beyond description, with a total absence of faith 
in God. On page 127 in Vol. 7 this same condition is described 
precisely. 

Will give you a brief synopsis of my life. At twelve I 
consecrated and joined the Methodist church, but becoming 


disgusted T backslid. Living in a lonely, desolate country town, 
nothing to think of besides eternal torment, very easily I fell 
prey to Spiritism. First it seemed a light frivolity, a mysterious
 truth, but I became deeper involved to the extent of 
developing into a clairaudient, clairvoyant, writing and trance 
medium, giving complete will to the good ( ?) spirits. In four 
years time I read extensively the Progressive ( ? ) Thinker , 
studied deeply "Occult Life of Jesus," — what a deadly insult 
to our dear Lord — and many books written by the "departed" ; 
at eighteen I found I was being made a dupe, because these 
people became weak, degenerate and immoral. My life was 
ahead of me. I dropped Spiritism like a hot cake but too late. 
An indefinite something began bothering me, affecting my 
mind. I next looked into Evolution, Reincarnation, New 
Thought, Palmistry, Phrenology, to drop them all as empty. 


[6262] 


May IS, 1913 


THE WATCH TOWER 


U5*-M6) 


Walking streets and fighting insanity, eventually in a public 
library I picked up "Science and Health." I read it — ah, 
here is the truth at last, I thought — was healed ( ?) almost 
instantly, laid off glasses and was transformed into another 
girl. I lived in the clouds for two years, joined the church 
and got along lovely with occasional trials which "Science" 
always met. Then I became wise to the fact that again I was 
duped. Two-thirds of these people made jackasses of themselves
, became silly, dishonest, and off their balance, and 
usually got some ailment, finally, which "Science" couldn't 
meet. Then one day suddenly my head went off. I fought 
desperately for thro* 1 years, was insane; tried thirtren different
 "Science" practitioners, all told me I waa "making something
 of it." Asking what "it" means, was told "it" was an 
illusion, a belief in another power opposed to God, principle. 
That left me in the dark, and I continued having violent raving
 spells. Next I tried medical doctors, chiropractors, etc., 
and finally went back to Christian Science but it was empty 
as a gourd and had a "missing link" which no one could explain
. Now I know this missing link to be found in Isaiah 
14th chapter, 12th to 14th verses, which clarifies the whole 
thing. 

After five years of thi3 misery and no solution anywhere, 
desperation followed and suicide was attempted different times. 
One Sunday at dinner table I suddenly felt myself taken hold 
of and pushed out. Like a flash I thought, "This is no illusion
, something having power and intelligence is possessing 
me"; but I knew not what it was and wont into a violent 
spell. But in that spell came a confession beginning with the 
words, "She has caught me. I have been here twenty years." 

Will not go into details. I had three spells in which this 
"thing" talked. It was vicious, evil-loving, sexless, nameless
, said it was thousands of years old and hated God; but 
"it" couldn't use me to do the worst of evils, which it cursed 
about. I was too high-minded. 

We all thought this was just delirium. A few weeks after 
a colporteur sister called with Volume I Scripture Studies. 
J was pacing the floor, putting down my hair, fighting this 
demon (as I now know). She pulled out the chart in front 
of "The Divine Plan of the Ages." Here was something I 
never looked into. I sat down, mother went out, and I fired 
questions at the sister, which she answered satisfactorily. She 
took up my case, read the volumes to me, and instructed me 
orally. Although the booklet on Spiritism was read, the 
friends did not credit the demon confession, but thought it 
was merely physical trouble. I again grew worse, felt abandoned
 and made a desperate effort at suicide, but failed. Then 
I said, "Lord, whoever thou art, I'll give myself to thee"; and 
I fully consecrated. A Seventh Volume, with page 127 marked 
was sent me through the mail. I was astounded at that page 
describing minutely my case. 

Some friends in this city who had experience with fallen 
angels heard of my case and tried to reach me to help. Events 
transpired that led me to come here to stay with them. I 
have been here five weeks studying, praying, making special 
study of Volume 7 and "Spiritism" booklet, but so far my 
"head" condition cannot be helped nor will the demon let me 
alone. It threatens, torments me and I have been thrown into 
several spells, which are less violent in the presence of God's 
people. Brother Bohnet was here and made my case a matter 
of special prayer. 

These demons seem in appearance to be beautiful, fascinating
, but their character is vile. They do not desire to return 
to their "first estate" and say they will do more and worse 
evils now, so many minds being open. Well, they are having 
their trial now, and if I must endure them foT a time what a 
help I may be, in the coming age, to the poor mental and moral 


wrecks that have been made by them! My prayer is for grace 
to endure if God doesn't see fit to remove this torture. It may 
be valuable some day, otherwise I would destroy myself. Please 
excuse mistakes. A presence at elbow, is being fought with to 
get this written — badly, I know, but will send it on. Too 
nervous to rewrite. 

May the dear Lord bless you and the dear Seventh Volume 
that is so misunderstood. I didn't accept it at first, but now 
it is the biggest comfort I ever had. 

Your sister in Christ, L. M. W. — Iowa. 

PEBSECUTED BY OEBMAN CLERGY 

Dear Brethren: 

You will be pleased, dear brethren, to know that the Lord's 
work is progressing here, notwithstanding the pressure of prevailing
 conditions. In Germany, however, the brethren report 
great difficulties, owing to the opposition of. the clergy, who are 
making their influence felt in a greater measure than ever 
before. But the truth is gaining headway nevertheless; the 
"atone" of Daniel's vision is rolling in upon and smashing one 
stronghold of the adversary after the other; and all who are 
truly the Lord's rejoice. 

Wishing you the Master's grace and continued blessing and 
praying that we may all be counted worthy of a share in the 
kingdom soon, I remain with much Christian love to you all, 

Your fellow servant in the Lord, 

C. C. Binkele, — Switzerland. 

STRENGTH FOB THE LAST STAND 

Dear Co-Laborers : 

I cannot refrain from asking a precious moment or two 
to express my appreciation of the recent Towers. 

After reading the greater portion of the last one (Apr. 
15th) aloud to Mother, whose eyes prevent her from reading 
much for herself, I exclaimed; "How can any one read that 
Tower and not read the spirit of Brother Russell and the 
spirit of Christ in every word of it? How can one help 
recognizing that God is using it to feed, strengthen, encourage, 
advise and sustain his little ones for their last, strong stand!" 

Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace always by 
all means. The Lord be with you all. — 2 Thess. 3:16. 

Yours "hid with Christ in God," B. S. L.— N. Y. 

HOPES STILL BRIGHT IN FRANCE 
(Translation) 
Dear Brother Rutherford and Bethel Friends: 

Yesterday we, 21 brethren and sisters, had the blessed privilege
 of commemorating the death of our beloved Savior, our 
own participation in the experiences of his body and in the 
oup of suffering, while still waiting for the real participation 
in the kingdom. It is a sweet thing to think that under such 
circumstances as these we can remember the dear people of 
God scattered here and there over all the earth, and meditate 
upon the grand drama which has 'been in process of enaction 
for nineteen centuries. 

The friends at this place and in various other parts request
 me to advise you that we no longer receive the French 
Watch Tower, or other literature, from Geneva, on account 
of the restrictions on matter coming from Switzerland. Brother 
Freytagf informs us that he has taken the situation up with 
the military authorities, but we feel dubious about his success
. But we do thank the Lord for this much, that everything
 sent us from Brooklyn or from London has come to hand 
regularly. 

The Lord bless you and guard you and the other members
 of the Editorial Committee — such is our daily prayer. 

With much love, your brother in Christ, our Hope. 

Lequime Samuel. — France. 


WILFUL SINS OF THE WORLD 


Question: — Do you understand that the only sins which ttie 
sufferings of the great company will expiate on behalf of the 
world will be deliberate sins against the Lord's people? 

Answer: — Yes. 

Question: — Is it your opinion, then, that all other sins of 
the world will be ignored ; i. e., will be atoned for by the merit 
of Christ? 

Anstcer: — Yes; except that each man, as we have said, 
keeps an account in his own mind and his own body. Whoever 
violates the laws of nature brings the penalty upon himself, as 
a result of his course or his action. It ifl just as when one 
eats too much food at a meal, or eats what does not agree 
with him; he will have some distress, Borne impairment of 
health, whether he is a saint or a sinner. His discomfort will 


be the natural result of a lack of the exercise of proper judgment
 or of the necessary knowledge. It is a matter of judgment
 on God's part, an automatic penalty. 

We understand, however, that in the great time of trouble 
now coming upon the World, God is judging the nations as nations
; and, of course, this will mean much suffering to the 
individuals of the world. God's time has now come to supplant 
&\\ these earthly arrangements and institutions, based upon 
selfishness, and establish his own righteous government for the 
blessing of all mankind — the living and the dead. This procedure
 will be something unique, never before known. God will 
here judge down, judge to destruction, everything that is not 
in perfect harmony with his righteous laws. But it will be for 
man's good, even though involving much suffering and trouble, 


mm 


"BE INSTANT IN SEASON AND OUT OF SEASON* 


Recently the Society addressed a letter to all the classes 
suggesting that they put forth a special effort to advertise a 
large public meeting, on the topic "THE WORLD HAS ENDED
—MILLIONS NOW LIVING- WILL NEVER DIE." Some 
of the classes got the impression from the letter that we would 
send a Pilgrim to them for a Sunday appointment in the near 
future, and on the strength of this secured halls and wired us 
they were ready. The thought suggested in our letter, however, 
was that when a Pilgrim comes, whether on a Sunday or on a 
week day, each class should put forth a special effort for one 


public meeting on the above topic if possible. We find many 
people are anxious to hear this subject discussed. It was not 
our thought to send any special speakers Ipng distances to address
 merely Sunday meetings, but rather a special effort for 
public witness should be made in connection with all regular 
traveling and visiting Pilgrims' appointments, regardless of the 
day of the week on which their visits occur. lit us "preach 
the Word; be instant in season, out of season. " (2 Tim. 4:2) 
The time is short, the opportunities precious, the rewurd great 
and glorious! 


CANADIAN BRANCH OFFICE 


In a recent issue we announced the purpose of opening a 
braneh office in Canada. The office is now established. Please 
address all communications to Watch Toweb Bible and Tract 
Society, 143 Donald Street, Winnipeg, Manitoba. 

The duties of this branch office will be limited. Exchange 
is so excessive that we find it better to have an office in Canada
 to handle all financial matters pertaining to the work in 
that country. The Canadian branch will receive remittances 


for subscriptions to The Watch Tower, "Good Hopes*' and 
Tract Fund donations, orders for supplies, books, etc. Orders 
will be filled from there so far as possible. 

All Pilgrims will be routed from the Brooklyn office, a 
copy of the routing being furnished to the office in Canada. 
All requests for Pilgrims should be sent to the headquarters at 
Brooklyn. Arrangements for specially advertised public meetings
 will be made through the Canadian branch office. 

