VOL. XXII. MARCH 15, 1901. No. 6. 
CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 99 

Christendom's Financial Outlook 99 

National Preparations for War 99 

The Spirit of Lawlessness 100 

"I Find no Fault in this Man" 102 

The Atoning Sacrifice Completed 105 

Paradise Promised 107 

"Father Into Thy Hands I Commit 

My Spirit" 108 

"Despised and Rejected of Men" 109 

"They that Reverenced the Lord 

Spake Often Together" 110 

page 98 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 



FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 

We have just received from London a fresh invoice of wall 
texts, illuminated motto-cards, etc., suitable for the walls of 
your parlors, dining-rooms, and bed-rooms. Our previous announcement 
of these embellishments brought so many orders 
that what we considered a good supply was quickly exhausted. 

The new lot is the choicest we have ever had— about one-half 
the same that we had before and one-half new designs. 
Hence those who got of the previous lot, and want all new patterns 
should say so. Or if they want any of the older patterns 
duplicated, mention which, and if possible, we will accommodate 
you. They are all choice, however, and if you had two 
of the same text, in different rooms, it would not matter. 
Orders will be filled in rotation as received. 

We have concluded to assort these in One Dollar parcels as 
before. You will be pleased with the general assortment, 
which will be known as parcels a, b and c, each different from 
the other. The prices, including postage, are about one-half 
what such goods are usually sold for in this country— though 
not as cheap as the British prices; because ocean freights and 
custom house duties are considerable. British friends will, 
therefore, receive still better parcels for the money from our 
London branch. We are not supplying these for filthy lucre's 
sake; but for the blessings that may result to you and yours 
through frequent suggestions in every part of your home of 
some of the choicest precepts and promises of the Scriptures. 

ONE DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS. 

Baltimore, Md., Sunday, March 10th, at Dushane Hall (3d 
floor) cor. Baltimore street and Post Office avenue; at 10:30 
A.M., a Praise and Testimony Meeting. At 2:30 P.M., discourse 
by Editor of this journal. At 7:30 P.M., a Question Meeting. 

Wheeling, W.Va., Sunday, March 24th, at 10 A.M., Praise 
Meeting; 1 1 A.M. and 3 P.M., discourses by Editor of this 
journal; at 7:30 P.M., Testimony Meeting. 



R2783 : page 99 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



NATIONAL PREPARATIONS FOR WAR. 

WE CLIP the following from a Pittsburg daily, 
which shows that the Hague Peace Conference 
of 1899 is not taken very seriously by any of 
the nations:— 

"To carry out the various programmes of naval 
construction, as framed by the nations of the world, 
will require an outlay of five billion dollars. England 
set the pace several years ago, and now many of her 
great ships are out of date and out-classed. 

"The United States government arranged to spend 
$60,000,000, of which $20,000,000 will be expended 
in 1901. The cost of the tools and places to repair 
ships, is almost as expensive as the ships themselves. 
The value of ships is ephemeral, owing to the constant 
changes in types. 

"England has under construction 17 battleships, 
24 cruisers, 8 sloops of war and 25 torpedo destroyers, 
at a total cost of $133,000,000. This will not complete 
the fleet but moves them forward and completes 
those ordered, under a former appropriation. 

"France has provided for a naval construction 
reaching to 1907, in which a total of 220 vessels are to 
be built, the outlay of 1901 being figured at 
$124,000,000. 

"The plans of Germany cover 34 battleships, 32 
cruisers and 80 torpedo boats. The appropriation for 
1901 is $100,000,000. Russia's expenditures in 1901 
is placed at $46,000,000 for the beginning of the work 
on new ships and completing those under way. 

"Poverty-stricken Italy will expend $30,000,000 
on her navy in 1901. Japan's budget for naval equipment 
in 1901 is $23,000,000. Austria, Sweden, Holland 
and Denmark are preparing to double their naval 
expenditures. Verily, the wings of the angel of 
peace are not to be spread over the ocean during the 
early years of the new century." 

CHRISTENDOM'S FINANCIAL OUTLOOK. 



Because the great time of anarchistic trouble for 
which the Scriptures teach us to look in the near 
future is to be the agency through which the "present 
evil world [age]" will collapse, and prepare the 



way for the Millennial Kingdom, therefore our interest 
in the financial situation as related to prophetic 
fulfilment. 

"Money -making," the accumulation of vast 
wealth, cannot under present conditions come from 
day-labor in cultivating the soil or otherwise. It 
comes from the use of machinery, which today is so 
complete and abundant in civilized lands that each nation 

R2784 : page 99 

is able to much more than supply its own demands 
and must compete for outside business. This 
is the meaning of the Chinese trouble— she has hundreds 
of millions of people, and Christendom wants 
their patronage and in the name of Civilization will 
insist on having it;— even tho it costs blood and 
treasure it must be had for the future still more than 
for the present. 

Truth to tell, the present era of prosperity would 
have collapsed a year ago had it not been for the wars 
which came just in time to prolong the momentum. 
The Spanish, Philippine, Boer and Chinese wars have 
taken men from the ranks of labor and helped in that 
way; and have drawn money from the treasuries of 
the nations and put it into circulation among the people 
as the price of services, provisions, armaments, 
etc., etc.,— bonds taking the place of money as "collateral." 
Note the above naval expenditures alone, 
and consider how the $500,000,000 to be spent this 
year is already giving employment to miners, coke-workers, 
steel-workers, railroad employees, ship-builders, 
boiler and engine-builders and gun-makers. 

And this is but one item of the world's war expense. 
For instance, in the United States Senate 
one of its most careful and responsible members declared, 
"The military budget of this Republic for the 

R2784 : page 100 

coming year will be nearly $400,000,000. It will be 
nearly twice what any European power is spending." 
Of this amount, only one twentieth is for the navy as 
shown above. 

If present wars continue, or others break out and 
necessitate further expenditures and more bonds, the 
"good times" will last a while longer, until something 
occurs to cause distrust; then a panic will ensue, which, 
because of present conditions, will grind the masses as 
none other ever did;— and then will come the collapse 
which we expect will spread to everybody and everything 
in "Christendom." Money is now pushing the 
lever forward and keeping the people busy, because it is 
more than proportionately profited; and when the time 
comes, as it must come, when national bonds will no 
longer be in demand, it will be the Money-power that 



will take fright and reverse the lever and arrest the 
world's machinery with a jolt that will shake the social 
structure. 

Already both Great Britain and Germany have 
found it expedient to place their bonds in the United 
States rather than at home. Already there are premonitory 
signs of financial trouble in Germany— as 
the result of "over-production," competition, inability 
to find a market for her products. Already British 
manufacturers are suffering from competition; and 
the manufacturers of the United States could do nearly 
double their present business if they had the demand 
for their goods. 

We clip the following from the Boston Herald:— 

"Germany is feeling sharply similar conditions. 
The Berlin correspondent of a London newspaper says 
the German mortgage banks are in a bad way, which, 
indeed, is not news, since it has been known for 
some time. The important point is that the situation 
does not improve. The electrical industries, the iron 
trade and the wool-spinning industry are extremely 
dull, the latter being reported almost ruined. The 
cities are full of unemployed people, and the paternal 
government is busily devising public works and charitable 
arrangements for their relief. There has been 
in late years an enormous industrial development in 
Germany, bolstered up, to some extent, by artificial 
means. Naturally this has been accompanied by an 
enormous speculative movement. Should it collapse, 
the consequence would be a period of hard times, the 
duration of which cannot be predicted with any confidence. 
Germany has been, as it were, intoxicated 
by glory and hope. All classes of the population are 
puffed up with a sense of national destiny. They have 
appeared to think that nothing could withstand their 
progress to the supremacy of the world. Any rude 
shattering of their dreams would result in corresponding 
dejection when its significance was fully realized. 
According to all accounts having semblance of truthfulness, 
the present prospect is dark and threatening." 

Concerning the condition of things in Russia, the 
Industrial World, Odessa, says:— 

"It is no ordinary, temporary, fleeting or passing 
financial and industrial crisis which Russia faces. 
Her staple industries for some time have steadily 
languished, from causes various and deep-rooted, 
which it is the government's duty to investigate. 
Money is daily becoming scarcer. No year in forty 
has opened under blacker auspices. The country is 
within measurable distance, all around, of an economic 
collapse." 

If it is thus in the face of such immense national 
expenditures, how will it be when these and other great 
enterprises are forced to stop by a great panic? When 
it will come, no one can tell; but the Lord's people 
who order their affairs more for the accumulation of 



heavenly than of earthly wealth will be in the more 
favorable condition (both of head and heart) to take 
their share of whatever may be permitted of their 
Heavenly Father, and to profit by it. In view of the 
foregoing, we would not be surprised if wars would 
continue or increase, and thus prolong the present 
"good times" for a while, and thus financially weaken 
the nations for their fall. But we make no predictions. 
The Master's advice is always in order, "Watch 
and pray, lest ye enter into temptation." 

THE SPIRIT OF LAWLESSNESS PREVALENT. 



The tendency away from peace toward lawlessness 
and war continues to be evidenced on every hand. 
The passion for blood and destruction still strives, 
however, to justify itself in some "righteous cause;" 
but the appetite, once whetted, will some day be careless 
respecting any claims of justification; and then 
some "good people" will be sorry that they did not 
balance their justice more evenly; that they helped 
unchain the tiger, that lies dormant, but not dead, in 
every fallen human being. 

The war against the Boers— to compel them to 
give the elective franchise to a few hundred foreigners, 
"uitlanders," has not only cost thousands of lives 
and millions of money, but has given thousands a taste 
of blood and fire, of recklessness of life and property 
which will prepare them for the coming scenes of anarchy 
at home. The same is true of the American 
soldiers in the Philippines, and the soldiers of all 
"Christendom" in China. 

The same spirit has manifested itself in nearly 
every nation of Europe against the Jews, and in 
Turkey against Christians. And it is a part of the 
spirit that has made possible horrible lynchings in 
this country; and which backs the present saloon-smashing 
now in vogue in Kansas. In all these cases 
those taking law into their own hands and practicing 
violence, would urge that right was on their side. 
Doubtless to some extent this is often true; what we 
point out is the spirit of lawlessness, anarchy which is 

R2784:page 101 

growing, and which will bear a "whirlwind" harvest 
ere long. 

TRUSTS AS VIEWED BY JUSTICE BROWN. 



"Justice Brown, one of the ablest members of the 
Supreme Court of the United States, in his John 



Marshall address at Parkersburg, W.Va., made some 
remarks pertinent to the trust question in speaking of 
the future of the judiciary of this country. 'The problems 
to be solved in the future,' he said, 'were those 
of combinations of capital and monopoly.... 
Society must adapt itself to the new conditions and 
do all it can to minimize the evils. It will not be the 
judges and the lawyers of the twentieth century who 
will have to face these problems, but the statesmen. 
There will be a struggle fought out with the desperation 
of hunger and possibly with bloodshed, but society will 
have to readjust itself on the basis of justice and 
equity.'"— Pittsburg Post. 



We endorse the above. We do not say that Trusts 
and combinations are unmitigated evils— that serve 
no good purpose; but admitting that such great combinations 
of capital serve a great purpose in economy 
of management and cheapening the cost of life's 
necessities— just as socialism would propose— we see 
nevertheless the impossibility of this reduced cost 
reaching and benefiting the public. We see that selfishness 
will maintain or raise prices and perhaps reduce 
wages to increase the stock dividends, even tho 
the process grind the masses into the dust. Those 
who forget that selfishness is the motive power of "the 
present evil world," will err in all their calculations. 

Socialists err on the other side of the question;— 
in supposing that people in general would work either 
their hands or their brains vigorously, if the incentives 
of gain, selfishness, wealth, were removed by 
legislation or otherwise. Not until the strong hand 
of the Kingdom of God, backed by the strong love of 
the glorified Christ (head and body— Rom. 8:17) takes 
control of earth's affairs can socialistic programs hope 
for success. 

THE POPE CRAVES POWER TO SUPPRESS 
PROTESTANTISM. 



The pope gave a hint respecting one cause of his 
anxiety to recover temporal power in Rome, when, 
addressing the Duke of Norfolk and accompanying 
English Catholics, recently, he said:— 

"Under our eyes, in this holy city, which should 
be the inviolate center of Catholicism, it is permitted 
to associations for religious propagation to take advantage 
of the sad economic conditions of the country 
to corrupt the faith of our children in the name of the 
specious doctrine of judgment, which pretends to leave 
each the right of interpreting in his own fashion the 
doctrine of Christ. You are right in protesting against 



this state of things, which enables you better to 
understand the grievous circumstances in which we 
have lived during the twenty-five years of our 
Pontificate." 

R2785 :page 101 

Commenting on this the London Spectator truly 
remarks:— 

"In other words, temporal power is needed to 
prevent liberty of worship and of conscience in Rome, 
and to cleanse Rome from the defilements of Protestant 
teaching. Yet the Pope praises the British nation 
because it allows full liberty of conscience. Fortunately 
there is little fear of Papacy recovering the 
temporal power. And, in truth, all good Roman 
Catholics should rejoice that this is so. Nothing 
could result therefrom but spiritual injury." 

IMPORTANT CONCESSIONS BY THE PORTE. 



"We are enabled to announce an important concession 
respecting the right of Jews to hold property 
in Palestine, which has been obtained from the Porte 
by M. Isaac Fernandez, President of the Comite 
Regional of the Alliance Israelite in Constantinople. 
For several years past, Jews of all nationalities, even 
Ottoman subjects born in Palestine, have been forbidden 
to buy landed property in Palestine. M. Fernandez 
has now secured for Jews who have been settled 
in the Holy Land for a considerable time, whether 
subjects of Turkey or of foreign powers, the right to 
buy "Miri" (agricultural land) and to have the property 
inscribed in their own names. The special importance 
of this concession lies in the fact that while 
"Mulk" (town land) is owned by private individuals, 
"Miri" is the property of the Sultan. 

"M. Fernandez has rendered an immense service 
not only to his co-religionists, but to the entire population 
of Palestine. The Imperial Treasury will be 
among the first to derive material benefit from the 
measure mentioned above. The government of the 
Sultan has thereby given a fresh proof of the religious 
toleration which is a tradition in its annals."— Jewish 
Chronicle. 



"We are in a position to state that according to 
our latest information from Constantinople the views 
expressed in authoritative Turkish circles are favorable 
towards political Zionism, and the advantages 
the Ottoman Empire will derive from it. We can 
further state that we are now in the midst of negotiations 



of far greater importance than the mere annulling 
of the prohibition of immigration would signify." 
—Report of Zionist Committee in Die Welt. 



R2785 : page 102 

"I FIND NO FAULT IN THIS MAN.' 
LUKE23:13-26.-MARCH 17. 



HAVING gone through the form of a trial, a mockery 

of justice— the chief priests and scribes and 

Pharisees, with a multitude of their retainers and servants, 

a clamoring mob, led Jesus to Pilate, while it was 

still early in the morning. (John 18:28.) But they remained 

in the court-yard while Jesus was led alone to the 

judgment hall, probably by a court attendant or a sentry, 

the Jews declining to enter because so doing would 

make them ceremonially unclean, and hinder their observance 

of the Passover feast which would begin that 

same night. What a curious blending this shows us of 

cleanness and uncleanness! How exact they were to a 

jot and tittle about matters of minor importance, and 

how utterly lost to all sense of heart-purity and love, 

the real essence of the divine law! We who are of 

spiritual Israel need to be on guard against such a development 

of outward religious ceremony and formalism, 

carefulness and purity, which might be accompanied 

by a blackness of heart and utter absence of holiness 

and love for righteousness. As a matter of fact, 

these chief religionists among the Jews were murderers 

at heart, from the divine standpoint, while careful of the 

outward ceremonies of their religion. Let us not be 

like unto them. 

It was an unusual thing to accuse one of their 
countrymen before a Roman governor. It was customary, 
on the contrary, from them to seek to hide their 
faults and to secure acquittal, or at least as much leniency 
as possible. Therefore, these prominent men of 
the nation had no question but what Pilate would immediately 
assent to their demand, and crucify Jesus. 
They seem to have been surprised that he should inquire 
respecting the facts of the case, or show an interest in 
giving justice— especially in protecting a Jew from the 
wrath of his countrymen, particularly the leaders of 
his nation. When, therefore, Pilate inquired, "What 
accusation bring ye against this man?" they answered 
him, "If he were not a malefactor we would not have 
delivered him up unto thee." Pilate then dismissed 
the matter as one of Jew against Jew, and not of Jew 
against Caesar, saying, "Take ye him, and judge him 
according to your law." (John 18:29,31.) But the 
Jews replied, "It is not lawful for us to put any man 
to death." The Roman government had taken away 



from the Jewish Sanhedrin the power of capital punishment, 

and nothing short of Jesus' death was in their 

minds. 

They had failed to have Pilate's speedy endorsement 
of their condemnation, regardless of justice, and 
now they must put their plea upon another ground— 
they must formulate a charge, and it must be such a 
charge as would appeal to the Roman governor. They 
well knew that their condemnation of Jesus for having 
said that he was a Son of God would be nothing in the 
estimation of Pilate; hence, after condemning Jesus 
unjustly for blasphemy, they made before Pilate a new 
charge, of three counts: (1) Sedition— disturbing the 
peace; (2) that he interfered with the collection of the 
Roman taxes; (3) that he himself claimed to be a king, 
and was thus an antagonist of Caesar. 

Pilate quickly saw the true state of the case; viz., 
that "through envy the chief priests had delivered 
Jesus" and condemned him, and not through any new-found 
love for Caesar and his government; and leaving 
the multitude of accusers in the court Pilate went into 
the judgment hall, where Jesus stood, and questioned 
him, "Art thou the King of the Jews?" (John 18:33.) 
The whole matter must have seemed very ridiculous 
to Pilate, who, we must remember, was neither Christian 
nor Jew, but a heathen man, in whose judgment 
all the hopes of Israel respecting Messiah would be 
absurdities on a plane with the chimerical hopes of the 
various nations the world over. He perceived that the 
person before him was a remarkable one, and the answer 
of Jesus led only to greater perplexity, for he told 
him that his Kingdom was not of the present time and 
order, but a future one, and that he had come to bear 
witness to this truth. Pilate found himself getting 
only deeper into problems which he could not comprehend, 
and suddenly broke off the conversation with the 
question: "What is truth?"— without waiting for or 
expecting an answer, as tho he would say, Yes, yes; we 
hear of truth, justice and equity, but what is it, and 
where is it to be found? Who shall determine what is 
the right? Are you right, or am I, here the representative 
of Rome, in the right, and authority, or are those 
Jews who are clamoring for your death in the right? 
What is truth? It is too perplexing a question for us 
to discuss further. 

Pilate, however, had made up his mind definitely 
that there was no danger whatever to the Roman Empire 
from the meek and lowly person whom he had interviewed 
—he was surely not an anarchist, not an insurrectionist 
of any kind. He could do no harm in 
the world, and even if his teachings respecting his 
own heavenly origin and kingship were baseless and 
the product of an unbalanced mind, nevertheless the 
individual himself was no menace to Rome. And thus 
he expressed himself in the words of our Golden Text: 
"I find no fault in this man." (Luke 23:4.) And 



Pilate's decision has been the decision of all honorable, 
fair-minded people throughout the world from his day 

R2785 : page 103 

to the present, irrespective of religious prejudices. 
Whatever fault has been found has been against those 
professed followers who have taken his name— in vain: 
those who have claimed to be his followers, but who 
have not followed him, but have rather gone contrary 
to his teachings in many ways. These have brought 
dishonor often upon the sacred name, but as for Jesus, 
the world today declares with Pilate, "We find no 
fault in this man." Yea, the world loves to quote 
many of his blessed sayings, and many wish for a 
government built upon the principles of righteousness 
which he enunciated, even tho many who thus proclaim 
are unwilling to be guided by his precepts. 

The Jewish leaders were chagrined with Pilate's 
decision, and began to argue the points and to attempt 
to prove that the teachings of Jesus were calculated to 
arouse a revolution amongst the people; that already 
in Galilee it had great influence, and now he was coming 
to Jerusalem, etc. True, the Lord's teachings were 
revolutionary as respected religious matters; but the 
charge was not true in the sense they wished Pilate to 
understand, that he was a breeder of a political revolution. 
And this is a good point for all of the Lord's 
followers to note: we, like our Lord, stand committed 
to a revolution amongst God's people on the lines of 
true religious worship, heart-obedience to the Lord, 
etc., but we, like our Lord, have nothing whatever to 
do with political revolutions. We know that such are 
coming in the Lord's own time and way, but we battle 
not with carnal weapons, as he did not; but as he did, 
so do we, wait for the Kingdom which God will establish 
in his own time and way— we wait for the expiration 
of "the times of the Gentiles," when, as God has 
foreordained and forearranged, the Kingdoms of this 

R2786 : page 103 

world will give place to, and be superseded by the Kingdom 
of God, in which, by the Lord's grace, we trust to 
have a part. 

The mention of Galilee suggested to Pilate's mind 
a way of escape from his dilemma, without either doing 
an injustice toward Jesus or unduly arousing the 
enmity of the Jewish leaders; he would solve the difficulty 
by referring the case to Herod, who was then 
in Jerusalem. This was the same Herod who beheaded 
John the Baptist (the son of Herod the great who 
slew the infants at the time of our Lord's birth), the 
same one who, hearing of Jesus, speculated that possibly 
he was John the Baptist risen from the dead. 
We read that "When Herod saw Jesus he was exceeding 



glad, for he was desirous to see him of a long season, 

because he had heard many things of him; and he 

hoped to have seen some miracle done by him." 

(Luke 23:8.) Herod questioned Jesus with many 

words, but got no reply. Our Lord was not there in 

self-defence, nor to plead his cause, nor to seek to escape 

the penalty for our sins, but the reverse. His 

silence under all the circumstances was the wisest and 

most dignified course. Herod sought for amusement 

as from a sleight-of-hand performer, and was undoubtedly 

surprised and disappointed that his kingly curiosity 

and questions were ignored. However, he and 

his court would have some amusement, so the soldiers 

were given the opportunity to mock the kingly aspirations 

of Jesus, doing mock homage, and then insulting 

him. Herod returned Jesus to Pilate for judgment. 

The Jewish notables and the rabble, clamoring for 
justice and the vindication of Roman law in the death 
of Jesus, again filled the court of Pilate's palace, and 
Pilate came forth and addressed them in the words of 
our lesson, declaring Jesus innocent of any criminal 
conduct, but announcing that in view of the commotion 
and clamor raised against him he would cause him to 
be scourged and that this should be considered a settlement 
of his case. Evidently the scourging of Jesus 
was an act of mercy on Pilate's part, by which he 
hoped to satisfy the bloodthirsty clamor of the accusers, 
yet it was unavailing, and merely caused our Lord 
additional suffering. The multitude cried out the 
more, "Crucify him!" Pilate's next subterfuge was to 
propose that since it was his custom to release one prisoner 
at this season of the year he would release Jesus 
at this time, and thus satisfy them in a double sense 
of the word; first, by considering him guilty, and 
secondly, by his release. But murder was in the hearts 
of those professedly religious people. They were blinded 
to justice as well as to mercy by the selfishness of their 
own hearts, for their enmity to Jesus was based simply 
and purely upon the fact that he and his teachings 
were discounting them and their teachings before the 
people. 

It is well that we should note that selfishness lies 
at the foundation of almost every sin and every crime, 
that is and ever has been committed. Let us, as the 
Lord's people, be specially on guard against this insidious 
evil, which is ours by heredity, and which 
needs to be destroyed, eradicated, and to be supplanted 
with love, as the governing impulse of our hearts and 
lives— love, which thinketh no evil, which is not puffed 
up, which seeketh not her own advantage at the expense 
of justice to the interest of others. We are not, 
however, to think of these Pharisees, scribes and priests 
as wilfully, knowingly, intentionally, crucifying the 
Son of God. They would not have been so bold! On 
the contrary, the Apostle assures us that it was in ignorance 
that they did it. (Acts 3:17; 1 Cor. 2:8.) 



an inexcusable ignorance, we may say, or at least, an 
only partly excusable ignorance, because it was the 
result of prejudice, which in turn was the fruit of 
selfishness. 

R2786 : page 104 

The priests, etc., felt that matters were getting 
desperate, and they must bring to bear upon Pilate 
every influence they could; hence their intimation that 
if he would not crucify Jesus they would report him to 
Caesar at Rome as being a friend of traitors against 
Roman authority— an enemy of the Emperor. This 
was a forceful argument, and Pilate realized it. Were 
such a report to be sent to Rome, signed by the leading 
officials of the Jewish nation, it would not be without 
weight, and the authorities there would wonder, at 
least, why the life of any poor, obscure individual 
would be spared to the alienation of the leading men 
of the nation and at the risk of an insurrection. Pilate 
decided that the only reasonable and proper course for 
him to pursue would be to let the Jews have their way; 
and taking a pitcher of water he washed his hands in 
their sight, as a symbol of his own disagreement with 
the death-decree which they were compelling him to 
render. His words were, "I am innocent of the blood 
of this just person: see ye to it. Then answered all 
the people, and said, His blood be upon us and upon 
our children. "-Matt. 27:24. 

Remembering that Pilate was neither a Jew nor a 
Christian, but a heathen man, we cannot condemn him 
as others have done. Rather, indeed, we must commend 
him as being a man who loved justice and sought 
to mete it out, and who yielded to injustice only after 
he had made every effort to stem the tide of contrary 
influences when it would have been easy for him to 
have curried favor with the officials by quickly assenting 
to the death of a person of no political influence. 
It is to be noticed, too, that the apostles do not implicate 
either Pilate or the civil authorities, but held 
responsible the Jews and their leaders (Acts 2:23), 
and that God has held that people responsible is evident 
from the history of the past eighteen centuries, in 
which their prayer has been answered: his blood has 
been upon them and their children. Thank God, his 
Word does not imply that divine wrath, even against 
these guilty persons, will be manifested and exercised 
through an eternity of torture by devils, but rather, as 
the Apostle intimates, God's wrath came upon them to 
the uttermost in the troubles which befell them as a 
nation and people. (1 Thess. 2:16.) Soon the wrath 
is to be turned away and the commission of the 
Prophet already is due to begin, "Comfort ye, comfort 
ye my people: speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem. 
Cry unto her that her appointed time is accomplished, 
for she hath received at the Lord's hands double for all 



her sins."— Isa. 40:1,2, margin. 

Jesus was now delivered over to Pilate's soldiers, 
to be made ready for crucifixion, and they, heartless 
and brutal, as we might expect, made sport of the 
Master's adversities. Putting upon him a cast-off royal 
robe and a crown of thorns, they jeered him upon his 
claim to kingship, without a surmise, of course, of who 
he really was, and how he is yet to be a King upon the 
holy hill Zion, to whose sceptre every knee shall bow 
and to whom every tongue must confess. It will be a 
surprised awakening to them some day, when they 
amongst others shall come forth from the dead to find 
Messiah's Kingdom established, and to realize that he 
exercised mercy toward his enemies, and that his death 
prepared the way for the blessing of themselves and all 
the families of the earth with an opportunity to come 
to a knowledge of God and of his righteous requirements, 
and thus, if obedient, unto life everlasting. 

It was probably about this time that Pilate's wife 
sent word to him respecting the dream she had, about 
Jesus, and admonishing him to have nothing to do with 
his condemnation. And so Pilate, as a last resort, 
brought Jesus forth, clothed in the purple robe of mock 
royalty, and with the crown of thorns, and presented 
him to the people with the words, "Behold the Man!" 
As tho he would say: Is it possible that you Jews are 
seeking the death of this innocent man, the noblest 
and best specimen of your race, indeed of the entire 
human race? Would not a final look at him appeal to 
your hearts and melt them? If I, a Roman, ignorant 
of your religion and regardless in general of all religion, 
have a pity and a sympathy and a sense of justice, is 
it possible that you are so unmerciful, while claiming 
to be the most religious people on earth? Behold the 
Man! Do you still insist that he be crucified? Then 
the priests cried out, not only that he ought to die 
because of being an enemy to the Roman Empire, but 
because he had taught that he was the Son of God,— 
thus appealing to the Jews that he was a blasphemer, 
one whom God commanded them in the Law to 
destroy. 

Pilate was the more afraid when he heard that 
Jesus claimed to be the Son of God, and again sought 
an interview with him; but Jesus' answer was, "Thou 
couldst have no power at all against me except it were 
given thee from above"— permitted of the Father. 
Pilate could do no more; even Jesus himself assented, 
and claimed that it was in the divine order that he 
should die. Pilate signed the death sentence.— 
John 19:4-11. 

There is a lesson for us in these words of our Lord, 
respecting the Father's permission of all that happened 
to him. We who are members of his body are counted 
in with him as under divine supervision, so that in all 
of our affairs all things are guaranteed to work together 
for our good while walking in his footsteps. This is 



the ground of our confidence in all the various trying 
circumstances of life. This it is that gives the peace of 
God which passeth all understanding, ruling in our 

R2786 : page 105 

hearts, not only subduing self and enabling us to submit 
ourselves to the will of God, but permitting us even 
to rejoice in tribulation, knowing that under divine 
providence, and that rightly received, it will work out 
for us a far more exceeding and an eternal weight of 
glory.-2 Cor. 4:17. 



R2787 : page 105 

THE ATONING SACRIFICE COMPLETED. 

--LUKE 23:35-53. -MARCH 24.- 

"Christ died for our sins, according 
to the Scriptures."— 1 Cor. 15:3. 

"AND when they had mocked him, they took off 

the purple from him, and put his own 

clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him." 

(Mark 15:20.) Jesus was now in charge of the centurion, 

and with the two bandits or highwaymen who 

were to be executed that day, was led to execution, 

each of the three prisoners being under the guard of 

four Roman soldiers, with a centurion in command, sixteen 

persons in all. It was about nine o'clock in the 

morning, and our Lord having been incessantly harassed 

by his enemies from the midnight previous, without 

food or rest, buffeted, scourged, tormented, was, 

according to tradition, weak and faint under the heavy 

load of his own cross, which, according to custom, he 

bore. The Gospel narrative seems to confirm this incidentally, 

by telling us that Simon, a Cyrenian, was 

compelled by the soldiers to bear the cross for Jesus. 

Some, however, claim that Luke's reading respecting 

this matter, that he "bore the cross after Jesus," signifies 

that he walked behind Jesus and merely assisted in 

the bearing of the cross. 

Whichever way it was, Simon had a most enviable 
opportunity of serving the Master— an opportunity 
which would be eagerly seized by some of the Lord's 
people today, who would be glad to share, not only 
the Master's burden, but his ignominy. And, strange 
to say, the opportunity is with us now, and whosoever 
will of the Lord's disciples is privileged to take up the 
cross and follow after him; for the offense of the cross 
has not ceased. True, the cross has become fashionable, 
and is worn by many as an ornament with little 
thought of the original cross and what it signified, and 



with little desire to bear any of its shame or ignominy 
or weight. But there are still some who have the 
Master's spirit, to whom the Apostle appeals, saying, 
"If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him;" 
for "we ought also to lay down our lives for the brethren," 
and to "fill up that which is behind of the afflictions 
of Christ for his body's sake which is the Church." 
-Rom. 8:17; 2 Tim. 2:12; 1 John 3:16; Col. 1:24. 

Altho the man Christ Jesus was holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners— perfect— nevertheless 
he was neither a giant in stature nor in physical strength. 
This indicates to us that the perfect man was not a giant 
physically, nor in brute force preeminent; for all that 
the perfect man was, our Lord Jesus must have been, 
in order to be his ransom price, his substitute. The 
coarseness and brute strength which we find in many 
men is to be esteemed a degeneration, as truly as is 
the weakness and effeminacy of others— only that the 
degeneracy has manifested itself in another form. 
Great brute force and coarseness of organism is rarely 
accompanied by a proportionate strength and efficiency 
of brain power, and of the finer sentiments of the mind. 
The completion of the restitution work, therefore, must 
not be expected to bring coarseness and giant strength; 
but fineness and symmetry, physical as well as mental. 
Additionally, we are not to forget that for three and a 
half years our Lord's ministry had been a constant 
drain upon his vital forces, not merely in connection 
with his public preaching, but specially in connection 
with the miracles which he wrought at the expense of 
his own vitality; as it is written, "Virtue [vitality] 
went out of him and healed them all."— Luke 6:19. 

The journey to Calvary was a sorrowful spectacle. 
It is to their credit that some of those who followed in 
the procession were weeping, and this credit for tenderness 
and sympathy falls to the women, to whom Jesus 
turning said, "Weep not for me, but for yourselves and 
for your children." Apparently the Savior's thought 
was not centered wholly upon himself: he was thinking 
rather how this injustice would shortly react upon 
this nation, whose representatives had said before God 
and men, "His blood be upon us and upon our children." 
No doubt our Lord had in mind the descriptions 
of the trouble that would come upon Jerusalem, as given 
particularly in the prophecies of Daniel and Jeremiah. 
(Daniel 9:24-27; Jer. 6.) We realize how literally 
our Lord's suggestion was fulfilled when we remember 
the story of the siege of Jerusalem, and how the women 
and children especially suffered in the horrors of that 
time. It is a sign of greatness of mind when one is 
able under such trying circumstances to think less of 
himself and more of others. 

Arrived at Calvary the crucifixion took place. It 
is probable that the victim was nailed to the cross while 
it was lying on the ground, and that then the four 
sturdy soldiers lifted it and set it into a socket in the 



earth, the pain from the wound being intensified by the 
jolting of putting the cross into an upright position, 

R2787 : page 106 

and then terribly augmented by the hanging weight of 
the body. Crucifixion is probably the most cruel form 
of death, and even by the Romans, as we understand 
it, was practiced only upon culprits— usually outlaws, 
brigands and seditionists. Thus our Lord was, in harmony 
with the statement of the prophet, "numbered 
with the transgressors."— Isa. 53:12. 

On our Lord's cross, above his head, written in 
three languages, was a statement of his crime— the 
charge upon which he was convicted and sentenced, in 
the words, "Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews." 
It was written in Latin, the language of the Romans, 
representative of authority and power; in Greek, the 
language of culture and learning; and in Hebrew, the 
language of the professedly God-fearing people. It 
was a title of shame and contempt, a brand of blasphemy 
to those who read it; and the multitude, going 
and coming to and from the city jested him upon his 
title, and the miserable failure of the fraud he had attempted 
to perpetrate in claiming for himself such high 
honors and dignities. The priests and rulers, of course, 
followed to see their victim surely dead; and any 
qualms of conscience they may have had respecting 
the injustice of their course seem to have been stifled 
by the apparent confirmation of their verdict in their 
success in accomplishing his death, and in his apparent 
powerlessness to save himself from his calamity. 
The soldiers too, especially those who had him in 
charge, seem to have felt that this was an exposure of 
another fraud, the ignominious termination of another 
one who had asserted himself against the power of 
Caesar. 

The records show that Jesus' mother was there, 
and her sister, and John the disciple, and his mother, 
and Mary Magdalene and Mary the wife of Cleophas. 
(John 19:25; Matt. 27:56.) They were all sorrowful; 
many of them weeping. They could not deny the assertion 
of the rulers and the multitude, that apparently 
the claims of our Lord had been fraudulent; they could 
not understand how he who had such power, and in 
whom they had such confidence, could be so helpless 
in the hands of his enemies. It was incomprehensible 
when they remembered how even the winds and the 
waves of Galilee obeyed him, and how many unclean 
spirits, being unable to resist the command of his word, 
had been cast out of the afflicted. But altho they 
could not make any reply, under the circumstances, to 
the jibes of those who railed at the Lord, they nevertheless 
loved him; for they knew, that regardless of his 
power and his titles, and whether or not he had overstated 
his relationship to the Heavenly Father, nevertheless, 



"never man spake like this man," and never had 
they known any who could compare with him amongst 
the sons of men for purity and nobility of soul. They 
could do naught else but love him and trust him, and 
wait for some indication of the seeming inconsistencies 
which they then beheld. And so it is at times with the 
Lord's followers since. Occasionally things occur in 
respect to the Lord's Word and what he permits his 
people to suffer, and the power he permits their adversaries 
to exercise, which are incomprehensible, and his 
followers may at such times be obliged simply to hold 
their peace; but those who know the Lord through intimate 
communion and fellowship of heart, who have fed 
upon "the deep things of God," who have drunk of his 
spirit— altho unable to explain the difficulties, are fully 
able to trust in him and to hope and to wait for such 
expressions as are sure to come, in vindication of his 
every act and word and providence, in due time. 

Whilst the others were reviling our Lord and calling 
upon him to manifest his Messiahship and to come 
down from the cross, one of the thieves joined in the 
ribald assault; but the other, realizing that death was 
near, and admitting his own guilt, seemed to recognize 
in Jesus a person of an entirely different order and 
character from that of himself. He alone, so far as we 
are informed, raised his voice in protest against the 
slurs, and in defense of the meek and lowly one, who 
said nothing in his own defense, and who thus set us a 
most wonderful example in patient endurance and suffering 
for well-doing. Had he demonstrated his power, 
as they "dared" him to do, he would have been wrecking 
the hopes, not only of those who maligned him, 
crucified him, but also the hopes of the whole world of 
mankind. O, how we rejoice in his faithfulness unto 
death— even the death of the cross! How we praise 
him that he did not exercise his power, and "call for 
more than twelve legions of angels" to deliver him, but 
on the contrary sacrificed himself, laying down his own 
life as a ransom for Adam and his race! 

The contrite thief knew little respecting Jesus, except 
what he saw before him of his patient endurance, 
suffering for righteousness' sake; but this "living 
epistle" made a marked impression upon him, just as 
sometimes the conduct of the Lord's followers, patient 
in tribulation, is the strongest and best lesson that can 
be given to some, "without God and having no hope 
in the world." There is nothing to indicate that this 
thief became a saint in the few moments of his acquaintance 
with the Lord; there is nothing to indicate that he 
had or could develop a character in that time which 
would constitute him an overcomer, a joint-heir with 
Christ in the Kingdom. Everything is to the contrary 
of such thoughts. He merely realized that he himself 
was guilty and worthy of death, according to the law, 
that Jesus was innocent, and that there was a bare 
possibility of there being something in the claims of 



this wonderful man in respect to a future Kingdom. 

R2788 : page 107 

He would at least speak a word in his defense, and then 
he would appeal to Jesus, that if he had a Kingdom, 
as had been intimated, he would graciously remember 
his words of defense and do a kind deed for him when 
his Kingdom should come. 

PARADISE PROMISED. 



Jesus replied, "Verily, verily [so be it, so be it], 
I say unto thee this day, Thou shalt be with me in Paradise." 
It should be as the thief had requested, not 
otherwise. When Jesus' Kingdom should come the 
effect or result of that Kingdom would be the restoration 
of the Paradise lost when sin entered into the 
world as a part of its penalty,— redeemed by the sacrifice 
which he was then finishing at Calvary. When he 
should come into his Kingdom at his second advent he 
would, as the thief requested, remember him there and 
then, and undoubtedly the thief will have an abundant 
reward for the words of comfort spoken to our dear 
Redeemer in his hour of trial; but that reward will 
surely not be a place in the throne, in the Kingdom, 
as a member of the body of Christ; for this position 
amongst the elect is to be given only to those who shall 
attain the character-likeness to God's dear Son. (Rom. 8:29.) 
Besides, none can attain this position without 
being begotten of the holy spirit, and the holy spirit, 
the begetting power of the new nature, was not yet 
given, until after Jesus' death, resurrection and ascension, 
when at Pentecost it came upon those who waited 
to be adopted from the house of servants into the house 
of sons.— John 1:12; 7:39. 

The thief died too soon to have any part in this 
Kingdom, had he been ever so well developed in character, 
—even as John the Baptist died too soon. Of the 
latter our Lord said, that altho there was not a greater 
prophet than he, "the least one in the Kingdom of 
heaven [the spirit-begotten Church, joint-heirs with 
Christ in the Kingdom] is greater than he." (Matt. 11:11.) 
When the Kingdom shall come, and Paradise 
shall be restored, not only the penitent thief will be 
there, but also the impenitent one, and those Roman 
soldiers, and those bloodthirsty scribes and Pharisees 
and priests— all will be in Paradise,— not for any worthiness 
of their own, but by reason of the merit of 
Christ's sacrifice, which paid their penalty and insures 
their having a full opportunity in the Millennial Paradise 
to come to a knowledge of God and through obedience 
then to life everlasting, if they will. 

How forceful the expression, "I say unto thee today," 



—notwithstanding all this seeming weakness on 

my part and seeming triumph of my enemies— I tell 

thee today, that thy prayer shall be answered; and 

that when I come into my Kingdom, Paradise shall be 

restored and thou shalt be there to be blessed, as I shall 

be there to be the King and Priest to give the blessings 

promised in the divine plan.* The garden of Eden 

was the Paradise lost, and on a larger and grander 

scale it shall in due time be restored by him whose sacrifice 

purchased it as well as mankind.— Eph. 1:14; 

Rev. 2:7. 

It was probably during the early part of the crucifixion, 
that the four soldiers who had Jesus in charge 
divided his clothing amongst them; but the seamless 
robe which he wore, a fine and expensive garment, being 
desired by them all, for it they cast lots. That robe 
properly and beautifully represents Christ's righteousness, 
the wedding garment, which is of great value, 
and which, during this present age, is granted to the 
most favored ones as furnishing the opportunity for 
their attainment with Christ of joint-heirship in the 
Kingdom, if they will suffer with him. The lot or 
privilege to have this garment of Christ's imputed righteousness 
has fallen chiefly to us of civilized lands, to 
whom the light of the knowledge of God's gracious 
plan in Christ has been granted. How thankful we 
are that the lot or privilege of possessing the favors represented 
by this robe is ours. Those who appreciate 
it will show their appreciation in the affairs of their 
daily lives, seeking to keep their garment unspotted 
from the world, and that it may be without spot or 
wrinkle or any such thing, and that it may be embroidered 
with all the graces of the Lord's character; 
that under the grace which it implies they may be accepted 
in the Beloved One.-Psa. 45:14; Jas. 1:27. 

The darkness which came over the scene of the 
crucifixion at noon, and lasted until three o'clock, 
after our Lord's death, was evidently a very remarkable 
one, and made a deep impression. A newly found 
version of the Gospel, known as "The Gospel by Peter," 
is represented to say of this darkness, "Many went 
about with lamps, supposing it was night," and that 
the darkness lasted until Jesus was taken from the 
cross, when the earthquake took place. "Then the 
sun shone out, and it was found to be the ninth hour." 

The rending of the Temple vail apparently took 
place at the same time as this earthquake— the moment 
of our Lord's death. This was not the trifling matter 
it might appear from the word "vail," for this vail was 
an extremely large and extremely heavy curtain, the 
tearing of which would be no small matter, but would 
have required superhuman strength. Edersheim describes 
this curtain as being sixty feet long and thirty 



*The comma should be after and not before "today" in order 
to permit harmony with the facts here before us, and agreement 
with other Scriptures. The original Scriptures are not punctuated 
—punctuation being a comparatively modern invention. 

R2788 : page 108 

feet wide, and five inches thick; made of seventy-two 
squares joined together. We have seen (Tabernacle 
Shadows) that this vail was symbolical;— that it represented 
the completion of our Lord's sacrifice by which 
he opened up for us a new way of life beyond the vail, 
through the sacrifice of his flesh. In a figure, therefore, 
the Lord God, by the rending of the vail, declared 
that the death of Jesus made possible the way into the 
Most Holy, even heaven itself, and the fact that the 
vail was rent from the top to the bottom implied that 
the work was God's and not one having its start and 
accomplishment in human design and effort. 

"FATHER, INTO THY HANDS I COMMIT MY SPIRIT." 



Our Lord's words commending his spirit, his life, 
to the Father, reminds us of the words of Stephen. 
(Acts 7:59.) Stephen, however, had little to surrender, 
like us all; his Adamic life, the spirit of life, received 
from Adam, was already forfeited, and the only life 
which Stephen, therefore, could commend to God was 
the reckoned life received by faith through Jesus, the 
Life-giver. In the case of our Lord the matter was different. 
He had life rights which had never been forfeited 
through sin, and was committing these to the 
Father as the ransom price for Adam and his forfeited 
spirit of life: nevertheless, our Lord was firmly trusting 
in the Father's promise to raise him up from the 
dead by his own power, and his trust was in God that 
the restoration of life which he had promised he was 
abundantly able and willing to perform, and raise him 
from the state of death perfect, in the divine nature, 
with its glory, honor and immortality. Thus our Lord 
gave up the "ghost" (an old English term)— gave up 
his spirit of life— he died, and remained dead until the 
Father raised him from the dead on the third day by 
his own power.* 

The closing scenes of the drama evidently were 
very awe-inspiring, not only to our Lord's friends, but 
also to his enemies, and a general hush and feeling of 
grief spread about. The taunts of his enemies ceased 
as the darkness came down, and many were willing at 
the last to admit that the occurrences were remarkable, 
and corroborated to some extent the Master's claims, 
saying, "Truly, this man was the Son of God."— 
Mark 15:39. 

The solemnity of our Lord's dying moments seems 



to have given greater courage to some of his friends, 

two of whom, Joseph and Nicodemus, were members 

of the Sanhedrin, which had condemned him, these 

two being either absent or voting against the condemnation. 

They had been too careful of their reputations 

to avow their interest in Jesus previously, "for fear of 

the Jews," but now they had the courage to own the 

Lord as their friend, and to arrange the details of his 

burial. (John 19:39.) The dilatory acknowledgment 

of Jesus on the part of these wealthy and influential 

men reminds us of the peculiar difficulties which 

hinder all persons of wealth and influence in connection 

with a proper acknowledgment of the way, the 

truth and the life. True, there are many rich men 

today, and many of influence, who, because of popularity 

of churchianity, take a prominent part in its 

service; but churchianity must not be confounded 

with "the body of Christ," the true Church, which, 

like the Lord, is comparatively without influence, power 

or wealth, as viewed from a worldly standpoint. When 

the great drama of this atonement day is completed, 

the last member of the body of Christ has finished his 

sacrifice, there will doubtless be many of the rich and 



*See tract, What is the Soul? Sample copy free. 

R2789 : page 108 

influential to come forward then, to honor the humble 
ones and to garnish their sepulchres. Much more to 
their credit and to their advantage and assistance in 
making their own calling and election sure would it be 
for these to come boldly forward in the time of sacrifice 
and bind their own sacrifices to the horns of the 
altar.-Psa. 118:27. 

THE ATONEMENT. 



Various are the theories advanced in the name of 
Christianity and the Scriptures, respecting the at-one-ment 
between God and man; some acknowledging that 
the work which our Lord "finished" in his death on 
Calvary is the basis of all human hopes respecting the 
life everlasting, and at-one-ment with the heavenly 
Father; others persistently seeking to deny this, advancing 
theories to the effect that the at-one-ment between 
God and man never was broken off, that no ransom 
sacrifice was necessary to a reconciliation, that no 
fall took place, and that hence no restitution back to 
primary conditions is necessary or desirable or was secured 
by the Lord Jesus' death. Many of these theories 
which deny the redemptive value of our Lord's death 



affect to do him greater honor by claiming that his 

work for humanity was solely that of a great teacher, 

and in no sense that of a Redeemer or purchaser. 

These false theories which ignore the ransom are becoming 

more numerous, more persistent and more seductive 

day by day to those who are not well rooted 

and grounded in the divine Word and plan of the ages. 

It is appropriate, therefore, that we here call special 

attention to the fact that according to the Scriptures the 

entire plan of salvation is pivoted upon the great transaction 

of our Lord's sacrifice, which, beginning with 

his consecration at Jordan, was finished with his expiring 

breath at Calvary. Whoever believes this and accepts 

R2789 : page 109 

it is justified thereby, obtaining his share in the 
merit of that sacrifice. Whoever rejects it rejects the 
only name and the only faith by which he can ever be 
reconciled to God and attain to life everlasting. 

We are not in this suggesting that men are saved 
by a theory, but we are suggesting that since all who 
come into harmony with God during this Gospel age 
must come to him through faith in the precious blood 
of Christ, it follows that he cannot have a reasonable 
faith without a more or less clear theory; and that any 
theory which ignores the death of Christ as the basis 
of justification and reconciliation is an unscriptural 
one, and hence of no value whatever. Hence all who 
claim relationship with God upon any other basis of 
faith, any other theory, are deluding themselves— they 
are neither reconciled to the Father nor to the Son, nor 
justified from their sin, nor members of the Church 
which is the body of Christ. 

We do not mean by this to say that only such as 
have a clear conception of the philosophy of the atonement 
are justified; on the contrary, it is our belief that 
many of God's dear people during the dark ages, and 
since, have lived and died without a clear conception 
of the philosophy of this subject as it is now possible 
for it to be seen and appreciated. But while failing to 
see the philosophy, all of God's true people have recognized 
the fact that it was the death of Christ which 
effected our reconciliation to the Father, and upon 
which all hopes of life eternal are based. See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. V., The At-one-ment. 

To those who prefer the inspired words of an 
Apostle to the uninspired conjectures of their own and 
other minds, the Golden Text is an all-sufficient answer 
to all no-ransom theories. One of these, Christian 
Science, declares: "There is no sin,"— hence nothing 
to deserve punishment; and "There is no death,"— 
hence Christ did not die. But the Apostle affirms, in 
harmony with both reason and Scripture, that both 
were facts, and that Christ's death was for (as a means 
to our recovery from) our sins. Let us stand firmly 



in the inspired "faith once delivered to the saints. "- 
Jude 3. 



R2789 : page 109 

"DESPISED AND REJECTED OF MEN." 

ISA. 52:13; 53:3, 12. -MARCH 31. 

THIS is the Review lesson and requires little comment. 
The Golden Text serves us as a caption, 
and is itself a summary of the quarter's lessons. Evidently 
to be despised and rejected of men did not signify 
that our Lord was worthy of such treatment, but 
rather that those to whom he offered himself were so 
degraded and blinded by sin as to be unable to appreciate 
the glorious qualities of his character. Nevertheless, 
as the Apostle declares, "To us who believe he is 
precious;" and again, "To as many as received him to 
them gave he privilege to become sons of God." How 
thankful we are, and deserve to be, that the eyes of our 
understanding were permitted to see our dear Redeemer 
in somewhat of his true light of grandeur and holiness; 
and we rejoice also that seeing his glory we have 
been led step by step to transformation and renewing 
of our minds, and that we are being changed from 
glory to glory by the spirit of the Lord even now in our 
hearts. "We have the mind of Christ." Moreover, 
we have the good hope, built upon the divine promises, 
that if we follow on in his footsteps in the narrow way 
we shall ere long be with him and like him and share 
his Kingdom and glory. 

"As he was so are we in the world."— 1 John 4:17. 

If the Master of the house was called Beelzebub 
and seditious and an enemy of law and order, against 
Caesar's government, etc., etc., by the false religionists 
of his day, so it should not surprise us, but should 
rather be expected, that all the way down through this 
Gospel age his followers, the members of his body, 
would be similarly misrepresented, slandered, maligned, 
despised and rejected by the popular religionists of 
Christendom. As a matter of fact, this is what the 
Scriptures teach us is to be expected; what history tells 
us has thus far been true; and what we are convinced 
from the Word of God will continue to be true until 
the last member of the body of Christ has finished his 
course. These oppositions from the world, the flesh 
and the devil (generally operating through some nominally 
Christian channel), are a part of the chiseling 
and polishing, a part of the testing and proving of the 
Lord's people which must determine whether or not 
they are worthy a share in the Kingdom— whether or 
not they esteem most the approval of men or the praise 
of God,— the honors and emoluments of this present 



life or the glorious but unseen things which God hath 

in reservation for them that love him. We cannot pass 

these tests in companies or groups, however small and 

select,— each must be tried, tested, individually, in order 

to prove him an overcomer, and before he can attain 

the promised prize. Each should remember the necessity 

for faith in what God has promised his people or 

he will be overwhelmed and defeated, and miss both the 

mark and the prize. "This is the victory that overcometh 

the world— even your faith." "Greater is he 

that is on our part than all they that are against us." 



page 110 

"THEY THAT REVERENCED THE LORD SPAKE OFTEN TOGETHER." 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have just finished 
reading three volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN, and to 
say I am much pleased and interested only feebly expresses 
my feelings. The Bible has been a sealed, and to 
a very great extent, a meaningless book. This is the 
first eye-opener I have ever come across. The more 
preaching of the "orthodox" sort I listened to, 
the denser was my ignorance, and the graver my 
doubts. In fact, I had arrived at the conclusion that 
no one knew anything positive about it; it was all 
conjecture, and that of a very flimsy character. I 
thought if men of intelligence and education, who 
had made these subjects a life-study, disagreed so 
radically, plain men like myself have no business to have 
any theories at all; and have for some time ignored 
the whole subject. 

But now, I can begin to see the light. Bible-reading 
has become more interesting to me. Things 
that were before as dark as Pagan theology, now have 
a meaning, and to me, a very pleasing one. Should 
like a copy of the WATCH TOWER. 

Yours, for the truth, A. C. HOWLAND,-Del. 



MR. CHARLES T. RUSSELL, 

DEAR BROTHER:-Having just read the fifth volume 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN with great interest and 
edification, I am very desirous of knowing when the 
next volume will be ready. I have been in the Congregational 
ministry for twenty-five years and have 
been teaching the popular view of eternal torment, 
but with the light on the Word that I have now received, 
I can no longer teach such God-dishonoring 
doctrine. I must believe that your view is the Scriptural 
one. My heart is exceedingly grateful to God 



that your book was placed in my hands. It is indeed 
"meat in due season." Please send further reading 
matter as per enclosed memorandum. 
Your Brother in Christ, I. F. TOBEY,— Oregon. 



MY DEAR BROTHER:-Your letters have given 
me much cheer during my protracted sickness, and I 
can but rejoice with you that the Lord's mercy has 
been over me in a very large measure; and, we trust, 
for wise and gracious designs, which he is abundantly 
able to work out in his own time and way. I wish to 
be entirely submissive to his just and holy will. I 
hope to be able to learn the great lesson he would 
teach me, that, ultimately, as well as now, shall work 
out to his glory and my own eternal good. 

The TOWERS have been a source of great pleasure 
and benefit. I read and re-read them with continued 
profit and delight. Of course, I wish them continued 
to be sent to my address, and will remit later, if not 
able to continue in the "Pilgrim" work. 

Last year's Report in December 15 TOWER is full 
of blessed promise, and a token of better and bigger 
things to come. I am very anxious to get into the 
field again; and the days of waiting seem very long- 
but, my Brother, I cannot give you much hope of 
doing anything under five or six months. I am very 
weak, and any extra exertion sends me to my bed 
again, as was the case last week, and I was obliged to 
send for a physician. The cause was improper circulation 
in an afflicted leg, brought on by trying to do 
a little work for my son— office work. I am better 
to-day, and as soon as possible will try to dispose of 
DAWNS and other literature in this town. 

My wife is very hopeful that everything will turn 
out for the best, according to the promise, if we will 
only do the best we know how, trusting every promise 
sure. 

May our dear Lord and Master greatly bless and 
strengthen you in the onerous and responsible duties 
to which you have given your life in the spread of the 
truth. For such we shall always pray. 

With best wishes and regards, in which Sister 
Ransom joins, I remain as ever your devoted friend 
and co-worker in the present harvest. 

Very truly, Z. A. RANSOM,-South Dakota. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose order for one 
dollar for which you will please send Vol. I. of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, "The Plan of the Ages," in cloth binding. 
The remaining 65 cents you will please accept as 
a contribution to the Tract Fund. 

I have read "The Plan of the Ages" twice (I have 



it in paper binding— loaned out) and am now reading 
"The Time is at Hand," and am well pleased with 
them. It has changed me from skepticism to a strong 
belief in and love for the Bible. I am now making it 
my constant study, and with DAWN as a help it seems 
plain and is truly interesting. It has caused me to see 
God in a different light, and I do indeed love and worship 
him. I can never thank you enough for being 
the instrument, through your writings, in bringing 
about this change. I am a poor man, a farmer, working 
all day, and studying nights and Sundays. While 
I am being thus benefited I wish that others may have 
the same opportunity, therefore I offer myself as a 
member of the Volunteer service. I distributed the 
tracts you sent me and some have manifested some interest 
from reading them. I think you are truly "a 
good steward giving meat in due season." I will help 
in a financial way as much as I am able. 
Respectfully, W. A. STANLEY.-Texas. 



ELDER C. T. RUSSELL, 

Dear Brother in Christ Jesus our Lord: It has 
been some time since I wrote you, altho I receive communications 
from you every two weeks in the WATCH 
TOWER; and how I in my old days appreciate it as 
meat in due season! Since we began reading it my 
good wife won't go to hear any of the clergy of our 
town, as she can learn more of God's plan in reading 
one number than she could from hearing all the 
preachers in our town. We read them till we can 
digest them, then send them out to such as we think 
truth-hungry. I sent one to the country some weeks 
ago. The lady sent me word that she would have the 
paper if she had to sell every chicken to pay for it. 
She is very poor in this world's goods, but too proud 
to ask for it gratuitously. 

Oh ! I am so thankful for the help drawn from 
the TOWER and DAWNS, otherwise perhaps I should 
have plodded on in the old rut as others are doing 
who have many advantages over myself by way of 
education and present environments. 

Believe me, I am truly yours, in the fullest meaning 
of the term, with hope of meeting you in the first 
resurrection. N. M. THOMPSON,-Missouri. 

page 111 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I wrote you today a 
"business" letter; now I want to send you a few lines 
of a more personal character from myself and wife. 

We wish to express to you our love and gratitude 
for the way in which you have continued to serve us 
during the past year. The January 1 TOWER came 
full of just what we wanted, a clear definition of the 



"mark" towards which we are pressing, and we 
thank God that we can "realize" fully what is the 
mark, and can see we have gained ground in this 
direction during the past year. 

I must tell you of our New Year's eve meeting. 
Twenty-seven of us met together to see the old century 
out and the new one in, and as we could not have 
you with us personally, you were represented by a 
large photo hanging on the wall, and by the reading 
of the TOWER for September 1, defining the law of 
"love." Personally, I am deeply grateful to you for 
that article, and for the corresponding one of January 
1, on the "Mark." I had begun to see that the law 
of "Do to all as you would have them do to you" 
meant so much more than I had thought, and now 
these two articles have made it clearer still. 

At our Sunday evening meetings I have been 
making these my theme, more than anything else, 
and you will be rejoiced to hear that in every member 
of the Church in these Twin Cities there is a noticeable 
improvement along the lines of love. 

You may be sure you were remembered by everybody 
present, and we prayed the dear Lord that you 
might be given continued wisdom to use aright the 
great favor conferred on you by the stewardship over 
the household of faith to give out to them the meat 
in "due season." And we also recognized and deeply 
appreciated the love you must have had to each of us, 
even when unknown to you in the flesh, or else the 
dear Lord would never have placed you in this 
position. 

I thank God that I am permitted to give out to 
others the meat which I have received of God through 
you; and I know that you will pray for me that I may 
have for my aim and ambition during the year begun 
a stronger desire to "serve" the brethren. 

Your brother in the Lord Jesus, 

W. HOPE HAY,-Minnesota. 



R2789 :page 111 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am glad to be able 
to write and tell you that I have about recovered from 
my illness. I am not quite as strong as I should like 
to be, but have no doubt I shall fully regain my 
strength in a little while. I went to Scotland last 
Friday for Brother Burkholder's funeral and was entertained 
by Brother Lehman. Altho the funeral was 
not until Saturday morning, by request I went over 
to see Brother Burkholder's family on Friday evening. 
There were several friends of the family present, and 
as the conversation turned upon Biblical matters we 
had a splendid opportunity for serving present truth, 
and they all showed much interest, and many good 



questions were asked. On account of the family's 
sympathy with the truth, the trustees of the church 
building refused to allow the funeral services to be 
held in that place. This action is significant, from 
the fact that it is a "union church," or rather (supposed 
to be) non-sectarian, and was built by the people 
of the neighborhood, with the understanding that 
it was for the use of any Christians. 

However, a large number of people assembled at 
the house for the service. Therefore, there was a 
good opportunity to witness for the truth. The greater 
part of the people who attended the funeral were 
"Mennonites" (that being a Mennonite settlement), 
so in accordance with the custom of that people, most 
of them returned to the house of mourning and spent 
several hours there. Of course there was a good deal 
of comment on the address, so the whole afternoon 
was occupied in discussing Bible questions, and the 

R2790 : page 1 1 1 

truth as usual proved itself powerful, and we hope 
that many were impressed by its beauty and simplicity. 
Brother Herr, from Pottsville, was present and 
assisted in the service, and also in upholding the truth 
afterwards. 

Brother Faunce wrote you of the experience we 
had at the United Brethren church here, a week ago 
last Sunday. Well, as a sequel, last Sunday evening 
the pastor undertook to show the unscripturalness of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, and by invitation several of the 
friends, including myself, were present to hear what 
this very blind shepherd had to say. Needless to say 
he had a very thin argument, and succeeded in making 
himself ridiculous. 

His ignorance of God's word was simply amazing, 
and must have been apparent to every thinking person 
present. On the whole, I think he (unwittingly) 
helped the truth rather than hindered it, for he read 
some excellent extracts from the DAWN. Some of 
them I should have chosen myself had I been debating 
the points with him. He also read the extract from 
Atlanta Constitution from the back of a missionary 
envelope which he had. Whilst he had to admit that 
hades meant the grave, he also said that it meant 
more than that; to use his own words— "Hades is a 
place divided into two compartments, one where the 
bad spirits go to, and the other Paradise, where Jesus 
went." All of his "scriptural" proofs were "home 
spun," and unfortunately (for him) could not be 
warranted not to shrink. Of course, the Morehead 
tract was in evidence, and so were about 200 of No. 
41, Old Theology tracts. All that was done by the 
friends to uphold the truth was done in the spirit of 
love and with becoming dignity. 

I'm sure you will be pleased to know that the 



friends here show much zeal for the truth, and are 
growing apace. We have now started a mid-week 
meeting, which promises to be a success. 

The Volunteer work will also be taken up; the 
arrangements for it are to be made next Sunday. 

I am hardly able to go fully into my colporteur 
work yet, but hope to do so soon; in the meantime, 
shall endeavor to do a little canvassing here, and 
altho this place was worked last year I hope to be 
able to reach some and dispose of some DAWNS. 

Please pray for me that I may have strength and 
courage to walk the narrow way. 

With Christian love to yourself and the Bible 
House family, I remain your brother in Christ, 
ERNEST D. SEXTON,-Pennsylvania. 

R2790 :page 112 

PASTOR C. T. RUSSELL, 

MY DEAR SIR:-After services on the first Lord's 
Day of this year, I found in my study a parcel of 
books with no name. I was leaving the next day for 
a 400-mile voyage, and took with me 3 vols, of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, which I perused with growing interest 
in the intervals of services as we sailed from 
island to island. I wish to subscribe to the WATCH 
TOWER, and to have tracts sent me (as per list); for 
this I enclose $2.50, which I hope will cover expenses 
of postage, etc. I am yours faithfully, 

DANIEL WILSHERE,-West Indies, 
Bahama Baptist Union— Supt. of Missions. 



page 112 

MR. EDITOR:-I cannot tell how thankful I am 
to you for sending us a sample copy of your paper. 
Oh, the good, glad tidings! How many wretched, 
awful days it would have saved me had I known it 
long ago. I believe you implicitly in all you say. It 
seems so much more like God ought to be. Oh, my 
words are too crude and I am too ignorant to express 
what I feel, but I am so glad, so glad. For years I 
have been a Presbyterian, and a doubter all the time, 
and only those who have gone through it know what 
that means. I will distribute any tracts you may 
send me, and be glad to do so. 

MRS. FRANK CAREY,-Pennsylvania. 



page 112 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I must renew my 
TOWER, as I could not get along without it. I have 



been wonderfully helped through it and the DAWNS 
into present light and truth, and so am using every 
means and agency through the influence and aid of 
God's Holy Spirit to make my calling and election 
sure. And oh! what a new book my Bible is now. 
How it unfolds to me, and so my pathway is getting 
brighter and brighter. Praise God. I can do nothing 
in the way of money for Good Hopes, but am devoting 
all my spare time and more to the spread of truth. I 
have a large Chart of the Ages in my office, and 
have many callers. 

I am availing myself of every opportunity to let 
my light shine, and correcting my old errors of 
Theology, which I have testified for years. And 
how God blesses me. As I give out he pours in. My 
will is only to do God's will. What an anchorage the 
truth is to the soul, when we see how rightly to divide 
it. Truly, you have been a great help to me through 
the WATCH TOWER literature, to God be all the glory. 

Your brother in a living faith, 

DR. JOHN STRUBLE,-Illinois. 



R2790 :page 112 

DEAR BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL:-Grace and 

peace! Your very kind favor of the 4th inst. to hand. 
Had an injury received to my right hand about a 
week ago. Am getting out on the road now in my 
business as an architect, and the Lord is blessing the 
efforts put forth in spreading the truth. Had another 
experience of his wonderful grace tonight here in 
town. I was planning and thinking how I could take 
along a lot of DAWNS, that I could sell in large numbers 
in single vols. After having depleted my stock 
in the grip to two vols., and taking orders for three 
sets, and coming here after 6 p.m., I went out to 
inquire about business. Finding a hardware store 
(where I usually inquire in every town) and finding 
no news, I showed the DAWN, but being a perfect 
stranger, I did not for a moment think they would 
part with the cash simply on my face and the name 
in my order book, etc. I sold five sets in that store, 
and two in another, spot cash, making 51 vols, for 
today. To God be all the glory. To say I was astonished 
is putting it lightly. I cannot get out of 
here until tomorrow 3 p.m., so can possibly sell 
some more in the same way. Glad to see names on 
the lists where the Lord used me to hand them the 
truth. These blessings should make me run the race 
with much joy. Enclosed please find P.O. order 
for money, and order for books to be sent to various 
parties. Pray that I may be kept humble, as I desire 
and require much more humility and love for the sacrifice 
than I possess, so it will not be a duty love to 



feed the little ones and spread the truth, but so the 
zeal of the Lord may burn me up. Hope to see more 
names on the TOWER lists some day in the paths of 
our DAWN work. 

I feel very happy over this new phase of the 
work, as it seems it ought to be very fruitful. 

February 17th.— Grace and peace! Just home 
from a week's trip on business in the country, and 
the most blessed of trips so far as DAWN sales are 
concerned that I know of. Sold 239 vols, in a week. 
Just returned from Jackson, Minn. Knew of a TOWER 
reader there and looked for him. I found the restaurant 
where he takes meals, and supposed he had sold 
DAWNS there, but when I found he had not I tried, 
and sold a set. This started the ball rolling in Jackson, 
where I am quite well acquainted, and received 
orders for 75 vols, before leaving. Then I had to be 
careful not to sell to the Presbyterians, as I was after 
their church. Hope to sell a volley to them later. 

If I had used my opportunities the last two years 
on the road with the success I now receive, it's 
hard to estimate how many DAWNS could have been 
sold. This is a new venture to get cash in advance 
for books. To the Lord be all the glory. May we 
do continually with our might what our hands find to 
do. Praying God's richest blessing and love to you 
and all the dear ones in the Bible House, I remain 
your fellow-soldier of the cross, 

M. P. THORI,-Minnesota. 

[Our dear Brother Thori is one of the leading 
architects of Minnesota, and in going about attending 
to this business he takes the DAWNS along, and is 
daily becoming more expert in reaching hearing ears. 
He usually sells five volumes at a time, and collects 
in advance, the books being delivered by mail. He 
has a letter from us showing his authority to do this. 
His success of late is phenomenal. He has sold over 
4,400 volumes in the past five years. The Lord is 
blessing his zeal with both still increasing wisdom 
and grace.] 



page 113 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 