Carrying Out Our Resolve to Be at Peace and Unity
THE 1958 Divine Will International Assembly will never be forgotten by those who attended it. And, without doubt, for all a most exciting moment came Friday afternoon, August 1, with the reading of the Resolution and its adoption by the 194,418 witnesses of Jehovah present. In it they went on record as to where they stood in regard to Jehovah’s Word, his supremacy and kingdom. They indicated how they felt about Satan’s schemes and Christendom’s faithless clergy and also voiced their resolve ever to continue at peace and unity.a
Having made such a resolve and having distributed 70,000,000 copies of it in tract form in December, 1958, let us not hesitate to carry it out. How can we do so? First of all by daily praying for our brothers, and especially for those in positions of responsibility, for those suffering persecution or undergoing other peculiar trials and for those personally close to us. And then by making balanced use of the four godlike attributes with which our heavenly Father endowed us: power, wisdom, justice and love.
It takes mental and physical power to come together and participate in congregational meetings and all the various activities that advance the interests of the Kingdom. Wisdom will help us to be at peace and unity, for it will help us to be both skillful and tactful. If we would be at peace and unity we must also act justly, doing to others all the things we want them to do to us. Justice will also cause us to recognize theocratic rule. And, above all, love will help us to be at peace and unity. Love for Jehovah will make us integrity keepers, never compromising with Satan’s organization. And love for our brothers will safeguard us against the divisive forces of Satan’s world and keep us loyal and faithful.
Yes, good and balanced use of power, wisdom, justice and love will enable us to carry out our convention resolve to be at peace and unity with our brothers in the New World society.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, November 1, 1958.

