Helping Others Appreciate the Value of Our Publications
1 “The word of God is alive and exerts power.” (Heb. 4:12) Since our Bible-based publications help people benefit from the power of God’s Word, we use them to stimulate interest in the Bible when witnessing informally or when calling from house to house.
2 January’s literature offer is any 192-page book printed on paper that yellows or discolors or any published before 1980. If such books are available in your congregation, prepare your presentation of the Kingdom message so as to lead into a specific point in the book you are using. How can this be done?
3 How to Prepare: To begin, select a statement in the book you are using that will likely appeal to honesthearted people in your territory. Next, think of a current event or a subject of general interest that you might be able to discuss briefly with the householder before calling his attention to the printed statement you have selected. Perhaps there is a cited or quoted scripture you could read, either from the Bible or directly from the book, to support your statements. If the person shows genuine interest, you may then wish to offer the book. At that time or later if more appropriate, explain briefly how this worldwide preaching work is financed, and give the person opportunity to contribute if he so desires. In any case, try to leave him with a question or a thought that you can use as the basis for a return visit.
4 Many congregations have on hand a few copies of Your Youth​—Getting the Best Out Of It and Listening to the Great Teacher. If these books are available, why not prepare for conversations with the young people you meet in the territory? Encourage them to read one of these fine publications. If offering The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life, you can use the formula outlined above and prepare to discuss any number of basic Bible doctrines that are covered in this excellent Bible study aid.
5 Offer Mankind’s Search for God: You may be able to start a conversation by calling attention to a news item that either highlights religious involvement in world affairs or otherwise shows religion’s influence in the lives of people.
Then pose a question, such as this:
▪ “How do you think God views the religious systems that are influencing world affairs today? [Allow for answer.] Would it surprise you to learn that the basic teachings of all these religions are quite similar and that they stand in sharp contrast with the teachings of the Bible?” If the householder is willing to listen, show him the table of contents, and explain briefly that whether a person is religious or not, his life is being affected by powerful religious influences. Point out that he can benefit from learning why mankind’s search for God has led in so many directions and away from learning how to identify the right religion.
6 At times it may be more appropriate to offer magazines or a tract. We have every reason to be enthusiastic and zealous about encouraging others to read these publications so that they can be equipped to experience the power of God’s Word in their lives by responding to its direction.

