Returning to Build Appreciation
1 Meaningful return visits progressively stimulate and enhance a householder’s growth toward becoming a believer. What are some practical suggestions to keep in mind when calling back on those who have shown interest?
2 First of all, prepare well. This begins on the initial call. How so? By keeping accurate records of interest shown. Note the name of the householder, the subject discussed, the response, and any placements made. Then review your house-to-house record before you return, and give prayerful thought to what you will say.
3 Now you are ready. What can you say? If you left the householder with a question on the initial call, you can then build on that subject when you return. For example, if the initial call centered on the blessings of God’s Kingdom, you could raise the question “Why does God permit wickedness?”
When you return, after introducing yourself, you might say:
▪ “When we last spoke, we discussed why a God of love permits so much wickedness today. Have you given further thought to that?” [Allow response.] Do you think God really cares about mankind? [Allow response.] Consider what the Bible says at John 3:16.” After reading the verse, you could draw attention to specific portions of chapter 8 in The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life, which points out the reasons for God’s toleration of wickedness today.
4 Another thought-provoking question you might leave on your initial call would be: “If God intended man to live forever, why do people grow old and die?” When you return, you could show them the Bible’s answer to that question as found at Romans 5:12. After reading the scripture, refer to the first paragraph on page 35 of the book Is This Life All There Is?, which discusses the basic reason why man grows old and dies.
5 If on your initial call you discussed ways to identify the true religion and left the book Mankind’s Search for God, a good question on which you could base your return visit might be: “How did so many religions come about?” When returning, you could talk about specific points in chapter 2 of that book.
6 A word of caution. Be careful about the questions you ask when you return. Asking “Did you read the material I left?” or “Do you remember me?” or “Do you remember what we talked about the last time I was here?” tends to put the householder in an awkward position. Such questions usually do not produce good results. On the other hand, be friendly, flexible, and brief. These qualities will enhance the message.
7 These and other approaches may be used to cultivate appreciation in the hearts of interested ones. Why not set a personal goal of making at least one return visit each week? Put to use the practical suggestions presented above, and search out experienced publishers who will help you. Your joy will increase as you build on the initial interest by making effective return visits.

