Service Meetings for January
Week Starting January 3
Song 101
 5 min: Local announcements. Briefly highlight specific points in current magazines that will appeal to people in the local territory.
25 min: “1994 ‘Godly Fear’ District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Question-and-answer consideration of insert by secretary. First, read December 15, 1993, convention assignment letter. After considering paragraph 3 of article, read opening and closing paragraphs of Recommended Lodging Locations list from convention. Read paragraphs 4-6 and 12-14 of insert. Emphasize need for all to select accommodations from Recommended Lodging Locations list even if attending a convention outside the assigned area, as noted in paragraph 12. Stress the Bible principles of honesty, obedience, loving concern for others, and so forth from article even if it appears that no one will be using motel rooms. Commend those cooperating with Society’s rooming arrangement. Highlight paragraphs 16 and 17 for any who are deaf.
15 min: “Helping Others Appreciate the Value of Our Publications.” Discuss article with congregation. Have brief demonstrations following paragraphs 3 and 4. Inform publishers of the 192-page publications congregation has in stock. If congregation does not have older books, demonstrate use of book Mankind’s Search for God following the discussion of paragraph 5.
Song 116 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 10
Song 147
10 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: Are You Ready to Face a Faith-Challenging Medical Situation? Stirring talk by capable elder to help brothers appreciate protective value of Advance Medical Directive/​Release card, using points from paragraphs 1-3 of November 1990 Our Kingdom Ministry insert. At some “Divine Teaching” District Conventions, more than 50 percent of the cards used to obtain a new release were unsigned, not witnessed, or out-of-date. Have new cards distributed to baptized publishers only, then consider October 15, 1991, letter of direction on filling out cards. Advise brothers NOT to fill out cards tonight but to take them home, prayerfully consider their need, then fill them out. But DO NOT SIGN card then. Bring filled-out card to next Congregation Book Study, where elders will assist in seeing that cards are signed, witnessed, and dated. The Congregation Book Study conductor will use an up-to-date list to be sure all in his group are accounted for. (Baptized parents can be aided in filling out Identity Cards for their children.) Anyone missing that book study can still be assisted by conductors/​elders at the next Service Meeting until all baptized publishers have their cards properly filled out and signed. Elders should have a list of any remaining ones and try to complete all cards as soon as possible.
20 min: “Returning to Build Appreciation.” Audience discussion. If publishers are using older publications, demonstrate how return visit may be made on person who accepted one of those books. Otherwise, demonstrate return visit on someone who accepted the book Mankind’s Search for God, using the suggestions in paragraph 5.
Song 154 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 17
Song 167
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Include acknowledgment of donations. Express appreciation for publishers’ financial support of Society’s activities as well as those of the congregation. Remind any who have not yet completed their Advance Medical Directive/​Release card to do that tonight by approaching their Congregation Book Study conductor or one of the other elders.
20 min: “Working Frequently Covered Territory.” Question-and-answer coverage led by service overseer. In congregations with frequently covered territory, feature a demonstration of one of the Reasoning book introductions referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5 as well as another appropriate introduction either taken from paragraphs 6 and 7 or prepared especially for the local territory. In congregations that do not cover their territory frequently, other suitable introductions from Reasoning book should be featured in demonstrations. Demonstrations should be well rehearsed.
15 min: What Is Earth’s Future? Based on Reasoning book, pages 112-17. (5 min.) Talk covering points under subheadings that begin on pages 112 and 113, covering material to middle of page 114. (7 min.) A newer publisher and a mature, experienced publisher discuss information on pages 114-16. Worldly relatives of new publisher have argued that Bible indicates earth will be destroyed. Newer publisher asks help of more experienced publisher in understanding Bible texts about earth. (3 min.) In conclusion, discuss question on page 117, “What kind of people will God favor with endless life on earth?” Encourage all to exert themselves to qualify for such a blessed privilege.
Song 176 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 24
Song 178
 5 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to have a share in field service this week. Announce congregation’s field service arrangements.
10 min: “The Bible​—Mankind’s Oldest Modern Book.” Question-and-answer coverage.
15 min: Family Use of the New Yearbook. Family head leads household in stimulating review of introductory material on first ten pages of 1994 Yearbook. Concludes by outlining arrangements for family to read a few pages of Yearbook each week.
15 min: Field Activity of the Congregation. Service overseer and another elder review congregation’s activity for past four months. One third of service year has passed (September-December). How is congregation doing? Offer sincere commendation in areas in which congregation is doing well. Also mention areas in which congregation could improve, and offer practical suggestions. Include one or two brief encouraging field experiences from first four months of service year. End on positive, upbuilding note. Jesus’ joy came from carrying out his ministry. We too will find great joy in keeping busy in the work Jehovah has given us.​—John 4:34; 1 Cor. 15:58.
Song 179 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 31
Song 186
 5 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to get early start in field service by participating this weekend. May offer helpful suggestions for presenting current magazines.
10 min: Present You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth From House to House. Brief enthusiastic talk on proven value of book in helping people know and worship Jehovah. Demonstrate how publisher might use suggestions in this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry in field service.
20 min: “Meeting Attendance​—A Serious Responsibility.” Question-and-answer coverage. In connection with paragraph 2, interview publishers who have overcome obstacles in order to attend meetings on a regular basis.
10 min: Local needs. Or talk by an elder on “Have a Right View of God’s Mercy,” based on The Watchtower, October 1, 1993, pages 22-5.
Song 188 and concluding prayer.

