The Bible​—Mankind’s Oldest Modern Book
1 The Bible is the most widely circulated book in all history. No other book has been translated into so many languages. In addition, no group of people have been as zealous as Jehovah’s Witnesses in distributing the Bible and publicly presenting it as the Word of God.
2 Since it is God’s Word, we can be confident that it gives workable answers to modern-day problems. And Jehovah’s organization provides practical help to find such answers in publications as well as videos. Therefore we are pleased to announce that the English version of The Bible​—Mankind’s Oldest Modern Book, the second of three videos demonstrating the inspiration of the Bible, may now be ordered from your congregation. It is 40 minutes in length.
3 Like the first video in this series, this second one also builds confidence in the Bible as a divine guide. It uses footage taken in Bible lands and in museums around the world to help us realize how Jehovah God has preserved the Bible throughout the centuries down to our day. You will see how the accuracy of the Bible has been maintained despite repeated copying and translation. You will see how this divine book has been preserved in the face of extreme opposition to its distribution. You will also see living testimonies of how the Bible has changed people’s lives for the better.
4 This video will be invaluable for family Bible discussion and for many other practical purposes​—just like the first one. We are sure that Jehovah will bless its use. Those who have not yet ordered it can do so immediately through the literature department in the congregation. The videos The Bible​—Accurate History, Reliable Prophecy and Jehovah’s Witnesses—​The Organization Behind the Name are also still available.
5 We are pleased to inform you that the Spanish version of The Bible​—Accurate History, Reliable Prophecy, the first of these three videos, is now ready for distribution. It is 41 minutes in length. You may order it immediately through the literature department in the congregation.

