Working Frequently Covered Territory
1 We rejoice to receive reports that many congregations are working their territory frequently. (Matt. 24:14; 1 Tim. 2:3, 4) Although this presents a unique challenge, experience has shown that it can be successfully met if we are well prepared and equipped to deal with various circumstances that arise.
2 Effective Introductions Are the Key: It is very important to be prepared to use one or more well-thought-out introductions. They should include pointed statements that make clear the vital reasons for our frequent calls.
3 The Reasoning book supplies many fine examples of appropriate introductions to use. Three are listed on page 15 under the heading “In Territory Often Worked.” Rehearse the ones you would like to use in your territory.
4 Some publishers find success using items from the local newspaper to initiate conversations in frequently worked territory. The Reasoning book gives three examples of how this can be done. Consider the second introduction under the heading “Crime/​Safety” on page 10 and the first two introductions under the heading “Current Events” on pages 10 and 11.
5 Introductions You Prepare: Feel free to develop and use appropriate introductory comments patterned after those presented in the Reasoning book. Express these in your own natural way, using your own words. You could rehearse them with an experienced publisher before using them in the field.
6 For example, you might say something like this:
▪ “Since we visited you last, [mention recent occurrence people in community are talking about]. Because all of us are affected in one way or another, many of our neighbors have expressed serious concern. Perhaps you too have given it some thought. [Pause briefly to allow for possible response.] In view of world conditions today, would you not agree with what the prophet Jeremiah wrote at Jer chapter 10, verse 23?” After reading the scripture, get the householder’s observations, then direct attention to a specific scripture that shows how Jehovah will resolve the particular problem under discussion.
7 Or you could say:
▪ “No doubt you noticed in the news today [mention specific happening]. Perhaps you will agree that this affects all of us. [Pause briefly for possible response.] We can hope for the authorities to come up with a short-term remedy; however, the Bible shows how the problem will be resolved permanently.” Direct attention to a specific scripture that explains what God will do.
8 “Why Do You Call So Frequently?” Appropriate responses to this potential conversation stopper are given in the Reasoning book on page 20 under the heading “Why Do You People Call So Often?” Even without being asked, we can give a fine witness if we seize every appropriate occasion to help others appreciate that genuine love of God and neighbor motivates us to call as often as possible. A discussion of Jesus’ words at John 21:15-17 could prove to be very beneficial in this regard.
9 Until Jehovah says it is enough, let us continue to meet the challenge of working frequently covered territory. With this determination, we can be assured of his guidance, protection, and blessing right down to the end.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.

