Aids to Prevent Loss of Integrity
 1. How important is God’s Word as an aid to avoiding loss of integrity?
WHY these irremediable failures? Well, in Saul’s case it is quite evident that he failed to keep strictly to God’s instructions to kings, as recorded at Deuteronomy 17:18, 19 (NW): “When he takes his seat on the throne of his kingdom he must write in a book for himself a copy of this law from that which is in the charge of the priests, the Levites. And it must continue with him and he must read in it all the days of his life.” That brings home to us the importance of prayerfully considering a portion of God’s Word of truth every day, even if it is only the text for the day with its comment in the Yearbook. That will guard us against losing our appreciation of and our fear of Jehovah. It will keep us humble, always reminded of our own limitations and our complete dependence upon our heavenly Father for everything.
 2. True humility should have what beneficial effect on us?
2 Humility will also deter us from trying to go alone, foolishly thinking that Jehovah has revealed to us personally the way of favor and blessedness. The gift of knowledge concerning his grand purposes has reached us through the “slave” organization that he is pleased to honor thus wonderfully (Matt. 24:45-47); and we may go on rejoicing in the steadily brightening light of truth only as we humbly throw in our lot with his name-people, diligently assembling with them and deriving from their companionship the courage and fearlessness in preaching that has rendered Jehovah’s witnesses notable throughout this old world.
 3. What part does prayer play in our maintenance of integrity?
3 Prayer, too, is another kind provision of our God, whereby we may be aided to go on walking “in the integrity of [our] heart.” Only the humble will pray sincerely. Others will find it hurtful to the pride to confess thus their own helplessness and their need for a strong protector. Those of upright heart will pray for God’s spirit to fill their lives and keep their hearts sound and unimpaired by the lawless influences that continually besiege them, and for his blessing upon his entire organization of servants. We can pray for these good things, never for a moment doubting the answer to our prayer, for these things are in accord with God’s will. Continuing earnestly in prayer, that is, maintaining a prayerful attitude of mind, will aid us to guard well our heart.—Phil. 4:6, 7; Col. 4:2-4.
 4. In what way will love aid us in standing firm for righteousness?
4 If we have genuine love for God and for our neighbors, then we shall never fall into the error of Urijah and flee before the onslaughts of the enemy. Rather, love for God will cast out fear of puny humans and condemned demons. Love for our neighbors will rivet us to the post of duty, giving warning of danger and directions for escape from destruction. So cultivate love. Be loving, considerate, compassionate and merciful in all your dealings. (1 Pet. 3:8, 9, NW) Your relationship toward your brother must be so adjusted that it will be truly beneficial to him. “Be in subjection to one another” is the way Paul expressed it at Ephesians 5:21, NW.
 5. How do Paul’s words at 2 Timothy 4:5 apply to us today?
5 Singled out, you might say, from the multitudes of earth’s population, we have been made the recipients of special advance information on God’s purposes, the end of this old system of things and the coming in of a new. How do we view the ministry that has thereby been extended to us? As something to be attended to just when we have a few minutes to spare from other matters of this life, its amusements, its ambitions, its careers? Not that, if we would avoid loss of integrity! Paul’s admonition to Timothy so fitly applies to us today: “Keep your balance in all things, suffer evil, do missionary work, thoroughly accomplish your ministry.” (2 Tim. 4:5, NW) That clearly means that today we must take our commission as preachers of the Kingdom in all seriousness. Do we?
INTEGRITY DEMONSTRATED
 6. What special relationship with God will be maintained by integrity-keepers?
6 Consider now some of the evidences and the fruits of integrity in these closing days of the old world. Faithful worshipers of Jehovah are not content to have their consciences lulled into a false sense of security and peace by all the sedative schemes of men. Instead, they have ‘made request to God for a good conscience’ and he has granted their request through knowledge and faith in his own Son, Christ Jesus. And once having gained, through the merit of Christ’s sacrifice, that consciousness of being forgiven our offenses against God, they exercise themselves to hold fast that good conscience, that is, continue at peace with the Supreme Sovereign of the universe. They know this can be done only by maintenance of integrity. Sincerity in Jehovah’s pure worship is their mainstay.—1 Pet. 3:21, NW.
 7. How does the soldier’s way of life illustrate the proper course for us?
7 Another strong evidence of integrity today is to be seen in the strong, courageous, enduring, soldierly qualities of those servants of Jehovah who keep always in mind that they are engaged in a warfare, not with flesh-and-blood enemies, but with crafty, superhuman, invisible foes who are ever on the watch for the unguarded moment. How wonderfully the suit of armor God provides fits those who have a full realization of the urgency, the danger and the challenge of these times! Good soldiers remain on the alert, take no foolish chances, keep their minds on the fight and put into it everything they have that they may share the fruits of victory. Soldiers of Jehovah are in no way behind.
 8. What other method should be followed in our efforts to remain uncontaminated by Satan’s world?
8 Integrity may be detected, too, in that clean-cut separateness from this old world that is characteristic of all who have become members of the New World society. Indeed the apostle Paul, when writing Timothy (2 Tim. 2:20, 21, NW), reminded him that we can continue as ‘clean vessels for honorable use by Jehovah in his great and happy household organization’ by keeping clear of the unclean vessels that are fit only for use by this corrupt world and to be destroyed with it. Note how clearly he sounds the warning: “In a large house there are vessels . . . some for an honorable purpose but others for a purpose lacking honor. If, therefore, anyone keeps clear of the latter ones, he will be a vessel for an honorable purpose, sanctified, useful to his owner, prepared for every good work.”
 9. How may we remain in the happy state of trusted service of the New World interest?
9 To remain in this happy state we must go on loving what is right and hating wrong. We cannot in any way countenance, excuse or shield that which is against God’s will and way. From those who insist on worldly habits, customs and practices, the apostle says “turn away!” Happy are we indeed if we never go by the advice of the ungodly, never take the road of the sinners, never join in the company of the scoffers, but, instead, find joy in Jehovah’s law, poring over it at every opportunity, as the psalmist recommends. Choosing for our companions others dedicated to pure worship of Jehovah and persons of good will who delight to hear and talk about God’s purposes will do much toward buttressing our integrity. “Do not be misled. Bad associations spoil useful habits.” (1 Cor. 15:33, NW) Hold on to the good habits of studying, praying, preaching.
10. Name some of the everyday relationships that call for exercise of integrity.
10 Fruits of integrity are observable in our relationships with the whole household of faith. If servants, we are found persevering in the work of caring for, strengthening and training the multitude of sheeplike ones over whom the Good Shepherd has granted us to have supervision. Disappointments, setbacks, apparently insurmountable obstacles will never shake us from patient continuance in welldoing. ‘Pay attention to the flock!’ and, ‘Shepherd the congregation of God!’ are the commands that we shall delight to obey. (Acts 20:28; 1 Pet. 5:2) If we are publishers in the congregation, our integrity is exhibited in the readiness with which we labor to assist the weaker ones, and generally to take that course of action that will promote the unity and peace and prosperity of the congregation.—1 Thess. 5:14, 15.
11. In what various stations in life can integrity be manifested?
11 And then integrity is manifest in such a host of other relationships of life. It is seen in the wisdom of the godly husband who by compliance with true Christian principles earns the respect and affection of his wife and family; in the wife who strives to make full proof of her position as helper to her husband, with readiness deferring to his position as head of the household; in the parent who refrains from irritating the children, but who seeks to train them with kindness and firmness upon the basis of Jehovah’s authoritative advice; in the child who, despite his puzzlement over parental requirements, humbly recalls their longer experience and maturer judgment and obeys their rule. But whether we occupy the position of husband or wife or child or master or servant, we do all enjoy the common status of preacher. In that position, following our well-thought-out decision to dedicate our lives to Jehovah’s service, we have been granted a high honor. Here is where our integrity shines forth at its best! In this service it is that we are called upon to endure faithfully the hatred, the violence, the ridicule and the ungodly arguments of an entire world that is against our God. But like our Leader and Commander, Christ Jesus, we must never lose sight of the joy that is set before us, the reward of tested and unshaken integrity.—Heb. 12:2, 3; Isa. 55:4.
THE REWARD FOR KEEPING IT
12, 13. How is the reward of integrity represented in the Scriptures, and what does this mean?
12 And what is that reward? It is that which is represented by ascending into the hill of Jehovah and standing there in his sacred temple. Today, as the apostle declared, “you have not approached that [Mount Sinai] which can be felt and which has been set aflame with fire” and to which no living creature could safely approach without the approval and favor of Jehovah. Rather “you have approached a mount Zion and a city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem, and myriads of angels, in general assembly.” (Heb. 12:18, 22, 23, NW) The glorious universal organization of Jehovah is here identified; and, prominently displayed therein and occupying the chief vantage point, can be seen the “holy temple for Jehovah . . . a place for God to inhabit by spirit.” Truly a sacred and everlasting sanctuary.—Eph. 2:21, 22, NW.
13 So, ascending into the hill of Jehovah and standing there in his sacred temple are closely akin to proving our worthiness to enter and live in the New World forever. A world that will witness the realization of that ancient purpose of the great God of integrity, the universal Integrator, as expressed at Ephesians 1:8-10 (NW): “It is according to his good pleasure which he purposed in himself for an administration at the full limit of the appointed times, namely, to gather all things together again in the Christ, the things in the heavens and the things on the earth.” That final integration will contain only sound, clean, incorruptible creatures who are wholly devoted to righteousness and to Jehovah, the source of every good and pure thing.
14. What happy lot is ours if we hold fast to our integrity?
14 Happy indeed is our lot if we can pray sincerely from the heart as did David: “Judge me, O Jehovah, for I have walked in mine integrity: I have trusted also in Jehovah without wavering. Examine me, O Jehovah, and prove me; try my heart and my mind. But as for me, I will walk in mine integrity: redeem me, and be merciful unto me.” (Ps. 26:1, 2, 11, AS) Then we can truly hope in Jehovah and entertain an assured expectation of dwelling forever in his new world with a host of like-minded men of integrity. “Keep integrity!” is the counsel to us all this day; and, doing so, we shall abide happily and forever in the universal family of the pure and holy God, Jehovah.

