Announcements
DELIVERANCE OF PEOPLE OF GODLY DEVOTION
The battle of Armageddon will take place within this generation. Jehovah’s witnesses look forward to it with full assurance of being delivered, having in mind the promise at 2 Peter 2:9, NW: “Jehovah knows how to deliver people of godly devotion out of trial, but to reserve unrighteous people for the day of judgment to be cut off.” With Armageddon rapidly approaching, it is important that Jehovah’s witnesses tell people about Jehovah’s loving provisions for deliverance. During May they will zealously go from house to house giving short Bible sermons and offering householders two Bible study aid books and two booklets for $1. A special effort will be made to leave in every home at least the latest booklet published by the Society.
FOR HUNGRY PEOPLE
Do you wish a well-balanced spiritual diet that will satisfy your hunger for accurate Bible knowledge? The Watchtower magazine is published on the 1st and the 15th of every month to provide substantial and varied Scriptural ‘food for thought’ for hungry people. Its spiritual food, Scripturally tested and proved, enables one to face with confidence and poise the many problems of this evil time. A year’s subscription is only $1, and if you subscribe before May 1 you will receive free three Bible booklets.
HAPPY CROWDS WILL ATTEND!
If you spent eight hours a day at it, it would take nearly two and a half years to talk for just one minute with each of the more than 427,000 people who attended Jehovah’s witnesses’ 1954 district assemblies. The 1955 “Triumphant Kingdom” assemblies will be equally impressive. They will be held in Chicago, Vancouver, Los Angeles, Dallas, New York, London, Paris and Rome, Nuremberg, and finally in Stockholm and The Hague. What a blessing to those who can attend three, four, five or more of these assemblies! What joy and Christian love will be evident among people of many nationalities! Hundreds, yes, thousands will cross the Atlantic to attend the European gatherings. Will you be among them? Will you share their joys?
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
May 22: Keeping Integrity, ¶1-23. Page 244.
May 29: Keeping Integrity, ¶24-30; also, Aids to Prevent Loss of Integrity. Page 249.

