Keeping Integrity
“The Rock, perfect is his activity, for all his ways are justice. A God of faithfulness, with whom there is no injustice; righteous and upright is he.”—Deut. 32:4, NW.
 1. What makes those acquainted with Jehovah happy and what do they do?
HOW happy are those creatures who come to know Jehovah for what he is, the Supreme Sovereign of all the universe, whose flawless conduct should call forth the unqualified praise of every living thing! Such persons are moved to sing as did the psalmist of old: “Sing unto him a new song; play skilfully with a loud noise. For the word of Jehovah is right; and all his work is done in faithfulness. He loveth righteousness and justice: the earth is full of the loving-kindness of Jehovah.” (Ps. 33:3-5, AS) These appreciative ones delight to “show that Jehovah is upright,” so that multitudes of their fellow creatures may be induced to serve and worship his holy name for their own eternal welfare.—Ps. 92:15, AS.
 2. What are Jehovah’s characteristics, and why are intelligent creatures drawn to him?
2 In another place David testified: “Good and upright is Jehovah.” (Ps. 25:8, AS) His inspired writings, together with all the other Scriptures, unite to reflect for us wonderfully the spotlessness and perfections of Jehovah. He is revealed to us as a holy God, absolutely pure, clean, incorruptible, undefilable, faithful, constant, and wholly devoted to righteousness. Human expression falls far short of adequate description of His excellence. Little wonder, then, that humble-minded humans are awed before his glorious though invisible majesty. No wonder they are inspired to approach into his presence by striving to conform their lives to the wonderful principles and laws that he originated for the operation of all his universal family. He is like a tremendous magnet toward which like-minded creatures are irresistibly drawn.
 3. In what important respect does he contrast with other so-called “gods”?
3 And how different Jehovah is from all other gods who, by their human worshipers, are depicted as choosing to maintain an isolated, aloof and selfish majesty and to shroud themselves in mystery by keeping their worshipers at a respectful distance for fear their sham will be discovered and exposed! Instead, Jehovah delights in those who make diligent efforts to know him and model their thoughts and actions after his. To all who would be his children he commands: “You must prove yourselves holy, because I am holy.” (Lev. 11:44, NW) That means that his true worshipers must strive to emulate his uprightness; they must display integrity in all their relationships with him and with their fellow creatures.
 4. Explain the expression “integrity,” showing how it applies to Jehovah and his children.
4 But what is integrity? And how may we attain and retain this essential characteristic of God’s universal family of creatures? Webster’s International Dictionary describes it as uprightness of deportment; soundness of moral principle; honesty, probity, state of being entire, unimpaired, unbroken; completeness. Delving deeper into the structure of the word we discover that its component parts are in, referring to the negative, and tegrity, a form of the Latin verb tangere, meaning “to touch.” We gather, then, that integrity is a state of being untouched, uncorrupted, unimpaired by divisive and corrupt influences. How wonderfully, then, our God Jehovah stands forth as the God of integrity! How essential for us to cultivate that quality if we would be like him, prove worthy to be his children!
 5. With what did God endow humans, and why should they fittingly seek to be like him?
5 When God first contemplated the creation of humankind he generously determined to endow humans with the grand possibilities of reflecting all his righteousness, for he declared: “Let us make man in our image, according to our likeness, and let them have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and the domestic animals and all the earth and every creeping animal that is creeping upon the earth.” How fitting, then, that man in his miniature sphere of control should pattern his behavior after the perfect example of the heavenly Father, of whom it is said: “Jehovah is righteous in all his ways, and gracious in all his works.”—Gen. 1:26, NW; Ps. 145:17, AS.
 6. Why so much conflict and demoralization, and what is the source?
6 Without that great and perfect Stabilizer and Integrator imagine what confusion this universe would be reduced to, what a welter of conflicting interests and demoralizing influences! As it is, this entire world civilization has been so badly corrupted and divided in its loyalties and confused in its thinking that the Sovereign God of integrity himself has been pushed into its background and men are rallied to human- and demon-inspired schemes for bettering their conditions. It all began when the first rebel creature, having permitted his own self-conceived pride and covetousness to break down and corrupt his proper allegiance to Jehovah, used a serpent to say ingratiatingly to the perfect Eve: “Is it really so that God said you must not eat from every tree of the garden? . . . You positively will not die. For God knows that in the very day of your eating from it your eyes are bound to be opened and you are bound to be like God, knowing good and bad.”—Gen. 3:1-5, NW.
 7. Briefly show the purpose of the rebel cherub both in Eden and in Job’s day.
7 Here we note outstandingly the premeditated move to shake the integrity of the first pair toward their Creator. Get them to listen to another source of information, another “authoritative” voice, to divide their loyalty and reduce their confidence and trust in the Creator to a fraction of what it once was. Would they fall before the corrupting influence of Satan or stand up to him courageously and retain the completeness of their devotion to the One who was their Creator and Benefactor? The issue raised there in Eden has not since then died out or been settled. In the time of Job, some thirty-five centuries ago, the boastful rebel accused that righteous man before Jehovah’s throne, alleging that he was only a favor seeker, a person who fell in line with God’s arrangements only because of the good things that Jehovah gave him.
 8, 9. (a) What was the test upon Job? (b) How did he meet it?
8 So Job’s integrity was put to the test. Wealth and property were taken away, children and household servants were slain, a loathsome skin disease assailed his own body from head to foot, and his own wife and three false friends conspired to have him renounce his worship of the only true God. Obviously the Devil was using these human mouthpieces to sound out his destructive propaganda: ‘The easy way out of all your troubles is just to curse God and die. Besides, he is not really worthy of your worship and devotion. He is an unreasoning dictator without any real love for his own creations.’
9 What think you of Job’s integrity? Did he permit himself to become divided as to allegiance, or to be corrupted by doubts and suspicions and the clever sophistry of this world and its god? No! Rather we hear him firmly declaring: “Till I die I will not put my integrity from me.” “Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.” (Job 27:5, AT; Job 13:15) Before this searching test was applied to Job he had already been distinguished as a faithful servant of Jehovah. And now, victorious in trial, he was signally blessed by the great Giver of every good and perfect present. Truly Jehovah loves and is made happy by those who are prepared to suffer in behalf of his name and righteousness. The course of integrity, this wholeness of devotion, of trust and obedience toward the Creator, is the path of wisdom, and Jehovah’s paternal admonition to his children is: “Be wise, my son, and gladden my heart, that I may answer the man who would taunt me.”—Prov. 27:11, AT.
10. What is Satan’s strategy?
10 The great Taunter, Satan, is continually watching and waiting for the deflection of creatures from the course of uprightness so that he may add to the ridicule and reproach that he heaps upon the name of the Creator. Himself represented by the basest of creatures, a serpent slithering on the ground, he would have all God’s creatures seduced from the upright condition of Jehovah’s worship and service. That is his scheme, and so he brings every underhanded weapon to bear against servants of the Most High, well knowing that he has only to succeed in introducing some slight doubt in the mind of an unwary creature, which doubt will serve as the thin edge of the wedge that can ultimately break asunder the wholeness of the creature’s devotion.
11. How does Jehovah prove to be a loving provider for men of integrity?
11 On the other hand, Jehovah takes great pleasure in observing those integrity-keepers who take all the reproach and sufferings that this world and its god can hand out, and still, like Job, walk in undivided, unsullied allegiance to the universal Sovereign. He is the perfect Father, who sets the example of integrity to all his sons and daughters. More than that, he lovingly provides in his Word, the Holy Scriptures, a storehouse of information as to his wonderful principles and qualities, so that the man of God may be thoroughly equipped to ward off the attacks of the enemy and stand fast for uprightness and truth. And still another marvelous provision to that same end is the flawless, flesh-and-blood example of his own beloved Son here on earth. Note how the confidence of the Father was so unequivocally expressed at the time of that unique baptism performed at Jordan’s edge: “This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved.” (Matt. 3:17, NW) Yes, and long centuries before that the reward of integrity that has now been awarded to Christ Jesus was likewise confidently dictated to the psalmist: “You love righteousness and hate wickedness; therefore has God, your God, anointed you with the oil of gladness above your companions.”—Ps. 45:7, AT.
WHAT IT MEANS TO US TODAY
12. Why is it important today to consider the record of ancient integrity-keepers?
12 But what does keeping integrity mean to us today in this year 1955? The answer to this question becomes plain as we examine the record of former men of integrity. That record God has especially preserved for our learning now in these times of greatest peril, when Gog from his darksome seat of operations in the vicinity of our earth prepares and directs personally an unprecedented and merciless campaign against the people of integrity toward Jehovah God and his King, Christ Jesus. As we consider briefly their trials let us realize how closely their circumstances conform to those in which we find ourselves today.
13. Explain the question at issue in Abel’s time and how he came to have Jehovah’s favor.
13 In the case of Abel we can observe that pure worship was at stake. Abel knew what was required of him in the way of sacrifice that would be acceptable to Jehovah God. Afterward Cain knew also, but preferred to have his own way. And whereas his mother had ambition to be as wise as God, Cain placed his own judgment in this matter of proper worship ahead of God’s judgment. But what of Abel amid such family surroundings? The willful, independent attitude of Cain was not permitted to infect his soundness of devotion. He held fast to right worship even though it cost him his life.—Gen. 4:1-15.
14. What is outstandingly stressed in Enoch’s conduct?
14 Preaching also has its special contribution to offer toward the final successful score in the field of integrity. This we find in the record about Enoch who, according to Jude’s inspired word, spoke out boldly and fearlessly against an antigod generation. Little did he care that he was out of line with the vast majority of earth’s population. His love of right and truth banished all fear of mere creatures, and sustained him in the work God assigned him. (Gen. 5:18-24; Jude 14, 15) We also find ourselves a scorned and hated minority, and with the same preaching assignment.
15. Show how Noah demonstrated his integrity and what enabled him to do so.
15 Walking humbly with Jehovah God as with a revered friend and tutor, anxious always to commune with him and learn from him his ways, is another feature of integrity-keeping that cannot be dispensed with. Consider the example of Noah, of whom it is testified that he “walked with God.” And how wonderfully Jehovah rewarded this faithful one who ‘proved himself faultless’ amid that entire generation of corrupt contemporaries! His walking with and studying diligently under the great Teacher equipped him to withstand that era’s swift decline in morals that ended in destruction by the Deluge.—Gen. 6:8 to 7:24.
16. What does obedience have to do with integrity as seen in Abraham’s experiences?
16 Obedience is another must for integrity-keepers. Abraham flashes to mind as an outstanding example in this field. Unquestioningly he denied himself the luxuries and pleasures of populous Ur in the land of Chaldea. But that was only the beginning. His subsequent travels were all strictly in accordance with the itinerary that God communicated to him. They brought him into continual contact with godless tribes and pagan kingdoms. But never did he waver from obedience to his God; never did he show the least indication of being adversely affected as to his integrity. And the supreme test only served to prove beyond question the soundness of his mental attitude toward God. He stood ready to slay that only son in whom all his godly parental love was centered, humbly recognizing that it is within God’s prerogative and power both to give life and to take it away, as well as to resurrect the dead to live everlastingly.—Heb. 11:19; Gen. 22:1-19.
17. What part did Sarah play in the great drama of integrity?
17 Sarah’s example also displays another sparkling facet of the gem of integrity. Yes, she did laugh when first the promise of childbirth in her old age was given. But the inspired writer testifies of her that she always maintained proper subjection to her husband, and, when reminded that it was the word of the Supreme Sovereign that was involved in the promise, “she was afraid.” She had fear of God, and that fear constituted the basis for true wisdom. Human wisdom and reasoning were put to rout. Her faith became a conquering power within her that triumphed over the barrenness of old age.—Gen. 18:1-15; 21:1-7; 1 Pet. 3:6.
18. What feature of integrity-keeping did James stress at James 5:10, 11?
18 Another feature of integrity is endurance. How aptly it is underlined by James in his epistle to fellow Christians when he says: “Brothers, take as a pattern of the suffering of evil and the exercising of patience the prophets, who spoke in the name of Jehovah. . . . You have heard of the endurance of Job.” (Jas. 5:10, 11, NW) And can we put our finger on the source of Job’s power to endure? On what else but the strong hope he entertained in the accomplishment of God’s rich promises? Consider, for example, this expression from the lips of a man undergoing excruciating agonies: “Oh that thou wouldest hide me in Sheʹol, that thou wouldest keep me secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou wouldest appoint me a set time, and remember me! If a man die, shall he live again?” (Job 14:13, 14, AS) His assured expectation of life by resurrection produced endurance, and his enduring successfully in turn strengthened his hope. We do well to take him as our God-approved pattern.
19. What special attitude of Moses deserves special notice in this connection?
19 How easy the Devil makes it for servants of Jehovah just to make some slight compromise or to soften down their tone and message! But not Moses. Despite danger and reproach he refused to side-step or shelve his responsibilities. He forsook the court of Pharaoh with all of its dazzling attractions, on the basis that his continuing there was acting out a lie, outwardly countenancing Pharaoh’s policies and practices, when inwardly he belonged to the despised and hated Hebrew minority. Later, when sent into the presence of the hard monarch with the message of God, there was no mincing matters, no soft-pedaling, but rather uncompromising faithfulness to God and to his commission. He maintained a solid stand for what was right. He continued unimpaired by the corrupt influences of Egypt.—Heb. 11:23-29.
20, 21. (a) State how Jesus came to be the pre-eminent man of integrity. (b) Who truly learned of him, and with what result?
20 With each of the foregoing examples of integrity-maintainers some one special feature or characteristic shines out as though to arrest our attention and strikingly emphasize the many qualities required by the one who would stand fast for righteousness and against iniquity. But now note how all unite in the marvelous example of God’s own Son, who admitted no worship but that of Jehovah, preached constantly and fearlessly, ever remained the humble sent One of his Father, obeyed the Father’s instructions right on through to the ignominious death on the stake, displayed unconquerable faith in his Father’s power and endured all things, never for a moment compromising with the Devil’s side of the integrity issue. This is why he is ‘anointed with the oil of gladness above his companions.’—Heb. 1:8, 9, NW.
21 And those who truly learned of him while he walked on earth demonstrated the same mental attitude. Rather than relinquish integrity they were prepared to give up comforts, properties, all things, yes, life itself. This is what Paul reminds us of at Hebrews 10:34 (NW): “For you both expressed sympathy for those in prison and joyfully took the plundering of your belongings, knowing you yourselves have a better and an abiding possession.” And Paul himself testified that, on account of proving worthy to be called a follower of Christ, “I have taken the loss of all things and I consider them as a lot of refuse.” (Phil. 3:8, NW) His “anxiety for all the congregations” involved a continual battle against divisive and contaminating influences already at work to break down the integrity of the infant Christian organization.—2 Cor. 11:28, NW.
22. How did integrity-keeping amaze the world of the first century?
22 God richly blessed the unselfish labors of Paul and his fellow apostles. Thousands of meek persons through love for righteousness were attracted by the fearless proclamation of the Kingdom in that first century of this era. They diligently studied the Scriptures, came to know Jehovah, matured in the faith and became active in the preaching campaign. What a spectacle they were to the corrupt and debauched generation of that day! Unflinchingly, they faced wild beasts and bestial human persecutors, many with their lives giving proof of unshakable allegiance to the God of integrity. The entireness of their devotion, while a most puzzling phenomenon to worldly men, was a source of amazement to all who witnessed it.
23. What searching questions confront us in these perilous times?
23 Likewise today true worshipers of Jehovah are in the midst of a hostile generation, a generation corrupted and debauched by the god of this world. Today too those who walk in the integrity of their heart before Jehovah are a people wondered at, misunderstood, hatefully opposed, persecuted, and under threat of death in some parts of the earth. Are you one of them by mere profession only, or by reason of a personal course of integrity that identifies you as one of them? Remember, integrity is a matter of the mind and the heart. Is your mind single for God and righteousness? Is your heart strong and clean to pump constantly through your inner self the heavenly wisdom that becomes a wellspring of life everlasting? If yes, then you will be happily numbered among God’s men of integrity.
WARNINGS AGAINST FAILURE TO KEEP IT
24. Explain how some have failed to keep upright.
24 Failure to keep integrity, on the other hand, has its warning examples also recorded in the Scriptures. In each instance it will be seen that failure stemmed from the creature’s lack of consideration for the unity and welfare of all other members of the universal organization of God’s creatures. Attention was turned inwardly to self. The close basic connection between the words fail and deceive underlines the fact that each corrupted one deceived himself into thinking more highly of himself than he ought, and therefore thinking less of his Creator and his fellow creatures than he ought. Once embarked on the course of self-deception, the next step was to deceive fellow creatures.
25. Who was the first failure, and why?
25 The courts of heaven witnessed the first failure when the inordinate ambition of a mighty cherub goaded him on to overstep the safe boundaries of freedom and precious responsibility with which his Maker had surrounded him. He cared not that this course would shatter the integrity of the universal family. Was he not clever and beautiful and endowed with great power and authority? Why should he not be greater? Why not the greatest? Self-deception strengthened his unlawful desire, and desire in turn drew him out into the field of illegal action. He became guilty of treason and conspiracy to displace the Supreme Sovereign.—Ezek. 28:13-18.
26. Where did Adam and Eve stand in the issue of integrity?
26 In Eden that same rebel maliciously promoted more failure of integrity. Added to Eve’s foolish readiness to listen to slander against One who had constantly blessed her with good gifts was Adam’s willful joining in the transgressions. Both of these perfect humans yielded to the baleful influence of the Devil as he purposely set about to divide them off from God’s happy organization and corrupt their line of thought. Unlike faithful Abraham, that privileged “first father” of humankind wanted to take all the good things from his great Benefactor but give nothing up. How corrupted they must have been thus to lose sight so quickly of the glorious incorruptibility of their heavenly Father!—Gen. 3:1-12; Isa. 43:27.
27. Were spirit creatures involved in this issue, and in what circumstances?
27 Then we recall that in Noah’s time more angelic sons of God failed to maintain integrity. They forsook their proper place of service in the heavenly courts to visit earth and indulge in illicit relations with the daughters of men. Their own selfish desires came to be more important to them than their assigned duties in the heavenly organization. Possibly, too, they found some sort of self-justification in the idea that they would be able to do much to uplift the human race and arrest its degenerative course. It would certainly suit Satan’s purpose to dangle such an apparently righteous motive before their minds. A reign of terror and violence on earth followed. Their brood of hybrid creatures, bullying giants, dominated the earthly scene and promoted every kind of godless conduct. Jehovah mercifully blotted out that nightmarish era by means of the Deluge, and banished those lovers of iniquity to the darkness of Satan’s world. What a glorious heritage they cast away by their integrity-breaking course of conduct!—Gen. 6:1-6; 2 Pet. 2:4, 5; Jude 6.
28. What caused Saul’s downfall?
28 Another outstanding example of lost integrity was the case of Saul. As long as he remained small and humble in his own sight he was highly favored of God. In time, however, he came to think too highly of himself. He presumed to put his own judgment ahead of Jehovah’s, dared to disregard the plain word of God directing his conduct as king and leader of the armies of Israel, and then dishonestly tried to vindicate his actions. The verdict expressed to him by Jehovah’s messenger was: “Because thou hast rejected the word of Jehovah, he hath also rejected thee from being king.” (1 Sam. 15:23, AS) The clear-cut judgment of the upright God of truth sheared right through Saul’s subterfuges and placed the issue squarely before him and those supporting him. The blighting touch of satanic influence had corrupted the first human king of Israel.
29. What example of failure in Jeremiah’s day do we have?
29 One of Jeremiah’s contemporaries, the prophet Urijah, shared in the special work of announcing the doom of Jerusalem and her iniquitous royal house. When threats of reprisal against him began to be rumored abroad, did Urijah stand fast and fearless in the strength of his God? Did he display the same indomitable courage as Jeremiah? No. He wavered. He permitted fear of man to sap his integrity. He fled to Egypt. And even there he was not safe, for his enemies had him extradited and then put him to a miserable death. Fear today can have the same effect on creatures who serve in their own strength and fail to don the suit of armor that God provides for their safety.—Jer. 26:20-24.
30. What value is there in the record of Judas and his end?
30 Judas was another striking example of those who receive all the good things of Jehovah God—in his case the precious privilege of association with the Lord Jesus—and yet prove to be not only thankless, but, what is far worse, traitorous toward the One who is altogether kind and merciful. Without doubt Satan fanned into a flame of hate every selfish propensity of Judas, so that thereby he might get at the foremost One of Jehovah’s men of integrity. His dismal end, all hope extinguished, stands on record as a powerful warning to “guard your heart with all vigilance, for thence are the well-springs of life.”—Prov. 4:23, AT; Matt. 27:3-10.
[Picture on page 244]
GENERAL MANAGER
HOLY BIBLE
PREACHING
PURE WORSHIP
WALKING
HUMBLY
WISDOM
OBEDIENCE
ENDURANCE

