Announcements
HOLDING FORTH HEALING TO THE NATIONS—Rev. 22:2.
Spiritual healing, leading to life eternal in God’s new world of righteousness, is now being held forth to the people of all nations. No nationality is excluded. From the heavenly kingdom of Jehovah God and his anointed Son a healing stream flows forth, from which all may drink. Yes, “anyone that wishes” may “take life’s water free.” (Rev. 22:17) All are invited, regardless of race, color or creed. The proclamation of Kingdom truth brings to honest-hearted ones the life-giving waters of divine truth and understanding. Jehovah’s witnesses will continue this month to call on people at their homes and present the Scripturally health-giving magazine The Watchtower on a contribution of $1 for a year’s subscription. All new subscribers will also receive three spiritually healthful booklets on Bible subjects. All lovers of righteousness are invited to share in holding forth healing to the nations.
FOR INSPIRING AND PRACTICAL BIBLE READING
The New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures, Vol. III, is a version of the Holy Scriptures (Job to The Song of Solomon) that should be in every home. In fact, every person that is interested in the Bible should have a personal copy. In modern English idiom, it makes for easy reading and is thoroughly enjoyable. Yet it presents an accurate and faithful translation of the original text recorded long centuries ago by God’s servants who had knowledge, wisdom and understanding from Jehovah. It contains the inspiring and comforting songs of praise of the psalmist and gems of wisdom from one who had a special gift of wisdom from on high. It provides stimulating and practical reading for our day. This edition is complete with copious cross references on outstanding Bible subjects, doctrines, words and proper names. It is bound in green leatherette with a gold-embossed hard cover. It is sent, postpaid, anywhere for only $1. A deluxe edition is also available. It is printed on thin Bible paper with a soft green binding of genuine Morocco leather. It is only $5. Send for your copy today.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
March 16: Jehovah Brings the Increase, and Fruitful Ministers Led by Active Force, ¶1-4. Page 80.
March 23: Fruitful Ministers Led by Active Force, ¶5-24. Page 86.

