Sharing the Magazines with Others
NOW SHARING THEM WITH NEIGHBORS
A woman witness of Jehovah in the United States, in Arkansas, writes: “I have been working in a territory three years with The Watchtower and Awake! One householder would take magazines irregularly. During the Awake! campaign I gave the sermon and offered the year’s subscription. Both the man of the house and his wife heard the sermon. The man said, ‘We have so much to read already.’ I showed how Awake! was a timesaver in many ways. He subscribed. I delivered the copies of Awake! until the subscription started coming through the mail and also left copies of The Watchtower. During December I placed the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures with them. In January I called and gave the lady of the house the sermon, ‘Who Are Jehovah’s Witnesses?’ She said, ‘You come back.’ I returned in two weeks, and she subscribed for The Watchtower. I have been delivering the latest copy of The Watchtower and at the same time conducting a Bible study in the ‘Good News’ booklet. The man of the house was at home when I called recently. He said, ‘I have had opportunities to get this literature for years, but I have just come to realize how interesting every article is in these publications, and every one is true.’ And he added, ‘I gave some copies to a neighbor last week that likes to read them too.’”
SHARING THEM WITH COLLEAGUES AND PATIENTS
A Witness in Missouri reports: “When I visited my chiropractor I drew his attention to the Awake! and its article ‘The Art and Science of Chiropractic.’ He asked me for a copy and also an extra one. I promised to return with another copy. Shortly afterward, I arrived home and the telephone rang; it was the chiropractor. He was very enthusiastic over the article and wanted to raise his order to twenty copies. When I delivered them, I found out he was going to distribute them to other chiropractors. My doctor then ordered twenty more copies of Awake! A few weeks ago a Witness was approached by a person who asked if this chiropractor was one of Jehovah’s witnesses. The Witness answered no, and wanted to know why this person had asked, since the doctor is a Catholic. She replied, ‘I was in his office and he gave me a copy of Awake!’”
MAILING THEM ON TO FRIENDS
A man who is not one of Jehovah’s witnesses but who is a consultant, public utilities, in Washington, D. C., wrote the Watchtower Society, saying: “I am a subscriber to Awake! and The Watchtower. Some time ago I made an experiment which was so successful I am passing it on to you. After reading these publications I enclose them in the same wrapper and readdress them to some friend [adding the small amount of postage]. In another experiment I furnished one of your representatives a list containing the names of eight friends, to which she mailed a certain issue. Within two weeks I received replies from six of these friends. They are now subscribers to your publications. In the light of the above tests, I think it would be an excellent plan if you would have printed on the front page of each publication, a one-line request that readers pass the publication on to some friend when they finish reading it. This, I am sure, would bring to your Society many thousands of new members each year. Your Society is doing a marvelous job in the general public interest, especially in holding back the tide of moral decadence that is pressuring our people 365 days of each year.”
SHARING THEM WITH TEACHERS
In a small town in Ohio a young girl regularly took The Watchtower and Awake! to her third-grade teacher. Subsequently a Witness met the teacher in the regular house-to-house work and this teacher wanted a copy of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. The teacher commented about the young Witness in her third-grade classroom. The result was that the father of the young girl arranged to call on the teacher, the father and his young daughter making the call together. A home Bible study was started. The young Witness is now taking the magazines regularly to her fourth-grade teacher.

