Truth Spreads in a Jail
AT A circuit assembly in Petersburg, Virginia, one of Jehovah’s witnesses related this experience: “I received a phone call from a prisoner in the city jail. He was anxious to contact one of Jehovah’s witnesses. He had served eight months in a prison camp and was transferred to the city jail to settle another matter. While he was in the camp, he began reading religious literature that was in the camp library. He kept noticing a green book, but everyone discouraged him, saying, ‘That’s that Jehovah stuff, don’t read it.’ But this only caused him to look into it. The following fourteen days he read, reread and looked up the scriptures in the first edition of ‘Let God Be True.’ Being convinced that what he read was God’s truth, he dedicated his life to Jehovah.
“Within a short time another man came to the camp with a red book, ‘This Means Everlasting Life.’ He read this book; as he said, ‘I wore the covers off.’ After having this foundation, he wrote some letters to the Watch Tower Society and received warm replies. Then one Sunday a Witness called and left the Paradise book and the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. Being filled with such a happy hope, this inmate began regular discussions with other inmates, and many showed interest. About seventeen men were willing to have a Bible study. Through his efforts, five of the men in the camp have come to appreciate the truth and are waiting to have a full share in Kingdom work.
“At the city jail I regularly held a Bible study every afternoon with this man. Since his short stay in the city jail, he has spread many seeds of truth with good results. Four men are definitely interested and seven have requested a Witness to call so they can learn more. This man’s conduct since learning God’s truth has been on such a high level that his influence is visibly having effects on fellow inmates. Where once there was filthy talk, now many are reading The Watchtower and Awake! and are looking up scriptures.”

