From Our Readers
Global Garden  I must say thank you for the beautiful series “A Global Garden—Dream or Future Reality?” (April 8, 1997) Yes, gardens and colors can affect our health and make us feel joyful. I loved the part entitled “The Way Home to Paradise.” Those few words were so encouraging—like an invitation saying, “This is the way.” What a pleasure it will be someday to work from sunup to sundown helping to transform earth into paradise! As I enjoy painting, drawing, and crafts, I also take delight in all the artwork in the magazines.
V. R., Australia
I wish to commend you for the articles. I thoroughly enjoyed them. I am almost 80 years old and still like to work in my yard. My flowers and vegetables would not take first prize, but I do enjoy being outdoors and working with them. Since reading the articles, I understand better why humans like to work in gardens.
R. R., United States
Save a Marriage?  When I read the article “Can a Marriage Be Saved After Infidelity?” (April 8, 1997), I had the impression that Jehovah was sending me a letter. It expressed exactly what I went through and what I felt. My husband was unfaithful, but he sincerely repented. As the article mentioned, I felt as if I were in a hurricane. I chose to forgive him, but I was sometimes ashamed of my thoughts. The article helped me understand that my reactions were totally normal and legitimate. Jehovah has greatly blessed our efforts, and our marriage has been saved.
L. P., France
While my marriage could not be saved, this article was a real blessing because it described exactly how I felt. I really could identify with everything in the article. I also know others who have likewise benefited from it. Many find it hard to understand how it feels, so this article will be of great help, offering them insight.
M. C., Ireland
I have been married for nine years to an unbeliever who has been an unfaithful mate. But when I read the paragraphs under the subheading “Is the Marriage Salvageable?” I felt much better. My husband would like to keep our marriage but with the other relationship still going on. So, I am happy that I am putting an end to it. Now I have to start over and be a single mom.
M. S. B., Trinidad
Thank you for the beautiful and sensitive article. The advice was excellent to use in determining if reconciliation will be successful. I had always assumed that if my husband was unfaithful, I could never forgive him. I realize now that that’s not always the right answer. It’s a shame that this obviously is an ever-growing problem, but thank you for Scriptural insight into how we can help ourselves. My reliance on Jehovah helped me through deep depression and helped me find strength to forgive, since my husband was (and still is) deeply repentant.
S. N., United States
Deaf Praise Jehovah  While reading the article “The Deaf Praise Jehovah” (April 8, 1997), I stopped to look at the picture of all in attendance. How faith-strengthening it was just to see so many brothers and sisters using sign language to praise Jehovah! I was moved to tears several times, as I greatly appreciate their zeal, determination, and dedication. Thank you for such articles.
R. H., United States

