Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will doubtless remember these points:
● How does ‘mercy exult triumphantly over judgment’?
In that, if a truly compassionate Christian should come into difficulty because of a momentary misstep, his record of merciful dealings will ‘win out’ over adverse judgment in that it provides just reason for God to apply generously to him the provisions now available through Jesus’ ransom sacrifice.​—P. 555.a
● Why did the first humans not need an extensive law code to guide their every action?
Jehovah God implanted in them the faculty of conscience, and the revelation of His Personality, ways and standards in the creative works provided principles to guide them.​—P. 557.
● How can we appeal to the consciences of others?
By making known the truth from God’s Word, and at the same time reflecting sincerity, honesty, purity of motive and unselfish love. (2 Cor. 4:1, 2)​—P. 566.
● Why can the true Christian not approve of gambling?
Gambling is a form of greediness, and the Scriptures classify greediness and covetousness along with idolatry. (1 Cor. 6:9, 10; Col. 3:5) Gambling conflicts with the Bible’s precepts to love one’s neighbor as oneself and to engage in honest, productive labor to obtain gain.​—Pp. 593, 594.
● At Zechariah 9:12, what is the “stronghold” to which “prisoners of the hope” are encouraged to return?
The Messianic kingdom of God, which was represented in the time of Zechariah by the city of Jerusalem, where a member of the royal line of David used to sit on the throne that was called “Jehovah’s throne.”​—P. 630.
● As recommended at Romans 15:2, how can one “please his neighbor in what is good for his upbuilding” when it comes to dress?
One’s attire should be pleasant to beholders. That means shunning a slovenly appearance or one that might needlessly offend others, as well as not wearing clothes that would make others feel self-conscious or inferior because of their own appearance; one’s choice of clothes should reflect concern for the feelings of others.​—P. 666.
● Why does the dedication of ourselves to God through Christ constitute a “request made to God for a good conscience”?
This is because when we repent of sin, turn around or get converted and dedicate ourselves to God, he relieves us of the condemnation of sin by applying the cleansing blood of Christ’s sacrifice and thus gives us a good conscience toward Him.​—P. 700.
● What did the tabernacle constructed in the time of Moses and the later temples that replaced it picture?
They represented Jehovah’s great spiritual temple or his structure of things for propitiation and worship on the basis of the sin-atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ; this spiritual structure came into being in 29 C.E.​—Pp. 712, 713, 715, 716.
● What was represented by the Most Holy, the Holy, the priestly courtyard and the altar of the tabernacle and later temples of Jehovah at Jerusalem?
The Most Holy pictured that part of the heavens where Jehovah has his holy residence as the God to be propitiated. The Holy represented the spirit-begotten condition of Jesus Christ and the 144,000 anointed Christians while still in the flesh. The priestly courtyard pictured the righteous standing of Jesus Christ and the 144,000 spiritual underpriests as to their fleshly bodies. The altar represents God’s will, that is, his willingness to accept Jesus’ human sacrifice.​—P. 721.
● What did the courtyard of the Gentiles of the temple rebuilt by King Herod represent?
The righteous standing to which all mankind must come in order to worship God acceptably.​—P. 721.
● How, as stated at Micah 4:5, can a person resolve to “walk in the name of Jehovah”?
He does so by becoming a dedicated servant of Jehovah God, choosing to follow a path in imitation of the example set by his Son Jesus Christ.​—P. 754.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1972.

