VOL. XVII. APRIL 15, 1896. (16 PAGES.) No. 8. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 74 

Views from the Tower 75 

The Easy Yoke 78 

Judas' Case a Hopeless One 79 

Our Children in the Time of Trouble 81 

The Contrast of Human Perfection 

and Human Depravity 82 

The Truth Defended in Scotland 84 

Bible Study: The Rich Man and 

Lazarus 85 

Bible Study: "Lord, Increase Our Faith" 86 

Encouraging Letters 87 

page 74 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1961 : page 74 

A MONTH LATER. 



SEVERAL friends write us that they missed the TOWER which announced 



the proper date for the Memorial Supper. Such are advised 

to celebrate a month later; viz., at the full of the following moon, 

April 26, after 6 P.M. --See Numbers 9:6-11. 

R1962:page74 

OUR PRAYERS ANSWERED. 



THE Post Office authorities have reinstated MILLENNIAL DAWN as 
"Second class mail" at pound rates of postage until May 19th, 
pending the action of Congress on Second Class Matter. 

The sisters as well as the brethren did well to address Congressmen 
and Senators as per the suggestion of our last issue. The government 
officials are representatives of all the people for whom they make laws: 
and this includes women as well as men. Indeed, in the terms of the 
law women are denominated "citizens." 



R1959 : page 75 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



RECENTLY, during the session of the one hundred 

and ninth conference of the M.E. church of 

Philadelphia, the delegates to the Laymen's Electoral Conference 

gathered and discussed denominational interests. 

It is described as a "breezy" session in which equal representation 

with the preachers in the general conferences was 

warmly advocated. Of this session the Philadelphia Press 

says: 

"To-day's meeting of the laymen of Philadelphia was 
no exception to the rule. It not only adopted strong resolutions 
memorializing the general conference to grant equal 
representations, but also gave positive instructions to the 
lay delegates that were elected to attend the coming session 
of the conference to endeavor to secure constitutional 
changes to largely restrict the governing powers of the 
preachers and leave them shorn of much of the official authority 
they now possess. In fact, the preachers were 
'handled without gloves,' and the declarations for enlargement 
of the authority of laymen in the government of the 
church were voiced with unusual vigor and unanimity. As 
was expected, the conference declared in favor of equal lay 
representation for women." 
We clip the following from the Pittsburg Post:— 
"Baltimore, April 6.— Rev. Dr. John Lanahan sprung 
a sensation in the Methodist preacher's meeting this morning 
when he announced that in a few days he will publish 
in a permanent form the 'Era of Frauds' in the Methodist 
Book concern at New York, of which he was at one time 
an agent. He stated that the publication is made necessary 



by the repeated denials of the frauds by persons in 
official positions. 

"After the astonishment created by Dr. Lanahan's 
reiterated charges against the New York concern had somewhat 
subsided, there was almost a unanimous sentiment expressed 
among the members of the preacher's meeting that 
the general conference, to meet in Cleveland, O., next 
month, be compelled to give serious attention to the 
case. Dr. Lanahan will be a member of that body, and 
his standing in the church is such that his statements can 
no longer be ignored. 

"Dr. Lanahan will, he says, furnish proof that for 
more than 12 years every financial report made to the 
church by the New York management was false, from 
$20,000 to $100,000; that said reports were false as to the 
amount of cash in the Shoe and Leather bank, where the 
official account was kept, because the senior agent kept large 
sums of the concern's moneys in his personal account and 
used it to speculate in stocks in Wall street; that large 
sums of money sent to the concern for church benevolence 
were used in the same way." 

We understand that the above charges are acknowledged 
but that for over twenty years the business has been in competent 
and reliable hands. 

"At a recent meeting of Methodist Episcopal preachers 
of Pittsburg it was argued that $1,000 a year should be the 
minimum salary for them, and that it should be a lien on 
the church property. It was not the first time that such a 
suggestion had been made."— Pittsburg News. 

The editor of the News, probably a worldling, comments 
upon this item, and gives an account of the labors 
and salary of a Methodist minister in these parts from 
August, 1833 to August, 1834, taken from his diary. Total 
receipts, $79.44; total sermons, 90, the first being from the 
text, "I must work the works of him that sent me, while it 
is day; for the night cometh when no man can work." 

The difficulty seems to be that preaching is sought by 
too many for its honor, its leisure and its emoluments. 
Few to-day are preaching under the impulse which moved 
the Apostle Paul: that caused him to rejoice in the preaching 
of the gospel even when its only wages were slander 
and persecution, and he earned his living by tent-making. 
But the Apostle had a gospel to preach of which he was 
"not ashamed;" he had "good tidings of great joy which 
shall [yet] be unto all people," to proclaim. Thank God 

R1959 : page 76 

for the opening of our eyes and ears and mouths to this 
blessed message— the light of the goodness of God shining 
in the face of Jesus Christ our Lord.— 2 Cor. 4:4. 



"The unanimity of the pulpit in New York in the desirability 
of peace has brought the clergy of all denominations 



together, and greatly accelerated the movement in 
favor of church union. To employ the picturesque phrases 
of Bishop Potter, the very church steeples appear to embrace 
each other. Although the movement for church union 
has all along appeared very chimerical to the conservative 
clergy, recent events seem to indicate a very near approach 
to it. Bishop Potter is the most sanguine in his expectations, 
and is working very hard to bring it about."— Exchange. 

The announcement is also made that there will be a 
meeting of prominent ministers in Pittsburg shortly, to consider 
what obstacles are in the way of a reunion of Protestants 
and Roman Catholics. 

We are inclined to think that Jesuits are behind these 
movements, all of which are of direct advantage to Romanism. 
Every one of good judgment, who is informed on 
the subject, knows that Rome will make no concessions; 
that all the surrender must be by Protestants. That Romanists 
are profiting by the situation is evident: missions for 
Protestants are being held in all large cities, at which questions 
relating to the differences between Romanism and 
Protestantism are entertained, and answered by priests of 
keen sagacity, who of course endeavor to represent Papacy 
as the mother of every good and desirable thing, and not 
the mother of harlots [systems] and all the abominations 
of Christendom. 

But after all it makes little difference to the predominating 
"tares" whether they are Protestant tares or Romanist 
tares. Perhaps indeed the radical blindness of their 
leaders may help some of the "wheat" class yet in Babylon 

R1960 : page 76 

to realize the situation, and thus hasten their separation, as 
those loyal to God. "Come out of her, my people, that 
ye be not partakers of her sins and that ye receive not of 
her plagues!"— Rev. 18:4. 



The "Church of England Almanack" reports eight 
associations amongst Church of England clergymen, favoring 
Ritualism and "restoration of visible communion" 
between the Church of England and the Church of Rome. 
One of these societies, the "English Church Union," has 
a membership of seven bishops and 4,255 ministers. 



L'Independence Beige says that in time of peace Russia 
has a standing army of 858,000 men; next comes Germany 
with 580,000 and then France with 512,000 men. In case 
of war Russia and France could put in the field 9,700,000 
men, against the 7,700,000 soldiers of the three countries 
forming the triple alliance— Germany, Austria and Italy. 
In time of peace the maintenance of the standing armies 
of the above powers costs $1,000,000,000 annually. 



What a record! What a satire on the terms "Christian 
nations" and "Christendom!" How evidently Satan is 
still the "prince" of "this present evil world!" No 
wonder that the whole creation groans and travails in pain, 
waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God. No 
wonder that the sons also groan and pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come! Thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 

It will not be long until these millions are enlightened 
to the extent that they will refuse to serve the ambitions of 
lords, priestcraft and superstition, who rule them by the 
grace of Satan. But they will not get free until they realize 
that the great taskmaster is Sin who rules them through 
their depraved dispositions, their selfish and degrading 
appetites. Next they must learn of and accept the great 
Savior who has already redeemed them, and who waits to 
make them free indeed. 



It appears that in modern rapid-firing guns the size of 
the bullets has been reduced to facilitate transportation, etc.; 
but a difficulty has been encountered: the smaller bullet 
does not sufficiently mangle the poor soldiers who are struck 
by them. Fewer lives are lost, and the wounded recover 
more rapidly, and are soon ready to be shot at again. 
This it seems is to be rectified, according to the following, 
from the New York Sun:— 

"A perforated bullet for which great destructive power 
is claimed has just been finished by an inventor at Anderson, 
Ind. The bullet has a hole, one-eight of an inch in 
diameter bored from the front end almost through its entire 
length. This air chamber, the inventor says, gathers air 
under strong pressure, caused by the rapid flight of the bullet, 
and the air expanding, when the bullet finds its mark, causes 
an explosion of great destructive force. Inch boards, which 
would be pierced by an ordinary solid bullet of the same 
calibre, are splintered and torn with great violence by the 
perforated bullet. Cans filled with water and sealed were 
simply pierced by an ordinary bullet, but were blown into 
fragments when struck by the new projectile. The usual 
effect, witnesses say, is for the bullet to tear in the object 
hit a hole from seven to ten times the size of the bullet." 

Alas! "man's inhumanity to man" seems to know no 
limit. When the great Prince of Peace shall have inaugurated 
his Kingdom and shall have opened the now blinded 
eyes of the world, with what feelings of revulsion and horror 
will men look back upon the present "reign" of Sin and 
Death! What feelings of sympathy and shame for the terrible 
degradation of the race should be awakened in every 
heart in which the love of Christ is shed abroad. True 
views, God's view, the view of the angels and the view of 
the saints on such matters should be impressed upon those 
with whom we come in contact, and especially upon our 
children. Let them know the truth— that cruelty is a 
shame, a disgrace, as well as a sin, even when practised on 
the lower creatures, but especially toward fellow beings 



made in God's image. 



There are two great levers, Love and Selfishness. The 
former is the right, the divine power. It, with justice, 
moves the sceptre of heaven, and is shortly to be the power 
that will rule the world. It should therefore be recognized 

R1960 : page 77 

and cultivated in the hearts and lives, the thoughts and 
words and deeds of all who have been translated out of the 
kingdom of darkness into the Kingdom of God's dear Son. 

Selfishness, greed, is the Sin-power now in control of 
the world through depravity. It has led and is still leading 
to every evil thing. The Apostle James' comment (James 4:2) 
is endorsed by a New York Tribune editorial as 
follows:— 

"Nations and individuals, the world over, as almost 
never before, are hastening to become rich. They are doing 
this in many ways, but most notably by the simple process 
of digging precious metals from the earth. Manufactures, 
trade, commerce, all are too slow. 

"Almost every war or threat of war to-day may be 
directly traced to this greed for gold and silver, just as 
could the savage freebooting of three hundred years ago. 
The troubles in the Transvaal are due to the gold fever on 
the Rand. That it is that makes Great Britain so resolute 
to maintain her suzerainty over the Republic, and that 
makes Germany so desirous of extending her own influence 
over it. The same cause led to the occupation of Mashonaland 
and to the Matabele war. It was not because Lobengula 
was a monster of savagery that he was deposed: no, 
but because his kingdom was a part of ancient Ophir. 
Prempeh of Coomassie made human sacrifices, it is true; 
but his kingdom was known to contain much gold, and 
hence the Ashantee war. 

"It was in expectation of finding gold in Madagascar 
that the French decreed the conquest of that island. For 
the same cause Japan wrested Formosa from China, and 
Brazil and France are now involved in a boundary dispute. 
Reports of mines of gold and gems led England to the 
partitioning of Siam, and are now making Russia and Japan 
confront each other over Corea. It is the mineral wealth 
of the Essequibo and Orinoco basins that makes the 
Venezuela boundary question most acute and most difficult 
to settle. It is the gold mines of the Yukon and of the 
Coast Range that have brought the Alaska boundary question 
to its present state, and prompted the vast extension 
of Canadian claims. And the gold finds, or expected finds, 
of British Columbia, of Australia and of Colorado and 
Washington are stirring three great English-speaking nations 
to the heart. " 



In India there are no fewer than 65 Protestant missionary 
societies; viz., 16 Presbyterian, with 149 laborers; 
13 Baptist, with 129; 9 Church of England, with 
203; 7 Lutherans, with 125; 4 Methodist, with 110; 2 
Congregationalist, with 76; 1 Unitas Fratrum and 1 
Quaker, with 16; 7 Independent, 5 Women's associations. 
In addition to 857 ordained missionaries there are 711 ordained 
European lay helpers, 114 European and semi-European 
lady assistants, teachers, etc., and 3,491 native 
lay preachers. The number of communicants is 182,722, 
an increase of 70,000 in the last decade. 

Is it strange that when viewing all the inconsistencies 
of these varying sects, a Hindoo Brahmin should say: 
"You Christians are not as good as your Book! If you 
were as good as your Book, you would convert India to 
Christ in five years?"— The Armory. 



"Probably one of the strangest facts in the history 
of language," says a recent writer, "is the resurrection 
of the Hebrew to life and activity as the 
language of a people and country, after its death, which 
occurred 2,250 years ago. The Jews who returned from 
the exile were a small people, and they were compelled to 
learn and employ the Aramaic, the language of the country, 
so that the Hebrew was disused, excepting by the priests, 
as the Latin now is by the Catholics. But the language 
was preserved in the Old Testament Scriptures, and it was 
taught that the Scriptures might be understood, and this 
has been continued to the present day. Now the Jews are 
returning to Palestine from Russia, Poland, Germany, Italy, 
Spain and other countries, and cannot understand each 
other in these divers languages, but they all understand 
the Hebrew of the Old Testament, and employ it, so that 
Hebrew is again the language of the common people, and is 
heard in the marts of trade and in common use. The Hebrews 
of Palestine employ it exclusively in their families, 
so that it has become again the mother-tongue. In Jerusalem 
it died, and in the same city after so many centuries 
it has come to life again. As was to be expected, the pronunciation 
varies, but this is corrected in accordance with 
the Arabic and other Semitic dialects. There is something 
marvelous in this restoration of, not only the people, but 
the language, which they had practically lost five hundred 
years before their dispersion."— The Armory. 



Rev. A. T. Pierson, one of the speakers at the Prophetic 
Conference held in Allegheny in December last, 
was immersed on Feb. 1, by Rev. J. A. Spurgeon, a Baptist 
minister in England. According to Baptist usage (there is 
no Baptist law on any subject; for Baptists deny being a 
denominational organization) his action made Mr. Pierson 



a member of the Baptist church. But he was already a 
member of the Presbyterian denomination, and a member 
of the Philadelphia Presbytery to which he addressed a 

R1961 : page 77 

letter, in which, after stating the fact of his immersion, 
he said:— 

"This act was not meant by me as in any sense a change 
of denomination, but a simple act of obedience to what 
seems to me a clear teaching of the New Testament. For 
some years the basis of infant baptism has seemed to me 
too slender, scripturally, and its perversion too common 
and too dangerous, practically, to justify my longer adherence 
to the practice. And the obvious example of believers' 
baptism seems to be too conspicuous in the New Testament 
to leave in my mind a reasonable question that it was my 
privilege thus to confess Christ, and typically submit myself 
to burial with him." 

Well done! Obedience to conscience is always a safe 
course. True, we regret the clinging to denominationalism, 
shown in the preference manifested for the tighter bondage 
of Presbyterianism, rather than the looser bondage of Baptist 
Associations; but Dr. P. is progressing, not retrograding. 
By and by, let us hope, he will be free indeed, 
from all human control. Let us hope, too, that he may 
yet come to see the true import of immersion, which few 
even of our Baptist friends see, of which the water immersion 
is only the outward symbol. "Then shall we know, 
if we follow on to know the Lord." 

The Philadelphia Presbytery was greatly agitated upon 
receipt of this letter. The fact that Dr. Pierson believed 
in the second coming of Christ, and took part in the Prophetic 

R1961 : page 78 

Conference, had already marked him as a semi-heretic, 

even though he avoided the despised Nazarenes of 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER and MILLENNIAL DAWN, and avoided 

teaching that our Lord's coming is for "the restitution of 

all things" (Acts 3:20,21)— the only "good tidings of 

great joy, which shall be unto ALL PEOPLE." 

The Presbytery had hoped that Dr. P. would take himself 
away into some other denomination, and at his request 
had granted him a Letter of Recommendation to the Congregationalists; 
for they did not like to "cast him out" 
simply because he believed the Lord's words, "I will come 
again and receive you unto myself," a truth so fully corroborated 
by all the Apostolic writings. To have done so 
would have advertised the second coming, and some of the 
common people might have been awakened to the Scriptural 
prominence of this teaching. 

But now, in being immersed, and in claiming that 
neither he nor others baptized in infancy were "believers," 
Dr. Pierson was casting discredit upon them all, implying 
that none of them had been baptized according to the 



Scriptures. If belief in the Second Coming was bad, this 

was worse; now he was a heretic, sure enough. The Presbytery 

promptly withdrew its Letter of Commendation to 

the Congregationalists, and after some dispute as to whether 

to "drop" him from membership, etc., or what to do, it 

was decided to request his withdrawal. 

In the discussion of the subject one of the ministers, 
Dr. Hoyt, said,— "We [Presbyterians, respecting infant 
baptism] rest on the Abrahamic covenant confirmed in 
Christ. To deny that fundamental principle in the Presbyterian 
Church, and then to hold a position in its ministry 
is utterly inconsistent. We are in a dilemma, and don't 
know how to get out of this labyrinth in which Dr. Pierson 
has entangled us." 

As with the doctrine of election, our Presbyterian 
friends have a mixture of truth with error, so on this subject 
of the justified state of the children of believers. True, 
the children of believers are subjects of divine grace until 
they come to years of personal responsibility (1 Cor. 7:14); 
but infant sprinkling has nothing whatever to do with 
this favor. Our Presbyterian friends have assumed, but without 
the slightest warrant, that baptism now takes the place 
of circumcision appointed for the seed of Abraham; and 
that, as infants were circumcised, so infants therefore should 
be baptized, even though not believers. But baptism and 
circumcision do not represent the same thing at all: 
if they do represent the same grace, only males should be 
baptized; for only males were circumcised. 

We would like to see the truth on the subject of baptism 
very thoroughly and widely proclaimed. It would be 
a great blessing to all true Christians, not excepting 
"Baptists" and "Disciples." 



R1961 : page 78 

THE EASY YOKE. 



"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will 

give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek 

and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. 

For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light."— Matt. 1 1:28-30. 

THE yoke is a symbol of servitude and subjection, and 
all in the world are under yokes of some kind— political 
yokes, social yokes, financial or business yokes, yokes of 
sin, of selfishness, of pride, etc., etc. The man who is under 
the political yoke finds it a very hard one. He is busy 
days and nights planning and scheming and working for 
office, studying all the arts of worldly policy to gain the 
friendship of voters, spending time, money and thought 
and concentrating every energy upon the risky business of 
seeking office, which, if he gain it, brings only a multitude 



of cares, and exposes him to a host of enemies of the opposing 
party who are often ready to blacken his character 
at the slightest provocation. 

Those under the financial or business yokes are similarly 
oppressed. They labor long and hard; they scheme and 
plan and contrive and fret and worry to be rich, and in so 
doing they fall into a snare which robs them of the true 
happiness which riches cannot bring. 

Those under the social yokes labor hard and sacrifice 
much in meeting the demands of society upon them. Few 
in the humbler walks of life know how galling is this yoke 
upon the rich, and particularly to those who are vieing 
with others in better circumstances. Women often 
wear themselves out in this unsatisfying service, while husbands 
and fathers are driven to despair and ruin trying to 
keep up with the financial drain. The yokes of pride, selfishness 
and sin of every kind are indeed hard yokes, and their 
burdens are heavy. To shake off all yokes and free ourselves 
from all burdens is impossible in this evil day. The 
prince of this world, Satan, has already imposed upon all 
the yoke of sin. And there is none able to deliver us from 
this yoke and its binding fetters but Christ, who, in his 
own good time and way, will do it for all who come unto 
him by faith and repentance. 

While it is the purpose of Christ ultimately to set all 
such free from every yoke and to release them from every 
burden, he sees that they are not able yet to exercise and 
enjoy the glorious liberty of sons of God; and so by way 
of discipline and training, he purposes to bring them to that 
condition. It is therefore necessary that those who would be 
delivered from the galling yokes of sin and of the present general 
order of things should submit themselves fully to Christ 
—that they take his yoke upon them. And he invites all who 
have come to feel and realize the discomfort of other yokes 
and the weight of other burdens, to come unto him for 
rest and release. 

R1961 : page 79 

In tender sympathy for all the oppressed and sorrowing 
he says, "Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you," 
etc. Thousands have responded to the kind invitation, 
and they testify in no uncertain terms to the ease of Christ's 
yoke and the blessedness of his promised rest. And yet 
the rest is not of general temporal prosperity and freedom 
from care and toil and from all restraint. 

Few would say in viewing the Apostle Paul's experience 
that the yoke of Christ on his shoulders was an easy 
yoke, or that the burden of Christ's work which he bore 
was a light one. But evidently he thought so, for he 
counted it an inestimable privilege to endure hardness as 
a good soldier for Christ's sake. He joyfully suffered the 
loss of all things and counted them but dross, that he 
might win Christ and be found in him. He rejoiced to be 
made a partaker of his sufferings that he might also be 



made a partaker with him of his glory, and share with him 
in the blessed work of his Kingdom. 

Blessed work! Paul gloried in the prospect of such 
a future mission, and was in haste to manifest his readiness 
of mind for it, by zealously and most energetically devoting 
his life here to the Lord's service along the lines indicated 
in the divine plan. He took Christ's yoke upon 
him: he did not attempt to guide himself, but humbly 
placed himself under subjection to Christ, and obediently 
followed his guidance whithersoever it led him— whether 
to prison and the stocks, to an ignominious public beating 
or stoning that left him almost dead, to shipwreck, to perils 
on land and sea, among heathen enemies or false brethren, 
to wearing labor, and painful toil, or what not? And yet 
Paul counted this burden of Christ a light one, and his 
yoke an easy yoke. He spoke of his trials as light afflictions, 
and said he rejoiced in tribulations; and with lacerated 
backs and feet fast in the stocks in the depths of a 
miserable dungeon Paul and Silas rejoiced and sang praises 
to God. 

Stephen had the same rest and joy even while his 
enemies were stoning him to death; and thousands more 
of God's saints can testify to the same thing— in the midst 
of poverty, sickness, affliction, temptation, and enemies 
on every hand, and even in the flames of violent persecution. 
Whence comes it? or how are rest and even joy 
compatible with such conditions? The answer is: it is a 
rest of mind— "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace 
whose mind is stayed on thee." None can know the blessedness 
of this rest until they have experienced it. And 
none can realize its great value until they have been put to 
the tests of affliction. 

R1962:page79 

The Lord gives the key to this rest in the words— 
"and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly of heart." 
Truly, in a meek and quiet spirit is the secret of rest. To 
be meek is to cultivate the graces of patience; of loving 
submission to the will of God; of abiding confidence in 
his love and care and in the wisdom of his guiding counsel 
and overruling providences; and to perseveringly pursue 
this course through evil and through good report, or 
through favorable or unfavorable circumstances. 

Let the beloved children of God seek more and more 
to copy Christ's meek and quiet spirit, accepting the providences 
of God and obeying his precepts and leading as he 
did, armed with the strength which he alone can supply, 
and will, to all those who take his yoke upon them, and 
learn of him. 



R1962:page79 

JUDAS' CASE A HOPELESS ONE. 



WE have heretofore pointed out that during this 
present age (the Gospel age, the spirit dispensation) 
the world of mankind is not liable to the Second 
death. (1) Because this age is for the Church's trial and 
is not the period of the world's judgment or trial. (2) Because 
now the world has not that degree of enlightenment 
which would involve the full, extreme penalty of God's 
law,— the Second death. (3) Because the inspired Apostle 
declares that now Satan is exerting a blinding and deceiving 
influence upon all except true believers (2 Cor. 4:4; 
Rev. 20:3), so that "the natural man receiveth not the 
things of the spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto 
him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually 
discerned."— 1 Cor. 2:14. 

These conclusions from the Scriptures in general are 
abundantly confirmed by the statements of Heb. 6:4-8 
and 10:26-31, in which the Apostle warns the Church 
that wilful sin or apostasy, on the part of those who have 
enjoyed the privileges of consecrated believers (viz., those 
who "have tasted of the good word of God, and the powers 
of the age to come, and who have been made partakers of the 
holy spirit"), leaves the case of such hopeless. It will be 
found impossible to renew such, because there remaineth no 
longer any part for them in the sacrifice for sin— they have 
had and have misused their share in the great "ransom 
for all." 

We have called attention to the fact that the world in 
general, even in civilized lands, has had no opportunity to 
sin after the example of wilful apostasy, described by the 
Apostle. And it is well to note that this sin unto death 
on the part of believers is not at all the same as the missteps 
and stumblings which may occur in the path of any 
through weakness of the flesh (Gal. 2:11-14), and which 
are among the sins which may be repented of, reformed 
from, and forgiven.— 1 John 2:1; 1 John 5:16. 

In view of the above, and in view of our further claim 
that the spirit dispensation began at Pentecost when our 
Lord was glorified (John 7:39), some have wondered that 

R1962 : page 80 

we teach that Judas' case is a hopeless one, since his sin 
and death were both before Pentecost. We are asked to 
explain this seeming inconsistency. 

We answer:— The period of the Lord's presence at 
the first advent,— from his baptism to his ascension— differed 
from the period after Pentecost, throughout this age 
in which believers walk wholly by faith and not by sight, 
even as the Millennial age will differ from the Gospel age. 

In the Millennium, knowledge and responsibility will 
no longer be confined to the spirit-begotten; for it is written, 
"The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord 
as the waters cover the sea [knowledge ocean-deep]." "All 



shall know me [the Lord] from the least unto the greatest." 

(Isa. 1 1:9; Jer. 31:34.) It will no longer be the rule 

that the consecrated must "walk by faith and not by sight;" 

for the consecrated of that time, while no doubt still having 

room for faith, will, to a very considerable degree, 

walk by sight. It will no longer be true that Satan, the 

god of this world, will blind and deceive all except believers, 

for Satan will be bound and can deceive the world 

no longer; and "this world" [age] shall then have given 

place to "the world [age] to come wherein dwelleth righteousness;" 

and all the blind eyes shall be opened.— 

Isa. 35:5. 

When knowledge is thus general, the possibility of sinning 
wilfully against great light will become general. Whosoever 
will may accept the divine favor and use the divine 
aids, and attain to perfection and life everlasting; and 
whosoever will may intelligently reject God's favor in 
Christ, and die the second death, the everlasting death, 
the hopeless death. 

Now let us return to the case of Judas, and consider 
the conditions which obtained in his time of trial and 
failure, in the period of the Lord's presence, in the Jewish 
harvest. The circumstances of that time differed from those 
of the present age and also from those of the Millennial 
age in the conditions and hence the responsibilities differed 
also. Our Lord was present, and marvellous works 
were performed, illustrative of "the powers of the world 
[age] to come." The truth was presented to the people in 
such a manner that the Lord declared that its rejection would 
bring "stripes" and "woes" upon those who, after hearing, 
loved darkness rather than light. He declared that some of 
those, because of the rejection of the truth, would be counted 
worthy of "many stripes;" and that it would therefore be 
more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of 
Judgment than for those. Our Lord's declaration was, If 
I had not done among them the works which none other 
man did, they had not had sin.— John 15:22,24. 

And if the people had such a responsibility because of 
what they heard and saw, how much greater was the responsibility 
of the twelve chosen apostles? They had professed 
much, saying, "We have left all to follow thee." 
They were always with him; and not only beheld many of 
his mighty works, of which the multitudes in various places 
saw but few; but more: he communicated to them, severally, 
a measure of his spirit and power, and sent them out to 
proclaim him and his Kingdom, and to work miracles— to 
heal the sick and cast out devils in his name. 

The apostles received also a special insight into the 
divine plan, an enlightenment not granted to the people; 
the equivalent to much that is now granted to the spirit-begotten 
ones of this age. The Lord addressed the multitudes 
in parables and dark sayings, but these he interpreted 
to the Apostles, saying, "Unto you it is given to know the 
mystery of the Kingdom of God; but to them that are 
without [outside the twelve and other special disciples], 
all these things are done in parables." Again he said to 



them: "Blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, 
for they hear; for verily I say unto you that many prophets 
and righteous men have desired to see those things which 
ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things 
which ye hear have not heard them."— Matt. 13:11; 
Mark 4:11. 

If, then, the people who saw a few of our Lord's mighty 
works, and heard a few of his words of life under parabolic 
cover, were declared "worthy of stripes" for not receiving 
the light, what shall we say of the responsibility of the 
twelve, who not only saw much more, but by his power in 
them performed his miracles; who not only heard the parabolic 
words of life, but who had them expounded to them 
by the great Teacher? (Matt. 13:36-43; Mark 4:10-13.) 
And what punishment less than death— hopeless extinction 
—shall we suppose was merited by the one of these, who, 
after all this, according to his own confession, "betrayed 
innocent blood?" We judge that if Pilate and Herod and 
the Roman soldiers had some responsibility for Christ's 
death, the multitude which clamored, Crucify him! His 
blood be upon us and on our children! had much more 
responsibility; and that the better educated, envious Pharisees 
and Priests who incited the illiterate common people 
had yet a greater responsibility (Matt. 23:15-33); and that 
Judas, his betrayer, was the chief, the real crucifier, because 
of his knowledge and wilfulness. Upon him alone, of all who 
had to do with his death, our Lord placed the responsibility, 
the full guilt, when he said: "The Son of Man goeth 
[to death] as it is written of him [prophetically]; but woe 
unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed. It 
had been good for that man if he had not been born." 
(Matt. 26:24.) Should Judas be granted eternal life under 
any circumstances or after any experience, his birth 
could not be considered a disadvantage to himself.— See 
also Psa. 109:6-8; John 17:12; 6:70,71. 

So, likewise, it is those, and those only, who (with good 
knowledge of God's grace in Christ) sin wilfully and count 
the precious blood of the covenant, wherewith they were 
sanctified [set apart], a common thing, who "crucify 
Christ afresh and put him to an open shame." And, like 
Judas, they often accompany this denial of his ransom-sacrifice 
with the words, "Hail, Master!" and a deceitful 

R1962:page81 

kiss. All such should be an abhorrence to all who possess 
to any degree the true, noble, Christ-like spirit. 

The question asked by some is,— Did not God predestinate 
that Judas should betray our Lord? Was he not 
thus forced to do his evil deed "that the Scriptures might 
be fulfilled?" 

We answer, No; "God tempteth no man;" He forces 
no man to do evil. To so suppose would be to charge the 
Almighty with being the real sinner and using men as his 
tools. On the contrary, "All his work is perfect." "God 
is not the author of confusion."— See TOWER March 1, '95. 



We cannot doubt that there are other men who would 
have performed Judas' part, as well as others who would, 
under similar conditions, have done as others of the Apostles 
did. God's foreknowledge of Judas' course and his 
Scriptural forestatement of it no more caused it to be so 
than the forestatement of the changes of the moon's phases 
by Almanac makers causes those changes. 



R1963 : page 81 

OUR CHILDREN IN THE TIME OF TROUBLE. 



THE following letter doubtless voices the sentiments 
of many. 

DEAR SIR:— I have a baby daughter now two years 
old. In the year 1910 she will be only sixteen years old. 
The query is, What is to become of her during the period 
of anarchy? She probably represents a class. Numbers 
of God's people must have small children growing up, and 
the same query must present itself to a great many. Certainly 
it would show anything but a commendable spirit if 
any parent could rejoice in the hope of becoming a member 
of the Bride of Christ and himself being taken away 
from the trouble "coming upon the whole world," and not 
think of the fate of his children who would be left behind. 
Now I find such promises as Psa. 37:25,26; 102:28 and 
Prov. 11:21; but these do not exclude the use of means. 
If the children of the righteous are delivered in the "time 
of trouble," it seems to me it will be by the use of means 
provided for their deliverance; and who should be considering 
the means to be used, if not their parents and 
guardians? 

Now my idea is that a state of anarchy will produce a 
complete destruction (1) of commerce— no railroads will 
be in operation, no post office service, no telegraph lines 
open; (2) of business— no manufactories will be running, 
no trade carried on, except in a primitive way and confined 
to narrow limits; (3) of government— there will be no 
protection to individuals except what their own strength 
affords. The country will be filled with bands of marauders, 
and the peaceful and moral among the people will be obliged 
to unite in little bands for defence and protection. For 
food and clothing they will be obliged to depend on what 
they can themselves produce and defend from marauders. 

Cities and towns will be burned or fall into ruin from 
neglect, bridges, etc., be destroyed, the machinery, etc., 
of our manufacturing establishments be destroyed or rendered 
useless by neglect and decay, so that after the period 
of anarchy is over the world will be obliged to begin over 
again. 

I would like you to consider this question of the state 
of the country; for perhaps it will not be so bad as I have 



described, at least in the United States and England. These 
two countries have been especially favored during the Gospel 
age, and perhaps they may still be favored during the 
time of trouble. Their higher degree of intelligence, their 
greater love of order and their greater knowledge of the 
truth, may enable them to conform sooner to the new order 
of things and not bring so severe punishment upon them 
as upon the rest of the world. Furthermore, may it not 
be that the prophecies more particularly refer to the Roman 
Empire; and the United States certainly, and England 
probably, were not parts of the Roman Empire. 

When we come to consider who will be the most favorably 
situated for escaping the perils of that time, it is evident 
that the towns and cities will suffer most. The ones who 
will be disturbed the least will be those who live in places 
remote from towns and cities and the main routes of travel, 
who live in a primitive manner, supplying their wants principally 
by their own labor from the land around them, 
who are not dependent upon commerce for their supplies, 
and whose remoteness from towns and routes of travel will 
keep them secluded from bands of marauders. Such places 
are mostly found in mountainous regions, and mountainous 
places are most easily guarded and defended from attack. 
This reminds us that Christ warned the Christians of Judea 
to "flee to the mountains" when they saw the near approach 
of the Jewish "time of trouble"— which was typical 
of the coming trouble. May it not be that he intended us 
to profit by that warning and provide places of refuge for 
those of our families and friends who will be here when the 
anarchy begins? 

[IN REPLY:— The above conception of the coming 
trouble is, we believe, a very moderate one. The account 
of the trouble upon Jerusalem at its fall is much more 
thrillingly awful; so also is the record of the reign of terror 
in France a century ago. Both of these great events are 
mentioned in Scripture as illustrations of the coming general 
trouble; which, however, it is distinctly declared, will be 
worse than either of these;— "a time of trouble such as 
was not since there was a nation." 

While the Roman empire occupies an important place 
in the prophetic history of the past eighteen centuries, yet 
we are to remember that the great troubles marking "the 
day of the Lord" are shifted to symbolic Babylon— confused 
nominal Christendom— which certainly includes 
Great Britain and the United States. Indeed, as the 
severest troubles came at the first advent upon those who 
had seen the great Light and rejected Him, so we may well 
fear that the great privileges and blessings enjoyed by the 
English speaking peoples have brought great responsibilities 
and will bring severe tribulations. 

The tendency of all as the storm approaches will be 
to seek cover, protection, under the great mountains (kingdoms) 
and in the rocks of society (beneficial orders) 
(Rev. 6:15-17); and many will flee from the country to 
the cities. The "overcomers" who will "escape all these 
things coming upon the world" (Luke 21:36) will indeed 



flee to the mountain, the Kingdom of the Lord, and be 

R1963 : page 82 

safe, but none others can attain to it. "Who shall ascend 
into the mountain of the Lord? who shall stand in his 
holy place? He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart," 
etc.-Psa. 24:3-6. 

But, seeing that all the efforts of men to hide themselves 
"from the wrath of the Lamb" when the great day of his wrath 
shall have come will be in vain, the saints would best make 
no such effort to hide their children, knowing that it would 
be folly. The trouble comes to overthrow sin and every 
false system and thing; and the lessons it brings will prove 
beneficial to mankind in general, breaking their idols and 
purging their hearts. If our children and friends need the 
purging, we should not wish to have them escape it. If 
they do not need it, we may rest assured that the Lord will 
permit the glorified members of his body, his Church, to 
care for their children and friends during that trouble and 
to succor them from all that would not be to their benefit. 
What more could we ask than that we should be their 
ministering guardians, far more able to help them than if 
with them in the flesh? 

The best provision which parents can make for their 
children is to give them, by precept and example, faithful 
instruction in righteousness. Remember that "the fear 
[reverence] of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." Begin 
therefore to instruct them in the plan of salvation, the 
plan of the ages. As they come to a true appreciation of 
God's wisdom, justice and love, it will give them broader 
and truer views of justice and love, in respect to their own 
conduct and toward their fellow creatures. Teach them 
meekness and humility, and the folly of pride and arrogance. 
Teach them generosity of thought, and how to be 
happy with little, reminding them frequently that godliness 
with contentment is true riches. Remind them of the 
Lord's words, "seek meekness, seek righteousness. It 
may be that ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord's anger." 
(Zeph. 2:3.) The rich in this world's uncertain riches, 
and the proud, whether poor or rich, and all that do 
wickedly, will be special sufferers.— Compare Mai. 4:1; 
James 5:1-6. 

During the time of trouble, for the first time in the 
world's history, there will be a premium on meekness, patience, 
love, gentleness, goodness. (However, before that 
stage of the trouble comes, before Babylon falls, there will 
be a different trouble upon a "great company" of those 
not overcomers, who will be severely buffeted by Babylon 
which for a time will have an increase of power. The foregoing 
remarks do not apply to this class which will come 
through great tribulation. Since the service of the poor 
and afflicted in mind and body is a great privilege, we 
should endeavor so to train our children that, when the 
trouble comes, they will be both able and willing to counsel 
others to righteousness and the avoidance of carnal warfare, 



rather than selfishly think merely of their own safety. 
Children should be encouraged to such stability of character, 
in combination with faith in God, that they will, under 
any stress, act up to a high conception of nobility.) 



R1963 : page 82 

THE CONTRAST OF HUMAN PERFECTION AND HUMAN DEPRAVITY. 



"And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots, that it 
might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, 'They parted my 
garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots.' 
And sitting down they watched him there."— Matt. 27:35,36. 

HERE, in marked contrast, are seen the glory of 

moral perfection and the depth of human depravity. 

Here was the most sublime heroism, the most 

perfect self-abnegation, the most exalted benevolence, and 

the most devoted loyalty, in contrast with the vilest hypocrisy, 

the most cold-blooded hate, and the most abject 

cowardice. The meanest, vilest selfishness, pride and conceit 

delivered to ignominy and death the fairest flower of 

virtue that ever bloomed on earth, and wicked hands and 

fiendish hearts executed the dark designs of envy and hate, 

taking a morbid pleasure in the dying agonies of the Son 

of God, while he, as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, 

opened not his mouth in self-defence, but meekly submitted 

to the terrible ordeal of suffering and death for the 

world of sinners, none of whom could then appreciate and 

understand his motives or his work. Truly, the contrast 

R1964 : page 82 

of such virtue, in comparison with such depravity, encircles 
the Cross of Christ with a halo of ineffable glory, 
the broken rays of which, falling upon us, express to us all 
there is of moral excellence and worth. 

In the apprehension, arraignment and crucifixion of 
Christ three classes of criminals come to view. First, there 
were those who, for envy, delivered him to death. They 
were the proud, boastful, self-righteous hypocrites, who, 
realizing their own inferiority, and aware of their own unfitness 
to be the leaders and saviors of the people, yet so 
anxiously craved the honors and praises of men and the 
emoluments of office that they could not brook the appearance 
of a rival of superior talents and ability. These 
hated the Lord without a cause, save that which originated 
in their own depravity. These, the mighty men of the 
Jewish nation, the rulers and religious teachers, the educated 
men of the nation, the expounders of the law of God, 
and the interpreters of the prophets,— these wickedly took 
counsel together against the Lord and against his Anointed; 



and in their counsels among themselves they acknowledged 
the superiority of the victim of their hate and expressed 
the real animus of it— their envy of his rising fame and 
influence among the people, which tended to their own 
speedy displacement. 

Second, there were those cringing, hireling menials, 
too basely selfish to spurn a bribe, or to appreciate a principle, 

R1964 : page 83 

and who are ever willing to sacrifice principle for a 
trifle of present advantage or gratification. Of this class 
was Judas, who sold the Lord for thirty pieces of silver, 
and also all of that infuriated mob which, incited by the 
priests, cried "Away with him ! Crucify him ! We have 
no king but Caesar! His blood be upon us and upon our 
children!" Judas loved the money, and these loved the 
approval of the priests and rulers, and wanted to be on the 
popular side. How mean the bribe, how base the crime! 

Third, there were those cold-blooded, cruel servants 
of the Roman state who, presuming to have no responsibility 
in the matter, cared nothing for the honor of justice 
or the vindication of right. It was their business to execute 
the mandates of their superiors, and they must do so 
at their own peril. Looking to their own interests, therefore, 
it was their business to drive the nails through the 
quivering flesh and to plant the thorny crown upon the 
victim's head. It was an awful business, but they were 
schooled to it, so that the groans of anguish failed to reach 
their hearts. So, regarding the horrid transaction in the 
light of business, they thought only of their booty, and, 
with frigid indifference, sat down and watched the agony 
of the Lord, while they cast lots upon his vesture. And 
some even endeavored to add to the sufferings by cruel 
taunts and fiendish exultation. 

How strange it seems that humanity, originally in the 
likeness of God, can sink so low! and yet it is all too true. 
The depth of depravity to which an intelligent being can 
sink can be measured only by the height of the original 
perfection and glory. Satan fell from a great height to a 
corresponding depth, and so likewise man falls to the very 
depths of iniquity, unless he repent and be converted from 
the error of his way, and voluntarily submit to the healing 
influences of divine grace. Sin, with accelerating speed, 
ever tends downward to more and more vile conditions, 
until it ends in the shipwreck of everything that is noble 
and pure; and "sin when it is finished bringeth forth 
death." 

As we look at the various manifestations of wickedness 
on the part of those who crucified the Lord, it is a 
sad comment upon human depravity to notice that the very 
same elements have been in the world ever since; and alas ! 
are present still. And the special victims of their hate 
have been, and still are, the meek of the earth, who have 
taken up their cross to follow in the footprints of the crucified 
One— the body of Christ which fills up the measure 



of his sufferings. (Col. 1:24.) All through the age there 

have been those anxious to deliver them to death, who, for 

envy, hypocritically assumed to be the representatives of 

God to condemn them, and to seek them out, and hunt 

them down, and kill their influence, and deliver them over 

to be crucified. This is the Pharisaical class— the class 

represented by the chief priests, the scribes and Pharisees. 

There has also always been the hireling class, ready to 

sell their services to such leaders for the paltry bribes they 

have to offer— for the favor of their leaders, for the convenience 

of being on the popular side, or for a trifle of 

financial or social advantage. This is the Judas class— a 

class which, like Judas and like the priests and scribes and 

Pharisees, know, and secretly recognize, the truth and righteousness 

exemplified in the body of Christ, yet who nevertheless 

dislike them, hate them, and are ever willing to 

make merchandise of them,— to deliver them over to scorn 

and contempt, if not, as in former times, to prison and to 

death, for the mean advantage of popular favor. 

Then there are still the cruel cold-blooded menials 
who, with complacency and indifference, and yet with 
curiosity, sit down and watch the sufferings of the body, 
and wonder what will happen next. They are surprised 
and puzzled by the fortitude which daily takes up the cross 
and follows after Christ; they cannot understand the 
motives that inspire it; they have no faith in the rewards 
to which the consecrated look, and they curiously watch 
them to see if, perchance, their God will interpose and deliver 
them. And when they see no miraculous interposition 
in their behalf, but that instead they bear the cross to 
the bitter end of sacrifice, they regard them, like their 
Head, as "smitten of God and afflicted," and to the sufferings 
are added their reproaches. And so every member of 
the anointed body can say with the Head, "The reproaches 
of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me." 

The important concern to all who are thus suffering 
with Christ in any measure is that they bear it with the 
same humility, benevolence and fortitude that characterized 
him under the most crucial tests of endurance. He was 
not surprised by the exhibitions of human depravity: he 
knew that he was in an unfriendly world bound by sin and 
largely under the dominion of the prince of darkness, and 
therefore he expected reproaches, taunts and persecutions, 
all of which he endured patiently while his great loving 
heart, almost unmindful of its own sufferings, was full of 
pity and of loving concern for others. Have we indeed 
so much of the Master's spirit that we can thus suffer with 
Christ, meekly bearing reproach and trusting to heaven's 
vindication of us in due time? "If when ye do well and 
suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God; 
for even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also suffered 
for us, leaving us an example that ye should follow 
his steps: who did no sin, neither was guile found in his 
mouth: who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; 
when he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself 
to him that judgeth righteously." Therefore let us "consider 



him that endured such contradiction of sinners against 

himself, lest we be wearied and faint in our minds." (1 Pet. 2:20-23; 

Heb. 12:3.) And let us also see to it that we 

bear the reproaches of Christ as he bore them,— with pity 

and prayer for the erring and depraved, if perchance God 

may grant unto them repentance; and with humble fortitude 

esteeming it a privilege to prove our devotion to the 

Lord by enduring hardness in his service as good soldiers. 

R1964 : page 84 

But what shall we say of those who hate the Lord's 
body without a cause, who for envy deliver them to persecution 
and death, or of those who for bribes betray the innocent, 
or of those who, with frigid indifference, but 
curious interest, calmly watch the sufferings of the body, as 
the Roman soldiers did of the Head, saying, "Let be, let 
us see whether Elias will come to save him?" "O my soul, 
come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine 
honor, be not thou united." Their way is the way of 
death. When the noble spectacle of loyalty to God, to 
truth and righteousness, and of Christian fortitude in enduring 
hardness and persecution meekly and patiently, fails 
to move and win the hearts of men, what more remains to 
be done for them? The goodness of God exemplified in 
his children as well as in other ways should lead to repentance; 
but if it only hardens the heart and steels it against 
the further influences of divine grace, sad indeed is the condition 
of such a soul. It is not ours, however, to judge 
such to condemnation: but it is our part to shun the company 
and counsels of all such. "Blessed is the man that 
walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in 
the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful: 
but his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in his law 
doth he meditate day and night... For the Lord 
knoweth the way of the righteous, but the way of the ungodly 
shall perish."— Psa. 1:1,2,6. 



R1964 : page 84 

THE TRUTH DEFENDED IN SCOTLAND. 



SOME months ago we gave a little account of 
Brother Houston's success in the colporteur work. 
He is a merchant, but is able to give a considerable portion 
of his time to special service for the Truth, of which he is 
not ashamed. His business talent and training are thus, as 
part of his stewardship, being used for the Master. And 
we might remark that he is not alone in this. In the United 
States there are a number of business and professional men 
and many artisans and farmers who are similarly using what 
time they can disengage from labor for the meat that 



perisheth. Indeed, everywhere, those who are filled with 

R1965 : page 84 

the spirit of the Truth are finding and using opportunities 
for serving it. 

Brother Houston's activity soon aroused opposition. 
MILLENNIAL DAWN was attacked through the public 
press, especially by a minister named Davidson, who endeavored 
to prejudice the people so that they would not 
read the DAWN. After several newspaper battles Mr. 
Davidson evidently thought his tongue would be mightier 
than his pen, and challenged Bro. H. to a public debate 
of the questions at issue. His challenge was accepted, 
and below we give a report of the discussion, by an unknown, 
clipped from one of the local papers. Bro. H. 
wrote us that it was his first experience in a debate, but 
that he felt it to be his duty to defend the Lord's cause, 
and that he was relying on help from on high. From the 
report below, he was evidently sustained by the Lord. 

"A CRITICISM ON THE DISCUSSION." 



"I was present at the theological discussion in Canisbay 
Free Church on Wednesday evening, and followed both 
speakers with great interest. Will you kindly allow me to 
say how very much disappointed I was with Mr. Davidson's 
method of dealing with his opponent, and why? Mr. 
Houston affirmed the universal applicability of the ransom 
sacrifice by Christ, taking as his key text 1 Tim. 2:5,6— 
For there is one God and one Mediator between God and 
men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for 
all, to be testified in due time.' I think that in the course 
of the discussion he made, among others, the following 
points:— 

"That in view of our fall in the first Adam, the basis 
of hope for the human race is in the ransom— 'corresponding 
price'— given by the second Adam, the Lord from 
heaven. 

"That this is confirmed by numerous other statements 
of Scripture, among which he quoted the following; 'Jesus 
Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man;' 
'as by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to 
condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one the free 
gift came upon all men unto justification of life;' that 
the gospel is thus 'glad tidings of great joy which shall be 
to all people;' that in 'the seed of Abraham'— the Church 
(Gal. 3:29)— 'all the families of the earth shall be blessed;' 
that Christ died 'for our [the Church's] sins, and not for 
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world;' that 
'God so loved the world that he gave,' etc.— John 3:16. 

"That salvation is thus a free gift to all men, the conditions 
being, accept, believe, obey. 

"That when Christ died millions had gone into their 



graves who had not known of the coming Savior even in 
type and shadow. 

"That his, however, is the only name given under 
heaven among men whereby we can be saved. 

"That millions have died since without ever having 
heard of the 'only name.' 

"That justification by faith is the central doctrine of 
the Christian system. 

"That St. Paul argues that they cannot believe in 
Him of whom they have not heard. 

"That therefore all must hear— have a full and fair 
opportunity before being finally condemned, and that it is 
only if we sin wilfully, after that we have received the 
knowledge of the truth, that there remaineth no more 
sacrifice for sin. 

"That the hope of the Church— the company to which 
many are called but of which only a little flock make their 
calling and election sure, the very elect, His Bride, specially 
called out in the Gospel age— is that she shall share 
the glory of her Lord as his joint-heir. That the present 
work of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for the 
future work of service— preparing by following Christ's 
footsteps of self-sacrifice for being the kings and priests of 
the next age. That the hope of the world lies in the blessings 

R1964 : page 85 

of knowledge and opportunity to be brought to all by 

Christ's Millennial kingdom— the restitution of all that was 

lost in Adam to the willing and the obedient at the hands 

of the glorified Church. That the ransom does not essentially 

or by the mere fact of it give or guarantee salvation 

to any man, but that the knowledge of it, with the corresponding 

opportunity, will be testified to all men in God's 

due time. 

"That there is no obstacle to belief in all this except 
the idea that death ends all probation— an idea for which 
there are no grounds in the Scriptures except the words, 
'Where the tree falleth there shall it be' (Eccl. 11:3), which 
may be interpreted to mean that no change takes place in 
the period of the grave, in harmony with Eccl. 9:10. 
That as the hope of the restoration of the Jews is the resurrection 
from the dead, so in that day (a thousand years), 
which God hath appointed to judge the world by that man 
whom he hath ordained, all that are in their graves shall 
come forth, when all who have not had full knowledge 
shall receive it. ('I am the resurrection and the life. He 
that liveth and believeth in me though he die shall live 
again; and no one who lives again and puts faith in me 
shall in any wise die until the remotest age. Believest thou 
this?' John 1 1:24,26.) That the preaching of the gospel 
to all who hear it now is a savor of life unto life or of death 
unto death, knowledge proving our condemnation if we do 
not accept the free gift. 

"That, per contra, the teaching of the Confession of 
Faith is that all mankind (save and except the elect) God 



was pleased to pass by and to ordain them to dishonor and 
wrath for their sin; and to assert and maintain that men 
can be saved by any other religion, or the light of nature, 
'is very pernicious and to be detested'— thus absolutely shutting 
the door of hope for the ignorant masses of mankind. 

"That this is out of all harmony with the God revealed 
to us in the Bible— the God who is infinite injustice, 
love, mercy, and who gave his only begotten Son as a ransom 
for all. 

"Here, surely, was plenty of work cut out for Mr. Davidson. 
Why did he not take up all, or some, or even one 
or two of these points, and show wherein they were unscriptural? 
I venture to say your readers will search your report 
in vain for an answer to any of these points. Here was 
constructive matter. What was wanted was destructive 
criticism. To merely relate the commonly accepted beliefs 
avails nothing. Why were these passages of Scripture 
not taken up and their true meaning explained— that is, if 
the wrong construction was placed upon them by Mr. 
Houston? Instead, amid much that was wholly irrelevant, 
and in execrably bad taste, Mr. Davidson read lengthy extracts 
from the book, MILLENNIAL DAWN, with the view 
of trying to prove that it teaches 'a second chance.' 
It was noticeable that the extracts as read met with 
no marked objections on the part of the audience. 
The book teaches that to every man is guaranteed one 
full opportunity in the Second Adam— not that if, in 
God's providence, one gets an opportunity in this life 
and refuses he gets another in the next life, but that 
all who had not heard will hear; it will be testified to 
them in due time. The quotation given by Mr. Houston 
from the book was a complete answer to the charge that it 
teaches a second opportunity to those who already had one. 
'We do not wish,' says the author of MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
'to be understood as ignoring the present responsibility of 
the world, which every man has, according to the measure 
of the light enjoyed, whether it be much or little, whether 
it be the light of nature or of revelation.' p. 145. From 
this it is manifest that by answering either 'yes' or 'no' to 
the categorical questions put to him— a most unusual thing, 
by the way, in a debate— he would be giving a misleading 
impression of the teachings of the volume in question. 

"A 'second chance' to those who have heard and understood 
the gospel, and have wilfully rejected it, might 
be 'unphilosophical, repugnant to Christian thought and 
feeling, and highly dangerous to morality;' but a plan of 
ages and dispensations, in the course of which all will come 
to a full knowledge of the ransom, is highly philosophical, 
by no means repugnant to Christian sentiment, and, if 
generally understood, would be a much more powerful lever 
to morality than the fear of everlasting torment. The world, 
sir, has outgrown a theology of gloom and despair. Reprobation 
is scouted all along the line of the best Christian 
thought of the day; and if Mr. Houston lacked in anything 
it was in failing to invade his opponent's territory 
and show up the logical absurdities into which much that 



is preached as the gospel to-day leads us. 

"As a Bible student I protest against points like those 
indicated above being scoffed at as 'a mixture of sense 
and nonsense,' and our would-be spiritual leaders going 
away fondly imagining that by the re-stating of thousand-times-told 
platitudes and playing upon our emotions by 
throwing a sanctimonious tremor in the voice, they had 
successfully answered important points of Bible teaching 
affecting the most vital doctrines of our faith." 



R1965 : page 85 

THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS 

-APRIL 26.-Luke 16:16-31.— 

THIS parable has long been used as the special support 
of the horrible doctrine of "eternal torment." If 
those who thus misuse it would but examine it afresh in the 
light of the below suggestions they would find it more in 
harmony with other Scriptures, more beautiful and more 

R1966 : page 85 

reasonable. 

(1) It is a parable, without doubt; because to take it 
literally would make of it an absurdity. It simply puts 
the rich man into flames and torment because of his fine 
linen and purple and sumptuous living, and not because of 
any specified evil doings. It likewise puts the beggar into 
"Abraham's bosom" simply because he was poor and sick, 
and not for any specified merit or righteousness. And if 
Abraham's arms are only for the poor and sick he surely 
has them more than filled long ago; so that the poor and 
sick of the present time would have no more chance than 
the well clothed and well fed of getting into his bosom— 

if this were a statement of fact and not a parable. 

(2) Since it is a parable, it must be understood and 
expounded as a parable, and not as a fact. In the parable 
of the wheat and the tares, wheat does not mean wheat but 
the children of God, and tares do not mean tares, but 

the children of the devil. The same is true of all other 
parables— sheep, goats, fish (good and bad), the pearl 
of great price, ten pieces of silver, etc., etc.: the thing 
said was never the thing meant. It would therefore be as 

R1966 : page 86 

incorrect to say that the rich man and the beggar of this 
parable were two men as to say that literal sheep and goats, 
and wheat and tares, were referred to in the other parables. 

(3) Interpreting this parable on the lines of interpretation 
applicable to all parables, we should expect the rich 

man to represent some class of people, and the beggar to 



represent another class, and the fire and Abraham's bosom 
to have equally symbolical meanings. 

(4) We suggest the following as fitting all the 
conditions:— 

The rich man represents the scribes and Pharisees 
(the elder son in the parable of the Prodigal Son) who enjoyed 
the good things of God's favor and had much advantage 
every way over the Gentiles as well as over the 
publicans and sinners (the prodigal) of their own nation. 
The purple raiment represented the royalty promised to 
Israel, the fine linen represented their justification through 
the typical sacrifices. 

The beggar who desired the crumbs from the table of 
the favored represents the sin-sick of Israel, and especially 
of the Gentiles, who were desirous of God's favor. Some 
of these Gentile outcasts asked for and received from our 
Lord "crumbs from the children's table." 

The death of both, beggar and rich man, at the same 
time, represented the change of dispensation which dated 
from the time that our Lord, just before his death, pronounced 
over Jerusalem the words, "Your house is left 
unto you desolate." 

The rich man in torment represents the trouble which 
has been upon the Jews throughout this Gospel age. The 
beggar in Abraham's bosom represents how the former poor 
outcasts have been received into divine favor during this 
Gospel age, and are no longer strangers, but children of 
Abraham through faith in Christ.— Gal. 3:29. 

For further particulars see OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS, 
Nos. 1 and 32. 

The Golden Text chosen shows that those who selected 
the lesson had the common misunderstanding of this parable. 



R1967 : page 86 

"LORD, INCREASE OUR FAITH." 

-MAY 3. -Luke 17:5-19.- 

OUR Lord's teachings were so contrary to the spirit 
of this world and so adverse to its policy that his 
disciples felt that to adopt his methods and principles and 
discard their own really involved a revolution of their 
former ideas. And in yielding themselves, as true disciples, 
they felt the need of a stronger, firmer faith than they had 
yet been called upon to exercise. They were quite persuaded 
from the purity and nobility of his character, and 
from his miracles and his teachings, that he was indeed a 
teacher sent from God; yet remembering the requirement 
of discipleship,— "Whoso forsaketh not all that he hath 
[all his own ideas and will and possessions and earthly 
prospects], he cannot be my disciple,"— they felt that to 
continue in this attitude of acceptable discipleship would 
require a growing faith which would rise to every emergency 



of his requirements. Hence their request, "Lord, increase 
our faith." 

And they were quite right in their reasoning; for the 
Lord also clearly shows that the true disciples make progress 
in the school of Christ toward the full overcoming of 
the spirit of the world. And this progress can be achieved by 
faith only— by such full, implicit confidence in his teaching 
and training as will keep them continually as earnest, diligent 
pupils under his guidance and instruction. "This is 
the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith." 
(1 John 5:4.) This, by the way, is very suggestive of what 
it signifies to be an "overcomer," to whom pertain all 
the exceeding great and precious promises of the gospel of 
Christ. It is simply this— that day by day we attentively 
heed and patiently carry out the instructions of our infallible 
Teacher and Guide in full, unquestioning faith in his 
wisdom and love; no matter how heavy will be the daily 
cross or how severe the discipline. It is indeed a tedious, 
life-long process, but the end will be glorious; and 
even the daily discipline, patiently and meekly borne, will 
bring the present rewards of conscious progress in the great 
work of overcoming and of a nearer approach to the goal 
of a ripened Christian character. All of this is implied 
in the beautiful words, so expressive of the faith and fervent 
devotion of true discipleship,— 

"Nearer, my God, to thee, nearer to thee, 
E'en though it be a cross that raiseth me." 

We observe that the Lord made no direct answer to 
this request of his disciples, but that he dwelt upon the 
power and desirability of faith. He showed that even a 
weak, but genuine, faith could so lay hold upon the power 
of God as to instantly root up and replant a tree, and on 
another occasion he said it could remove mountains into 
the midst of the sea. Is the suggestion preposterous? No, 
not to faith; for, bear in mind, faith is not imagination, 
nor self-will, nor ignorance, but it is a reasonable thing 
founded upon good and substantial evidence: so that our 
Lord's teaching here implied what on another occasion 
he clearly stated; viz., that the request be made according 
to the will of God. (John 15:7.) Thus, for instance, 
if the least disciple were assured, on good evidence, that 
the removal of such a tree or mountain would be a part of 
the divine will, and that it was his duty to do the commanding, 
he should have equally strong faith in the results. 
Thus it was when the Lord caused the barren fig tree to 
wither. This, observe, was not to satisfy mere idle curiosity, 
but like all of his miracles, which God wrought by 
him (Acts 2:22), it was for a definite and wise purpose, 
to teach an important lesson, and also to convince his disciples 
of his divine recognition and authority. 

But since there is no basis of evidence for faith that 
the will of God is to remove literal trees or mountains in 
answer to any idle or self-willed or ignorant commands of 
men to do so, a genuine faith in his willingness to do it now 
is an impossibility. But regarding the tree and mountains as 
symbols of difficulties and obstructions in our individual 



Christian course, or in the general course of God's work, 
we know that "miracles" are wrought for those who exercise 
faith; and they going forward in the strength of the 
Lord, are thus permitted to overcome difficulties and to work 
righteousness otherwise impossible. 

While the Lord made no direct answer to this request 
for an increase of faith, his whole subsequent course with the 
disciples was a fulfilment of it. And so it will be with us if 
in a similarly true spirit of discipleship we pray, "Lord, 
increase our faith." The increase of faith will come, not 
by a miraculous infusion, but in the natural process of the 
Lord's leading and training. In the school of experience, 
in following his leading and in the blessed results of each 

R1967 : page 87 

step of the way, faith develops and grows. 

Verses 7-10 show that it is in the Lord's service we 
are to look for the rewards of faith, the special manifestations 
of divine favor, in the removal of obstacles and difficulties 
found to be in the way of our progress in his service 
by cultivating Christian character in ourselves and others, 
and in ministering generally to the furtherance of the 
divine plans. We may not expect these rewards of divine 
favor except as we prosecute the service. And when they 
are received we are not to regard them as evidences that 
we have done any more than it was our duty to do. As servants 
of God we owe him the full measure of our ability; 
hence we may not feel that we have merited or earned the 
great blessings of heavenly inheritance and joint-heirship 
with Christ. We have merely done our duty; but God, 
with exceeding riches of grace has prepared, for those who 
lovingly serve him, rewards far beyond what they could 
have asked or hoped for. We can do no works of supererogation; 
even at our best our service is marred by many 
imperfections, and could never find acceptance with God 
except as supplemented by the perfect and finished work 
of Christ. 

Verses 11-16 show how the rewards of faith, which are 
of God's free grace and by no means earned by our faith, 
should be gratefully received. The samples given illustrate 
the fact that the rewards of faith are not always gratefully 
received. Here were ten lepers cleansed, and only one returned 
to give thanks and worship. So also of the many 
who receive justification by faith, the forgiveness of sins 
and reconciliation with God through Christ, how few return 
to present themselves living sacrifices, thank-offerings, 
to God, their reasonable service! 



R1966 : page 87 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Just a word to tell you that 
our little Church (thirteen in number) met last evening and 
joined with the rest of the body in commemorating our 
Master's death on our behalf. We had a solemn but blessed 
time, and we realized perhaps more than ever how much his 
death means to us. We thank God and take courage. 

Your brother in the faith, JESSE HEMERY. 



Maryland. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-A little company met at 
our house and celebrated our Lord's last Memorial Supper. 
We all felt how graciously the Lord hath dealt with us in 
leading us out of darkness into his glorious light. We 
realized our shortcomings and unworthiness of the high 
privilege of participating in the communion of his death, 
after being made acceptable to our Heavenly Father through 
the merits of our Redeemer. After a brief explanation 
of the symbols, seven partook of the same. We closed 
with Hymn 276. 

All were greatly strengthened, especially as we realized 
that all the Lord's people everywhere were praying for one 
another. We also felt, from previous experiences, that we 
have especial need at this time to encourage one another. 
May the Lord be gracious unto all, and keep us very humble; 
"for many are called, but few chosen." 

Love from your brother, joined by all the company at 
Oakland, H. WEBER. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I pray for you 
daily that our Father in heaven will give you a clear conception 
each day of his will and grace and strength to stand 
for God and the truth. Oh, how thankful we are (I am 
speaking for our little assembly here) that God has been 
pleased to reveal his Son to us, and that we know him as 
the way, the truth and the life! 

Our little assembly is using me for its leader, and I am 
so weak, dear Brother, that I need your prayers daily; but 
Oh, I am so thankful that I feel very humble, and pray the 
dear Lord always to keep me in that way. How much I 
need to study and meditate on the love of God to usward, 
in order to get the mind of our dear Lord. Only by continuance 
in well doing and prayer can we have the spirit's 
guidance in this wilderness journey. Our daily song should 
be, 

"I love thy Church, O God! 
Her walls before me stand." 

We met for the Memorial Supper at Brother Fry's. 
When I saw a good-sized room full, the thought came to me, 
"Can I serve in a way that will be satisfactory to our 



blessed Lord and the truth-loving ones?" The answer came 
like a flash. "I will be with thee and uphold thee; my 
grace is sufficient for thee; only trust, and lean on me." 
How strong I was, dear Brother, after the answer came to 
my whispered prayer! I read a short article on the subject 
from one of the dear old TOWERS, and Brother Chase gave 
thanks. All appeared to be deeply impressed and to realize 
the solemnity and import of the occasion. 

Yours in the love of the truth, R. S. MOORE. 

[The three letters above are fair samples of about one 
hundred reports received of the commemoration of the 
Memorial supper: and probably as many more celebrated 
from whom we have had no reports. These seasons are becoming 
more precious yearly. Indeed, we are glad to be 
able to report that the spiritual health of the Church was 
probably never better than now, the servants of the truth 
never more active nor more wise, and the triumph of truth 
over error never more pronounced. God be praised for the 
privileges and pleasures of his service! This we believe is 
the sentiment of an increasingly large number. 

May the strength and blessing derived from this Memorial 
of our Redeemer's sacrifice and of our fellowship in 
it abide with us all as a blessing, fitting and preparing us 
for further faithful service, and to endure whatever trials and 
tests our Lord may see best to permit to come upon his 
flock; we cannot expect that such a season will altogether 
pass without " sittings " for the wheat, to separate the chaff 
and the tares. --EDITOR] 



England. 
DEAR BROTHER:-The TOWER is as fully appreciated 
now as at any time during the past fourteen years in which 
I have been privileged to receive it. Its form and size are 

R1966 : page 88 

convenient; its title page is a sermon in itself; but as "in 

de wah time" the Richmond newspapers were eagerly welcomed, 

though printed on the commonest of wrapping 

paper, so the TOWER would be gratefully welcome for the 

blessed truth and spiritual food it contains, apart altogether 

from its outward appearance, necessary though it be that it 

should be becoming, pure, chaste, sober, unsensational in 

garb, as a fit covering to the purity within. 

I have said it is as much appreciated as at any time; in 
some respects it is even more so. Articles are anonymous, 
less controversial matter appears with regard to those who 
"went out from us" and those not of us; only so much as 
is necessary, that the true flock may be kept true, and guarded 
from false shepherds and false and poisonous food; and 
less prominence is given to "Encouraging words from faithful 
workers" in the omission (if I remember rightly without 
referring back) of names of writers. Altogether there 
is a welcome appearance as of a chastened purity, which 



without doubt has a corresponding effect upon its readers. 

Whilst in heart and mind I give thanks to our Father 
through Jesus our Lord, that I have been privileged to hear 
and to accept of the blessed truth of the most holy Word, 
and to partake of the spiritual food now spread before us, 
in His due time; I yet, whether rightly or wrongly I know 
not, have a great distaste for the relation of "personal experiences. 
Perhaps the liking or disliking of it in different 
persons may be owing largely to early training and sectarian 
association;... though the admonition "confess your 
faults one to another," in a proper spirit, is fully recognized. 

It appears to be a duty, whenever occasion offers, to 
boldly declare the truth, as far as lieth in one, and certainly 
it is a great pleasure so to do, and especially to an ear that 
can hear; but how few these are. 

With kindest seasonable greetings and affectionate respects 
and regards, Yours in the one faith, 

[Experience meetings in which the speakers vie with 
each other in the relation of their past wickedness, or in 
boastfulness of present grace or attainments, are sure to be 
injurious in their tendency. But testimony meetings at 
which each child of God present in simplicity and godly 
sincerity recalls the Father's care and love and discipline 
for the week or month preceding are surely very profitable. 
If each is careful to relate such features of his experience, 
his trials or triumphs, as will be helpful to others, all will 
be edified. This letter column is designed to supply such 
a lack for many of our readers who are isolated and enjoy 
no such privileges of communion of saints.— EDITOR.] 



Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is now a few years since 
my eyes were opened to the present truth; and I feel that 
I ought to write you a few words telling you of the great 
joy and happiness it has given me. Oh, how thankful I am 
to God that the "present truth" has illuminated my path! 
I can not find words to express myself. How I rejoice that 
I can now see that all the world will be blessed in "due 
time," and that the time is fast approaching when the 
Gospel Church will be glorified with Christ, our Lord and 
Head. 

Brother Franklin was the first to present the truth to 
me. I remember very well the first time we conversed 
about the matter. When he said that death (extinction of 
being) was the penalty for sin, and when he denied eternal 
torment, he startled me! I thought it was horrible that a 
man, claiming to be a Christian, could be so bold as to deny 
eternal torment for the ungodly. I purchased the first 
volume of DAWN of the brother, but at that time I could 
not read English, and not until after two years did I commence 
to read it. It was hard for me to get rid of all my 
inherited prejudices; but, thank God! I can now see what 
the Word of God teaches and also the value of Christ's 
sacrifice; and I have tried to present the truth the best I 



could to my countrymen. 

I am glad to inform you that in my judgment the 
Swedish translation of DAWN is very good, and I will circulate 
as many as possible. Please remember me in your 
prayers, and be sure that when at the throne of grace I always 
remember you. 

Sincerely yours in Christ, A. T. ERICSON. 



page 88 

Georgia. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Received your very kind 
letter, and appreciate very much your kindly interest in my 
spiritual welfare. I realize the necessity of walking close 
to God, and striving day by day to cultivate the mind that 
was in our Savior. 

I also feel the need of approaching the throne often in 
order to renew my strength to continue the conflict. I feel 
as if I had more temptation to endure now than when I 
first embraced the truth; yet, while they are at first grievous, 
I ought to rejoice in them as giving opportunities to build up 
a Christian character— if rightly resisted. The glorious 
end of our high calling grows more precious to me as the 
time grows nearer. Sometimes Satan injects the thought 
that I am very presumptuous to aspire to be part of the 
Bride class; but I am fully satisfied that if I draw back 
now, the Lord will have no pleasure in me. I fully realize 
the importance of walking humbly before the Lord, of following 
him who was meek and lowly of heart; and yet, 
while I am striving to this end, my poor, fallen nature gives 
me a great deal of trouble, so that I am very often grieved 
at my slow progress in Christian development. Nevertheless, 
the sincere desire of my heart is that I may walk more 
worthy of the vocation wherewith I am called, so that by 
attending faithfully to the Lord's will, mine may be the joy 
of sharing his name, his honor, his glory, as partaker with 
him in the divine nature. Your brother in Christ, 
S. J. RICHARDSON [Colporteur]. 



Massachusetts. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Enclosed please find order for 200 
or more DAWNS. Am doing better here than I expected. 
It looks now as though it would take me two or three months 
to finish up. 

My health is very good, and I have sufficient encouragement 
to keep my spirits cheerful. Had one very snowy day 
in which I worked some among the stores. Found one 
man who recognized me as one who left a tract there once. 
He said he usually tore such things up, but this he put into 
his pocket. Did not know why, but read it, sent to the 
office for VOL. I., read it, liked it and bought the other two 
volumes of me. 



So the work goes on. Those who hunger and thirst 
for the truth will find it. The Lord as a good Overseer is 
watching the work and will guide it all right. As I see the 
work going on, and the Kingdom class building up, I feel 
like shouting, Glory! 

Yours in full sympathy with the work, GEO. KELLOGG. 



page 89 
