From Our Readers
Memory  My sincere thanks for the article “You Can Improve Your Memory.” (April 8, 1996) In the past I have tried to remember the names of all the members of my local congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses—but unsuccessfully. The pressure intensified recently when I was assigned by the Watch Tower Society to serve as a traveling minister. This article answered my prayers! Applying the suggestions given, I was able to remember the names of more than half of those I met in eight different congregations.
C. E. U., Nigeria
Found God  Thank you very much for the article “God Let Us Find Him.” (March 22, 1996) While I was reading it, my eyes filled with tears of joy for Scott and Steve Davis. Their experience has strengthened my resolve to undertake a career in the full-time ministry after I graduate from school.
G. G., Italy
Never have I read an experience as wonderful and as heartwarming as this one! Jehovah must surely have been smiling when he saw these two young men try so hard to serve him. Their unselfish service to God is very commendable.
J. D., United States
The story of Scott and Steve’s search for God was truly inspiring. I too searched for God in many churches but was never satisfied. I wanted so much to please God but had no idea how to do so. How thankful I am that Jehovah knew my heart was crying out! Serving Jehovah has saved my life and has brought me peace.
D. C., United States
Divine Protection?  I had been depressed lately because I thought Jehovah was not listening to my prayers. However, the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Can True Christians Expect Divine Protection?” (April 8, 1996) helped me understand that God acts according to his purposes and not always according to our wishes. May Jehovah bless you as you write articles that help us put our trust in him.
C. A. A., Brazil
Used Cars  Thank you for the article “How to Buy a Used Car.” (April 8, 1996) My husband and I just purchased a used car. It sounded pretty good at first, but after two weeks we started hearing noises. After six weeks the car broke down completely. If we had had this good information beforehand, maybe we wouldn’t have a broken-down car sitting in our driveway.
M. C., United States
As a professional auto technician, I would like to add one point. Before you buy a used car, check to see if the numbers on the car body and the motor correspond to the numbers on the registration form. If they do not or if they have been erased, you may be buying a stolen car!
M. V., Czech Republic
Thanks for the helpful suggestion.—ED.
Smokeless Tobacco  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Smokeless Tobacco—Is It Harmless?” (April 22, 1996) I did not quite understand the title, which prompted me to read the article. Even though I have not come across this problem here in Togo, the article helped me see the types of problems affecting others in different parts of the world.
C. H., Togo
I love to read all your articles, but this one was the best. There are young people here who are using smokeless tobacco, but this article warned about the dangers. I am never going to use it.
P. H. W., Brazil

