





He Could Have Had God’s Favor

WE SERVE Jehovah and want his favor and his blessing. But how can we have God’s favor? In Bible times, some people who had committed serious sins regained God’s favor, or approval. Others had good qualities but in the end lost God’s favor. So we might ask, “What is Jehovah looking for in each of us?” The example of Rehoboam, a king of Judah, can help us find the answer.



A BAD START

Rehoboam’s father, Solomon, was the king of Israel for 40 years. (1 Kings 11:42) After his father died, Rehoboam traveled from Jerusalem to Shechem to become king. (2 Chronicles 10:1) Was he afraid to become the next king? Solomon was known for his great wisdom. Soon, Rehoboam would have to prove whether he was wise enough to solve a difficult problem.
The Israelites felt oppressed and sent representatives to tell Rehoboam what they wanted him to do: “Your father made our yoke harsh. But if you make the harsh service of your father easier and you lighten the heavy yoke he put on us, we will serve you.”​—2 Chronicles 10:3, 4.
Rehoboam had a difficult choice to make. If he did what the people wanted, he and his family and those in the palace might have to live without some of the luxuries they had been used to. However, if he refused the people’s request, they might rebel against him. What did he do? He first talked to the older men who had helped his father. They told him to listen to the people. But then Rehoboam spoke to those of his own age and decided to treat the people harshly. He told them: “I will make your yoke heavier, and I will add to it. My father punished you with whips, but I will do so with scourges.”​—2 Chronicles 10:6-14.
Do you see a lesson for us? Today, we have many older ones with us who have served Jehovah for many years and who can help us make good decisions. Let us be wise and listen to them.​—Job 12:12.



“THEY OBEYED THE WORD OF JEHOVAH”

Rehoboam now gathered his army to fight the rebellious tribes. However, Jehovah sent the prophet Shemaiah to tell them: “You must not go up and fight against your Israelite brothers. Each one of you must return to his house, for I have caused this to happen.”​—1 Kings 12:21-24.a​—See footnote.
Was it easy for Rehoboam to listen to Jehovah? What would people think of their new king? He had told them that he would punish them “with scourges,” but now he was not going to do anything about this shocking rebellion! (Compare 2 Chronicles 13:7.) Still, no matter what the people thought of him, the king and his armies “obeyed the word of Jehovah and went back home, as Jehovah had told them.”
What is the lesson for us? It is always wise to obey God, even if people ridicule us for doing so. God will always bless us when we are obedient.​—Deuteronomy 28:2.
Was Rehoboam blessed for his obedience? Rehoboam still ruled the tribes of Judah and Benjamin, and he decided to build new cities in those territories. He also made some cities stronger “to a very great degree.” (2 Chronicles 11:5-12) More important, for a time he obeyed Jehovah’s laws. Because the ten-tribe kingdom started to worship idols, many from there traveled to Jerusalem to support Rehoboam and true worship. (2 Chronicles 11:16, 17) So because Rehoboam obeyed Jehovah, his kingdom became stronger.



REHOBOAM’S SIN AND REPENTANCE

When Rehoboam’s kingdom became strong, he did something strange. He stopped obeying Jehovah’s law and began to worship false gods! But why? Did his mother, who was an Ammonitess, influence his decision? (1 Kings 14:21) We do not know, but the nation followed his bad example. So Jehovah allowed King Shishak of Egypt to capture many cities in the kingdom of Judah. This happened even though Rehoboam had made those cities very strong!​—1 Kings 14:22-24; 2 Chronicles 12:1-4.
The situation became worse when Shishak and his army came to attack Jerusalem, where Rehoboam ruled. At this point, the prophet Shemaiah gave Rehoboam and his princes this message from God: “You have abandoned me, so I have also abandoned you to the hand of Shishak.” How did Rehoboam react to that discipline? In a very positive way! The Bible says: “The princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves and said: ‘Jehovah is righteous.’” Therefore, Jehovah rescued Rehoboam, and Jerusalem was not destroyed.​—2 Chronicles 12:5-7, 12.
After that, Rehoboam continued to rule over the kingdom of Judah. Before he died, he gave many gifts to his sons. He probably wanted to make sure that they would not rebel against their brother Abijah, who would be the next king. (2 Chronicles 11:21-23) By doing that, Rehoboam acted more wisely than he had when he was younger.



WAS REHOBOAM GOOD OR BAD?

Even though Rehoboam did some good things, the Bible says about his rule: “He did what was bad.” Why? Because “he had not resolved in his heart to search for Jehovah.” So Jehovah was not pleased with him.​—2 Chronicles 12:14.





Rehoboam did not have a close relationship with Jehovah, as David did




What can we learn from the life of Rehoboam? He obeyed God sometimes. And he did some good things for Jehovah’s people. But he did not have a close relationship with Jehovah, and he did not have a strong desire to please him. Thus, he stopped doing the right thing and started worshipping false gods. You might wonder: ‘When Rehoboam accepted Jehovah’s correction, was it really because he felt deeply sorry for his mistakes and wanted to please God? Or was it just because of what others said he should do?’ (2 Chronicles 11:3, 4; 12:6) Later in life he again did what was bad. He was very different from his grandfather King David! It is true that David made mistakes. But he genuinely repented from the serious sins he committed. And he loved Jehovah and true worship all his life.​—1 Kings 14:8; Psalm 51:1, 17; 63:1.





We can learn much from this Bible account. It is commendable when people provide for their families and do good things for others. But to have Jehovah’s favor, we must worship him in a way that pleases him, and we must have a strong relationship with him.
To reach that goal, we need a deep love for Jehovah. Just as we keep a fire alive by putting more wood on it, we keep our love for God alive by studying his Word regularly, meditating on it, and persevering in prayer. (Psalm 1:2; Romans 12:12) And this love will motivate us to please Jehovah in all that we do. It will also motivate us to feel truly sorry when we make mistakes and to ask Jehovah to forgive us. Then we will not be like Rehoboam but will remain faithful to true worship.​—Jude 20, 21.



Because Solomon was unfaithful, God had already said that the kingdom would be split in two.​—1 Kings 11:31.

