From Our Readers
Breaking Up  I was in a dilemma as to continuing a flawed courtship when I came across your article. (“Should We Break Up?” July 22, 1988) It was advice given at the appropriate time. I feel as if a burden has been taken off me. I now know what to look for and what to do during a courtship. I have never come across any organization that thinks about its youngsters as you do. Keep it up.
E. E., Ghana
Mary  Recently Awake! had an article on Mary (November 8, 1988) and belittled the value we place on her. We greet Mary as did Gabriel. We call her ‘blessed’ and ‘Mother’ as in the Scriptures. We are happy and want to stay that way.
M. P. M., Brazil
Understandably, the subject of Mary is very close to the heart of Catholics, and we agree that Mary was highly favored by God. Nevertheless, our article showed that there is no Biblical support for the many traditions that have developed in connection with her, such as the Immaculate Conception, the Assumption, or her role as mediatrix. (Leviticus 12:6-8; Luke 2:22-24; 1 Corinthians 15:50; 1 Timothy 2:5) The issue facing Christians, therefore, is not whether they are worshiping in the way they prefer but whether they are ‘worshiping in truth.’ (John 4:23)​—ED.
Papal Infallibility  I was shocked at your February 8, 1989, issue. (“Are Popes Infallible?”) I deeply believe that all true lovers of God should value what they have in common and work together in unity. But this is a base attack, ill-founded, poorly conducted, and poorly researched. What was your point?
E. S., United States
For the most part, we simply reported what Catholics themselves are saying regarding the doctrine of infallibility. Indeed, the articles were based almost exclusively on Catholic sources, many of them bearing the imprimatur of the Catholic Church. We further endeavored to help our readers scrutinize this doctrine in the light of the Scriptures. Such an objective examination of religious beliefs, though perhaps painful, is of great value to any sincere truth seeker.​—ED.
Hurricane Gilbert  I get the distinct impression in your article (March 22, 1989) that relief supplies were sent only for Witnesses in that area of Mexico. What about the neighbors who are not Witnesses? There was also an undertone of ‘showing off’ when the article went on to say how ‘neighbors were very impressed’ by your relief efforts.
C. T., United States
By no means do Jehovah’s Witnesses ignore the plight of others when disasters occur. Previous articles have demonstrated how willing Jehovah’s Witnesses are to assist their neighbors during such times. See, for example, the article entitled “The Levee Has Broken!” (October 8, 1986) We thus endeavor to “work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.” (Galatians 6:10) While our motive is not to impress others, such fine works often move observers to offer words of commendation. (1 Peter 2:12)​—ED.
Handicapped  I greatly appreciated your article “Handicapped but Successful.” (October 22, 1988) Because I have cerebral palsy, people sometimes insist on treating me as if I can’t do anything. They say: ‘You can’t do this. Here, let me help you!’ just as your article pointed out. I find, though, that when I try, I can!
C. S., United States

