What Hope for a World Without Weapons?
WHAT a relief it would be if the crushing burden of the arms business were lifted and the global stockpiles of weapons done away with! What hope is there for such an eventuality? History shows that the nations will not do it of their own free will. Moreover, armaments are just a symptom. A problem has to be tackled at its root to be permanently solved. Can that root be traced, and if so, who can tackle it?
The arms business derives its nourishment from one of mankind’s greatest curses, war. But war did not grow from the arms business. Instead, the arms business grew from war. Is the root of the evil to be found in war, then? No, war is just a branch on which the arms business is flourishing. From where does that branch derive its nourishment?
Who have the power to declare war? All constitutions put such power in the hands of their governments, which usually start wars to enhance or protect national interests. Governments are supported by the people. So the problem is connected with this whole human system of things, influenced by nationalism, economic rivalry, territorial imperialism, and racism. Is this system the root of the problem, then? No. A closer examination will show that this wicked system derives its nourishment from a hidden root, a source that most people ignore.
A Hidden Root Laid Bare
That root is exposed in the Bible. This ancient book reveals that a powerful spirit creature, driven by selfish ambition, raised himself up in opposition to God. (Job 1:6-12; 2:1-7) He is called Satan (meaning, Adversary) the Devil (meaning, Accuser, Slanderer). He introduced sin and death into the human family. (Genesis 3:1-7) Therefore, he is called “the wicked one.” He inspired the first lethal assault in human history, that of Cain on Abel.​—1 John 3:12; Genesis 4:8.
The Bible also unmasks Satan as “the god of this system of things,” the great “dragon” who ‘gives power, throne, and great authority’ to the global political system of rulership. Jesus Christ boldly pointed out that “the Devil . . . was a manslayer when he began” and described him as “the ruler of the world.”​—2 Corinthians 4:4; Revelation 12:9; 13:1, 2; John 8:44; 14:30.
However, this lethal root will not last forever. A study of the Bible identifies this present cataclysmic period in human history as the last days of Satan’s system of things, which means that “he has a short period of time” left before he and his machinations are stopped cold. The provision for relief from this satanic influence is symbolically described by Jesus’ apostle John: “I saw an angel coming down out of heaven with the key of the abyss and a great chain in his hand. And he seized the dragon, the original serpent, who is the Devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years. And he hurled him into the abyss and shut it and sealed it over him, that he might not mislead the nations anymore until the thousand years were ended. After these things he must be let loose for a little while.”​—Revelation 12:12; 20:1-3.
Removing the Burden of Armaments
When the root is put out of action, all its bad influence will cease. To make possible this thousand-year era of restored peace on earth, Jehovah, Almighty God himself, will remove the crushing burden of armaments: “Come, you people, behold the activities of Jehovah, how he has set astonishing events on the earth. He is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth. The bow he breaks apart and does cut the spear in pieces; the wagons he burns in the fire.”​—Psalm 46:8, 9.
Millions of people are already preparing themselves to live under such peaceful conditions. Jehovah’s Witnesses are already fulfilling this prophecy: “Nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.” (Isaiah 2:4) Therefore, they do not take part in any form of armament business. Like Jesus and his disciples, they maintain a strict stand of neutrality on political issues and do not participate in any temporal war or conflict, come what may.​—John 17:16.
According to fulfilled Bible prophecy, the time is near when no weapon will be forged for war, when all the earth’s resources will be used only for the well-being of its inhabitants. The Prince of Peace, Jesus Christ, the King of all the earth, guarantees this: “He will deliver the poor one crying for help, also the afflicted one and whoever has no helper. He will feel sorry for the lowly one and the poor one, and the souls of the poor ones he will save. From oppression and from violence he will redeem their soul, and their blood will be precious in his eyes.” Therefore, rejoice! A world without weapons is soon to be a reality!​—Psalm 72:12-14.
[Pictures on page 10]
The time is nearing when there will be no more war. Instead, the earth will become a peaceful paradise
[Credit Lines]
U.S. Marine Corps photo
Tahiti Tourist Promotion Board

