
Help the Blind Learn About Jehovah




 1. How did Jesus demonstrate compassion for the blind?
1 Jesus’ death was just days away. As he was departing the city of Jericho, two blind beggars cried out: “Lord, have mercy on us!” Although the trials that awaited Jesus weighed heavily on his mind, Jesus stopped, called the men to him, and healed them. (Matt. 20:29-34) How can we imitate Jesus’ compassion for the blind?
 2. How may we be able to give a witness to a blind person we meet in public?
2 Be Helpful: If you encounter a blind person, perhaps in public, introduce yourself and offer to provide assistance. Since such ones are often taken advantage of, the person may be suspicious at first. However, your genuine friendliness and sincere interest may put him at ease. Keep in mind, too, that there are different degrees of blindness, and this may determine how much help needs to be rendered. After you have rendered assistance, perhaps you can mention that you are involved in a Bible education work. Offer to read him a scripture, such as Psalm 146:8 or Isaiah 35:5, 6. If he is able to read Braille, ask if he would like to have a Braille publication that will help him learn more about the Bible. You could also help him obtain audio files from jw.org. If his computer has a screen reader program that audibly reads text from the screen, he may even appreciate the printed articles on jw.org along with the publications that can be downloaded in RTF (Rich Text Format).—See the box “When Helping a Blind Person . . .”
 3. How can we search out the blind in our territory?
3 Search Out the Blind: We seldom meet blind people in the house-to-house ministry because many of them do not feel comfortable talking to strangers who come to their door. Therefore, it takes real effort to “search out” such ones in order to give them a witness. (Matt. 10:11) Do you have a workmate or a schoolmate who is blind? Take the initiative to speak to him. If your territory has a school for the blind, offer some of our Braille publications for the school library. Do you know someone who has a blind family member? Does your territory have organizations that provide helpful services for the blind or have assisted living facilities with blind occupants? Explain to the family member, the receptionist, or the director that Jehovah’s Witnesses are very interested in helping the blind, and offer to bring Braille literature or audio recordings. Show him the Bible’s promise that God will soon eradicate blindness permanently. You may also wish to show the video from jw.org entitled “Without It, I Would Feel Lost,” which relates the experience of a blind man who has benefited from having the Bible in Braille. By explaining the purpose of your visit, this may open up the way for you to make contact with blind individuals.
 4. What lessons does Janet’s experience teach?
4 A blind sister named Janet visited a facility that has residents who are blind. She started a conversation with a young woman. Janet told her, “Jesus healed blind people to show what he will do for all who are blind.” They considered Revelation 21:3, 4 together, and Janet explained how this promise would be accomplished by God’s Kingdom. The woman got quiet and then said: “I’ve never heard this from a blind person’s point of view. Most people who can see believe that people are blind because of something they or their ancestors did.” Janet e-mailed the woman a link to the Bible Teach book, and now they are studying the Bible together twice a week.
 5. Although we cannot heal the blind as Jesus could, our demonstrating interest in the blind will bring what blessings?
5 Of course, we cannot heal people of their blindness as Jesus did, but we can help all those whose minds have been blinded by the god of this system of things, including the physically blind, to understand the truth of God’s Word. (2 Cor. 4:4) Jesus healed the two men near Jericho because he was “moved with pity” for them. (Matt. 20:34) If we demonstrate similar interest in the blind, we can enjoy the privilege of helping some to learn about Jehovah, the one who will end blindness forever.



When Helping a Blind Person . . .
              Speak directly to him, but do not raise your voice. The blind cannot see, but they can usually hear quite well.

            Bend your arm, and allow him to take your arm just above the elbow if you are guiding him. He will be able to follow as you walk a half step in front of him. When you see a curb, a pole, a step, or another obstacle, it is important that you alert him.

              Feel free to use words that refer to vision, such as “see” and “look.” The blind also use them. They “see” with their other senses, even creating mental images of what is being described.

            Have your discussions in a quiet place. The blind often do not feel comfortable in places with loud background noise, as it is difficult for them to know what is happening around them.

            Tell him when you leave his presence. This will save him the embarrassment of speaking to someone who is no longer there.

            Fill out a Please Follow Up (S-43) form, and give it to the secretary if the blind person shows interest but does not live in your territory.





