
Improving Our Skills in the Ministry—Witnessing to Someone Who Speaks Another Language




Why Important: Jehovah is interested in the spiritual welfare of people “in every nation.” (Acts 10:34, 35) Therefore, Jesus indicated that the good news would be preached “in all the inhabited earth” and “to all the nations.” (Matt. 24:14) Zechariah prophesied that people “out of all the languages of the nations” would respond. (Zech. 8:23) According to the apostle John’s vision, those who survive the great tribulation will include individuals “out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues [languages, ftn.].” (Rev. 7:9, 13, 14) In view of the foregoing, when we encounter someone in our territory who speaks another language, we should try to give him a witness.



How to Do It:
           Be prepared. Carry in your witnessing case Good News for People of All Nations. Become familiar with the instructions entitled “How to Help Those Who Speak Another Language,” found at the beginning of the booklet. Anticipate the languages you may encounter, and download a video or a publication in those languages from jw.org to your mobile device. Consider using the JW Language app to learn a few phrases. If congregations of different languages preach in the same neighborhood, carry literature only in the language of your congregation when going from house to house. However, when engaging in public witnessing in multilingual areas, have literature in the languages of those you may meet.

           When you encounter someone who does not speak your language, do your best to share “the magnificent things of God” with him in his own language. (Acts 2:11) Direct him to jw.org for more information in his language. If he shows interest, promptly fill out a Please Follow Up (S-43) form, and give it to the secretary. Continue calling on the interested person until he is contacted by publishers who speak his language.




Try This During the Month:
            During your next Family Worship evening, have a practice session where you give a witness to someone who does not speak your language.





