VOL. XIX. DECEMBER 1, 1898. No. 23. 

CONTENTS. 



Millennial Dawn, Vol. IV., in 

German 346 

The Bible Versus the Evolution 

Theory 347 

A Live Topic Discussed by 

Traveling Ministers. 
Report of a Friendly Discussion 

on Board a Crowded "Lightning 

Express," Witnessing the 

Fulfilling of Dan. 12:4 

Fighting Against God 357 

The Holy Land Desolated 359 

page 346 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



R2399 : page 346 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV., IN GERMAN. 

Some months since we noted the fact that our German friends 
were urging its publication in their language, and were unwilling 
to accept our refusal. We finally offered that, if a sufficient 
number were ordered in advance, to amount to $500, we would 
consider it the Lord's will to proceed with the matter and grant 
the request. 

We are gratified to be able to state that the required sum 
has been subscribed. The translating is being done by Brother 
Pillichody of Switzerland and Sister Giesecke of Germany, and 
will then be criticized by Bros. Koetitz and Kuesthardt of this 



country. All this, and the typesetting, printing, etc., will require 
several months; but the work is already started. May the 
Lord's blessing attend it to the praise of his glory and the blessing 
of his people of the German tongue! 



OUR NOVEMBER EXTRA. 

The demand for our Sept. issue was so great that it speedily 
exhausted our 20,000 edition: so we got out another 40,000 edition 
of the same "Parousia" article and other matter as a Nov. 
7th Extra, and sent a copy to each subscriber. You will not 
need it for your file and can give it to any friend known to be 
interested in our Lord's second coming. Send us addresses of others, 
and we will mail them samples, free. 



page 346 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE." 

This book, described in our Nov. 7th issue, we find we can 
supply for less than stated: hence we are sending six of our 
booklets to each person who has already ordered, and will do 
the same with future orders. 



R2392 : page 347 

THE BIBLE VERSUS THE EVOLUTION THEORY. 

-A LIVE TOPIC DISCUSSED BY TRAVELING MINISTERS. 

Report of a friendly discussion, on board a crowded 
"Lightning Express," witnessing the fulfilling of Daniel 12:4. 

ALPHA.— Is this seat engaged? 

Betha.— No, it is at your service, and I will 

be pleased to have company— sit down. You are a minister? 

—Of what denomination, may I ask? 

A.— I am a Presbyterian minister, and now en 
route to a meeting of the synod of which I am a member. 

B.— Ah! this affords me a good opportunity to 
inquire how the Presbyterian ministry in this vicinity 
stands on the subject of Evolution. My observation 
leads me to believe that the Evolution theory, which 
I consider quite unscriptural, is becoming very popular 
in all denominations;— amongst the ministers as 
well as amongst their parishioners. I will be glad to 
know the attitude of the Presbyterians hereabouts. 
I know, of course, that Presbyterian doctrinal standards, 
like the doctrinal standards of all orthodox 
churches, uphold the Scriptural doctrine that man was 



created perfect and fell from his perfection into sin and 
degradation: and my question, therefore, in substance 
is,— Are Presbyterians in this vicinity holding to the 
Bible and to their creeds on this point, or are they 
abandoning both in favor of the speculations of Darwin, 
Huxley, et al? 

A.— Not being authorized, I cannot speak for my 
brethren of the Presbyterian ministry as a whole, but 
I can speak for myself, and I assure you that I am a 
firm believer in Evolution: and I have every reason to 
believe that my views on the subject are in full accord 
with the sentiments of the best educated people in my 
own and other denominations. 

B.— I concede the point that the tendency of education 
for the past twenty-five years has been in the 
direction of Evolution and against the Bible: I incline, 
however, to the opinion that the majority of the advocates 
of evolutionary theories are not aware of the violent 
and irreconcilable difference between these theories 
and the Bible. It appears to me that if it were generally 
known that if evolutionary theories are true, the 
Bible doctrines are false, and that if the Bible is of God, 
his inspired Word, evolutionary theories are absolutely 
false, many Evolutionists would give the subject deeper 
study before accepting and advocating a theory 
which gives the lie to the words of our Lord and of his 
Apostles and all the holy Prophets. 

A.— Oh well, I do not go to the extreme of some 
Evolution theories— to claim that there was no divine 
interposition in the operation of Nature, no life-giving 
at the beginning: that inert matter became vitalized 
without supernatural aid I deny. Even Prof. Huxley 
on this subject says,— "At the present moment there 
is not the shadow of trustworthy, direct evidence that 
abiogenesis (life derived from the not living) does take 
place or has taken place within the period during which 
the existence of life on the globe is recorded." 

B.— Yes, surely there are very few that go to the 
extreme you mention. But I maintain that the entire 
philosophy of Evolution is opposed by the plainest 
statements both of the Old and New Testament Scriptures. 
(1) The extreme view, if it does not deny the 
existence of God, claims at least that he had nothing 
whatever to do with the creation of man; but that 
Evolutionary processes began with inert matter. (2) 
Also extreme hypothesis assumes that divine power 
did operate upon inert matter, but that it began at the 
very lowest point of living organism, and created a 
microbe, or more exactly speaking a "protoplasm" 
which became the parent of all living things, including 
man, by a supposed process of Evolution. (3) The 
most conservative theory of Evolution hesitates to go 
so far back as the "protoplasm," and ignoring the 
method by which divine power operated in the development 
of the lower animals, begins its philosophy 
with man: searching amongst the lower animals, for the 



one most nearly resembling humanity in structure and 
shape, it lights upon the monkey, the baboon and the 
chimpanzee, and asserts that human nature represents 
a second step in advance of these (for it is forced to admit 
many dissimilarities), and that "a missing link" is still 
being sought— a grade or condition of life between the 
highest monkey-developments and the lowest form of 
the human creature known. 

Those who accept this last theory often strenuously 
object to tracing their genealogy back to a microbe, a 
"protoplasm," but feel less hesitancy about thinking 
of Adam's grandfather as a monkey, and Adam himself 
as but one remove from the monkey family, and 
himself the very lowest and most degraded of his own 
species. This last is the thought, I believe, that is the 
most prevalent throughout Christendom; and those 
who entertain it, while somewhat abashed at the humble 

R2392 : page 348 

origin which they attribute to our race, nevertheless 
pass over it lightly, to expatiate in glowing terms respecting 
the great progress that mankind has made, 
and especially on the high degree of development attained 
in this nineteenth century. 
A.— Well, do you dispute the greater general intelligence 

R2393 : page 348 

of the masses to-day, as compared with the 

past? And if you do not dispute that, is it not an unanswerable 

argument in support of the Evolution theory? 

B.— Assuredly I do not dispute the fact that we 
of to-day are enjoying a higher degree of general 
knowledge and civilization than has ever before been 
known to the world. But instead of accepting in explanation 
of present conditions a theory which makes 
void the Word of God, I accept the explanation of 
present conditions which the Bible presents,— stronger 
and sounder by far, and more reasonable every way, 
than the Evolution theory. 

The Bible foretold the present conditions, and explained 
how they would come about, and how they are 
to result, with a detail and an accuracy which evolutionary 
speculation knows nothing about. I call to 
your remembrance the revelations given to the Prophet 
Daniel, concerning the things to come to pass in the 
closing epoch of the present age. I remind you of the 
Prophet's deep interest in the stirring scenes of that 
vision, and how he prayed and fasted seven whole 
weeks, desiring to know of these things— the purposes 
of God: and how then an angel was sent to him who 
delivered the divine message, "Go thy way, Daniel, 
for the declarations [of the vision] are closed up and 
sealed until the time of the end." This "time of the 
end," you will remember, is elsewhere in the Scriptures 



spoken of as "The day of His Preparation"— the 

day or period in which the Lord will be preparing the 

world for the new dispensation, the Millennial Age. 

Perhaps you will recall also the testimony of the 
angel sent to Daniel respecting some of the peculiar 
characteristics of this "Day of Preparation" or "time 
of the End"— he said: "In the time of the end many 
shall run to and fro and knowledge shall be increased— 
and the wise shall understand, but none of the wicked 
shall understand." (Dan. 12:4,10.) This inspired 
statement, it seems to me, is most remarkably fulfilled 
before our eyes to-day, and not only proves that we are 
now living in this period, "The Time of the End," 
the day of God's Preparation, but also furnishes a 
much clearer and more satisfactory explanation of the 
present day enlightenment and progress than any Evolution 
theory extant. It begins by calling attention 
to what every one will concede is one of the most notable 
features of our time, differentiating it from all 
past time, viz., the fact that everybody travels. The 
whole world seems to be "running to and fro;" just as 
was revealed to the Prophet twenty-four hundred years 
ago. Here we are ourselves, at this very moment running 
at the rate of fifty miles an hour and the car 
crowded full: and we know that similar trains are rushing 
in every direction, similarly laden with people. 
We wonder why there should be so much "running 
to and fro," and yet it is on the increase every year. 
And mark you, my friend, the railway, and the steamboat 
and the trolley car, which permit this running to 
and fro, belong to this century. Remember, again, 
that you and I have probably traveled over more miles 
of country within the last twenty-five years than did 
all our ancestors back to Adam, during that period of 
six thousand years. 

Take the next feature of the Lord's revelation to 
Daniel respecting the present time: "Knowledge shall 
be increased." I hold, in harmony with this Scriptural 
statement, that the present wonderful increase of 
knowledge is not the result of Evolution, but the result 
of divine interposition at the present time: that it is 
one of the features of this "Day of His Preparation" 
—making ready for the Millennial Kingdom. If the 
theory of Evolution were correct, this increase of 
knowledge should have been gradual, during the past, 
and not sudden, now, toward the close of six thousand 
years of man's history— within the present century, 
and particularly within the past fifty years. 

I call your attention also to the fact that the increase 
of knowledge has accompanied and followed the 
running to and fro of the past sixty years. In his own 
due time it has pleased the Lord to draw to man's attention 
the powers of steam and electricity, and to 
quicken him with intelligence for the handling and 
harnessing of these to his service. (See Exod. 31:6; 
36: 1 .) Pots had boiled and kettle-lids had rattled for 



centuries before the mind of Watt was led to reflection 
on the power of steam, and how it might be utilized in 
human affairs. Similarly simple were the first thoughts 
respecting contrivances for making use of steam power, 
and subsequently electrical power. But for those 
simple thoughts to which we believe divine providence 
led in God's due time, these great factors in our nineteenth 
century awakening might have lain unnoticed 
for centuries to come, as they did for centuries in the 
past. But in his own due time God made these the 
bases, the starting points, for the fulfilment of the divine 
prediction— "in the Time of the End many shall 
run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased." 

As the discovery of the power of steam led to the 
construction of engines by which, on boats and cars, 
the people by running to and fro and commingling 
with each other gave fresh impulses to thought and 
action, so also the same steam power was attached 
to printing presses; and as a result the world is flooded 
with literature in every language, and thus again the 
world's thinkers and writers are brought in contact with 
the millions of its population, and increase of knowledge 
became unavoidable— as God foreknew. Electricity 
coming in assists in this commingling of mankind and 
their thoughts, throughout the world, by telegraph, 
telephone, etc. Very evidently the all-wise God, the 
Author of the Bible, which he caused to be written by 
his various instruments and agents, knew well what 
would be the result of letting in of the proper light at 
the proper moment, to cooperate with all the features 
of his great and wonderful plan of the ages. 

Moreover, you will bear me witness that the stoutest 
Evolutionists stand somewhat in awe of what may 
be the outcome of present conditions, viewed along the 
lines of Evolution. They begin to fear that the increase 
of knowledge signifies eventually a danger of social 
wreck and possibly of ultimate anarchy, or, to avert 
this, a return to some degree of restraint of education or 
of liberties. They see that the increase of knowledge of 
our day permits a twelve-year-old child to have before 
him the accumulated knowledge of centuries, as well as 
of modern investigations and discoveries, gives him 
much more theoretical knowledge at his command than 
had his grandfather (mainly of his own personal experience) 
at seventy years of age. They see also that 
a century ago the educated were extremely few, whereas 
to-day knowledge is so increased that in civilized 

R2393 : page 349 

lands education is compulsory, and comparatively few 
are without its privileges and advantages. And yet 
they see, contrary to all their Evolutionary expectations, 
that these hitherto undreamed-of blessings and comforts 
of our day are not apparently favorable in the 
masses of the people to the cultivation of happiness 



and contentment. On the contrary, it is manifest that 
the more and the greater the blessings enjoyed, the 
more and the greater will generally be the discontent 
in unregenerate hearts. Thus Evolutionists stand in 
dread of a retrograde movement, the logic of which 
disputes their hypothesis. 

On the contrary, all of these facts are in most absolute 
accord with the Scriptural delineation of the 
cause, object and result of the present running to and 
fro and increase of knowledge. The Scriptures indicate 
that the present increase of general knowledge 
and skill is now due, in order to the preparation of 
machinery, and the various mechanical arrangements 
and contrivances for the benefit of mankind during 
the Millennial age; nevertheless, it points out also 
that this knowledge is premature, so far as mankind 
in general is concerned— that mankind is not in proper 
condition to appreciate and use with wisdom the knowledge 
and opportunities, liberties and blessings thus 
thrust within his grasp, because of innate, inherited 
selfishness,— which left to itself would turn blessings 
into curses. The Bible points out that unregenerate 
man needs a strong superhuman government, which 
will give him practical lessons along the lines of wisdom, 
righteousness and the spirit of God, Love: and 
it points out that God is preparing to establish such a 
strong superhuman government, which will prove a 
blessing and an uplifting power to all who will come 
into accord with it, after its establishment. This 
superhuman government is the Millennial Kingdom, 
the kingdom or dominion of heaven, for which our 
Redeemer taught us to pray, "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 

A.— Pardon the interruption, but I should have 
considered you too logical a reasoner to hold the theory 
that Christ will come a second time in "glorified flesh," 
sit upon an earthly throne, hold earthly court, etc., 
during the Millennium. It strikes me that is a very 
gross conception of divine government— a retrogression 
as compared to the present spirit dispensation. 

B.~ I agree with much of your criticism of a common 
view of Christ's Kingdom. Such is not my view: 
I understand the Scriptures to teach that our Lord 
Jesus is no longer a man, a human being, in any sense, 
but a spirit being, "the express image of the Father's 
person." And when his kingdom shall come into control 
in the world, the heavenly king and his associates 
(the glorified Church) will no more be visible to mankind 
than are the holy angels now. The coming Kingdom 
will be a spiritual and invisible one, but will operate 
and rule through human representatives. As an 
illustration of a spiritual ruler operating and governing 
through earthly agents, take "the present evil world" 
or age, of which Satan is the prince. A spirit being, he 
is invisible to humanity, and rules for evil through his 



R2394 : page 349 

human servants. With the end of this age comes the 
binding of Satan and the overthrow of his dominion- 
God's due time for the establishment of the Kingdom 
of Heaven having come. Christ's Kingdom will be the 
reverse of Satan's in respect to its character in that it 
will be a Kingdom of light, a Kingdom of righteousness, 
but it will resemble it in that its King and his associates 
will also be spirit beings of a still higher order, 
of "the divine nature," and equally invisible to men. 

A.— I could not object to that view of the Kingdom. 
Proceed, please, as before. 

B.— The Scriptures point out that the present blessing 
and preparation for the incoming Millennial age, 
will prove eventually a curse in the end of this age- 
in that the increase of knowledge and of liberty, combined 
with the innate selfishness of the depraved man, 
will eventually lead to the very condition which our 
Evolutionist friends foresee and dread. But the Scriptures 
point out that even this dread condition of anarchy, 
with which the present age will terminate, will be 
overruled of God so as to make of it a practical lesson 
for mankind, humbling the power and the pride of the 
great and of the small, and teaching all the great lesson 
that human perfection is not attained through processes 
of human evolution, but only through divine 
interposition for the uplifting of mankind, through the 
agency of the Kingdom of God, long promised through 
the Prophets and Apostles, and by our Lord himself, 
to be the divine agency— the Seed of Abraham, in 
which all the families of the earth shall be blessed. 

The prophecy already mentioned calls special attention 
to this. It will be as a result of the running to and 
fro and the increase of knowledge, and the strange parallel 
increase of dissatisfaction, that the prophecy declares, 
—"There shall be a time of trouble such as never 
was since there was a nation"— and at that time, to intercept 
that trouble, and to save mankind from self-destruction 
in anarchy, Michael, the great Prince (Christ) 
shall stand up, the leader and the commander of the 
people. "And it shall come to pass that whosoever 
will not hear [heed] that Prophet shall be cut off from 
amongst the people."— Dan. 12:1,4,9,10; Acts 3:23. 

A.— What you say is very interesting and certainly 
does account for present-day enlightenment and progress 
in a manner different from my previous thoughts 
on the subject. I do not yet see, however, what ground 
you have for your assumption that the Evolution theory 
is in direct conflict with every teaching of the Bible, 
and that the one gives the other the lie, so that whoever 
holds to the Evolution theory must ipso facto deny 
the teachings of the Bible, and whoever holds to the 
Bible must, to be logical, renounce all faith in the Evolution 
theory. I would be pleased to have you substantiate 
your statement, if you can, with as keen logic 



as you have just used in accounting Scripturally for 
our nineteenth century intelligence. 

B.~ I will be pleased to submit to you the proofs 
that the hope set before mankind in the Scriptures is 
most radically opposed at every point to the Evolution 
theory: but first let me call your attention to a few 
other facts bearing upon the subject, aside from Scriptural 
declarations respecting the divine purpose and 
plan for man. I would have you notice that the world's 
history does not accord with the theory of Evolution, 
as evinced by the following facts: 

While conceding that this is preeminently the day 
of increase of knowledge, as the Scriptures foretold, I hold 
that it is not preeminently the day of increased ability. 
We do not find that the world is becoming greater in 
ability, but merely, as the Scriptures declare, greater 
in knowledge, which is generally diffused as never before. 
(1) In the domain of Art. Modern artists point us 
back to Raphael, Michael Angelo, and others, as the masters 
whom they still copy, in the matter of artistic skill. 

(2) In Poetry. If we inquire respecting poets, 

R2394 : page 350 

without disparagement to any of the able ones of recent 

years, we are, nevertheless, pointed back to the greatest 

poets, and told that the poetry of the Book of Job has 

no equal to-day in literature. We are pointed also to 

the Psalms of David, and to Homer, Virgil and Shakespeare, 

all past-masters, whose works and style are 

studied and to a large extent imitated to-day. 

(3) As for Laws. It is well known that the Mosaic 
laws have served as a basis, pattern and guide in the 
formation of the laws of Christendom, special adaptations 
being made to harmonize with present conditions: 

and yet there were features of the Mosaic law not incorporated 

into the laws of Christendom, which it is 

generally admitted would be blessings, if adopted in 

some measure; for instance, the law of the Jubilees, 

the cancellation of all debts every fiftieth year, the 

beneficial results of this law being attained in part only, 

and for a limited class only, by modern bankruptcy laws. 

(4) In the Sciences. Of present day arts and 
sciences special boast is made; and we are ready to admit 
generally the claim, accounting for it as before explained. 
Nevertheless, it behooves us to remember 

that the people of the past accomplished wonders without 
our modern appliances. For instance; the great 
pyramid at the delta of the Nile gives evidence of 
having been oriented in harmony with late astronomical 
deductions; and even in its mechanical structure 
implies a skill which causes modern architects 
and builders to wonder, when they find some of its 
immense stones so closely fitted at their joints that the 
dividing line is not thicker than a knife-blade. It is 
admitted that it is doubtful whether such immense 



stones could be raised and thus accurately placed in 

position even with the aid of modern mechanical appliances. 

We are not to forget, either, that some of 

the valuable arts of the past were so thoroughly lost 

that even with all our present-day enlightenment they 

have not yet been re-discovered: for instance, the process 

of manufacturing flexible glass; and the process 

of tempering steel which gave the swords of Damascus 

a world-wide fame for flexibility; and the process of 

tempering copper so as to render it useful for tools. 

And while considering these matters we are to remember 
that the Scriptures indicate not only that the 
Children of Israel became much degraded through their 
several centuries of bondage in Egypt, but also that 
among all the Gentiles there was a retrogression. This 
is particularly stated by the Apostle Paul in his letter 
to the Romans (1:21-28), where he points out that the 
degradation of the Gentile nations was not the result 
of their creation in a depraved condition, but resulted 
from their not choosing to retain the knowledge of 
God in their hearts— for which cause he gave them over, 
abandoned them to their own way, permitting them 
to hasten and to increase their degradation, so that to-day 
throughout the world there are some, indeed, 
sunken so low as to be only a few steps removed from 
the brute creation. 

A.— I thank you for this dissertation, but urge 
that you come directly to the point of my question now, 
and mention specifically the antagonism between the 
Bible and the Evolution theory. 

B.~ I will do so, and to begin with I call your attention 
to the Scriptural account of man's creation, as 
given in Genesis— that man was created, not as a microbe 
or protoplasm, nor one step removed from a 
monkey, but, as specifically stated,— "In the image of 
God created he him." Man was created a moral image 
of God (—not a physical image, because God is a spirit, 
while man is of another nature, human, fleshly, earthly). 
And this thought, of man's original perfection 
of being, is borne out by the context, which declares 
that God looked upon his creature with approval, seeing 
him to be "very good." It is borne out also by 
the general testimony of Scripture respecting God as a 
Master workman— "His work is perfect." (Deut. 32:4.) 
It is borne out by the statement of the Prophet, "Thou 
madest him [man, Adam] a little lower than the angels, 
thou crownedst him with glory and with honor 
[his moral likeness to his Creator]; thou didst set him 
over the works of thy hands,"— the beasts of the field, 
the fish of the sea and the fowl of heaven— "and didst 
make him ruler over them all"— giving to man the 
rulership, the dominion of the earth, with its lower 
orders of creation, in likeness of God's dominion over 
heavenly things. (Psa. 8:5,6.) It is borne out again 
by the statement of the Prophet, that God made man 
upright, but he sought out many inventions, and defiled 



himself.— Eccl. 7:29. 

Additional to all these evidences of man's condition, 
is the fact that he was placed on trial for eternal 
life. It is not supposable that an imbecile creature, 
one remove from a monkey, would be in a fit condition 
to be tried before the bar of Divine Justice for eternal 
life, with the assurance that he might live forever in 
the condition then enjoyed, provided he maintained it 
by obedience. Surely the fact of Adam's trial implies 
that his condition was then a good condition, that his 
abilities were then perfect abilities, and that his only 
lack was in experience, in the use of his good abilities 
and the knowledge which the use of those perfect abilities 
would bring. It would be thoroughly unreasonable, 
inconsistent with divine justice, and out of harmony 
with expression of the divine Word, to suppose 
the Lord would have given everlasting life to Adam, 
with the prospect of maintaining it forever, and with 
the risk of losing it forever, had he been but one remove 
from the brute creation, or had he been even as 
low as are the majority of mankind to-day. 

On the contrary, the facts that Adam is Scripturally 
termed a "son of God," and that he maintained 
that sonship and fellowship with God while in 
the Garden of Eden, prior to his transgression, and 
came under the penalty of death, with its concomitants, 

R2395 : page 350 

sickness and pain (the results of mental, moral and 
physical decay), assure us most unmistakably that the 
Almighty intended us to understand by this Genesis 
account of man's creation that man was created perfect, 
and that whatever has come upon the race since 
has been the result of transgressions against the divine 
commands— has been the penalty of sin. 

Furthermore, note the Scriptural consistency, for 
while the Apostle Peter tells us that "a day with the 
Lord is as a thousand years," Genesis tells us that the 
sentence upon Adam was that he should die "in the 
day" of his disobedience, and that he did die within the 
limits of that thousand-year day. Nevertheless, the 
record that the dying process in him lasted for nine 
hundred and thirty years fully corroborates and sustains 
the declaration that God's creation was perfect, and 
possess powers of vitality, mental and physical, which 
since have almost entirely disappeared— for the average 
of human life to-day does not exceed thirty-five years. 

This story of man's creation in the image of God, 
in sinlessness and perfection, the very reverse of the 
Evolution theory, is fully confirmed by all the testimony 

R2395 : page 351 

of the Old Testament. The Prophets pointed 

out the fallen condition of Israel and the world, and 



pointed forward to the coming of the Messiah as the 
only hope of relief and blessing. Our Lord himself 
was announced by his Forerunner, John the Baptist, 
as "The Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of 
the world." These declarations that there are sins of the 
world to be removed, and which would require the 
sacrificial death of Christ as the Lamb of God, a Messiah, 
a Deliverer, are in direct contradiction to the Evolution 
theory, which claims that man has been gradually 
and grandly climbing upward into the likeness of 
God. According to Evolution, there is no sin of the 
world, unless it be a sin to evolve, to progress, upward. 
According to Evolution also, the world needs 
no Redeemer, for as it could not be claimed to be a sin 
to progress upward to perfection, neither could it be 
claimed that man was a sinner while thus progressing 
upward, nor could it be claimed that Justice could require 
any redemption price for that which had not 
fallen from grace, but which was approaching more 
and more to the divine standard. 

At our Lord's first advent he found some Pharisees 
"who trusted in themselves that they were righteous;" 
and in reproving these he declared that he had not 
come to call the righteous, but sinners, to repentance: 
declaring also that those who feel themselves to be 
whole do not feel their need of a physician, but that 
he himself, nevertheless, is the Good Physician. The 
Evolution theory is in accord with the Pharisaical view 
of matters;— theorizing that it is progressing grandly 
upward it does not recognize the necessity for the great 
sin-offering which God has provided. 

Again, we remember that our Lord declared that 
he "came to seek and to save that which was lost." 
(Luke 19:10.) According to the Evolution theory 
nothing was ever lost, all that we have as a race is gain: 
according to this theory, therefore, our Redeemer's 
statement was worse than void of meaning— a falsehood. 
But from the Scriptural standpoint, as presented 
in Genesis, and confirmed by the Prophets and 
Apostles, the whole world was lost in father Adam; 
because when he came under the penalty of sin the impairment 
of his dying process extended to all his posterity 
as yet unborn,— according to the laws of his 
nature. From this standpoint our Lord's words are full 
of meaning. They mean that he came to recover Adam 
and all his race from the sentence of death, and to give 
to all an opportunity to attain eternal life through him. 

The Apostle Paul (Rom. 5:12-19) states this matter 
most forcefully. He places himself, as a teacher 
and expounder of the divine dealings with humanity, 
in absolute and direct opposition to the Evolution 
theory. He says: "By one man's disobedience sin 
entered into the world, and death by [as a result of] 
sin: and so death passed upon all men, in that all are sinners 
[inheritors of their father Adam's blemishes]." 
The significance of this clear statement is unmistakable. 



It tells us that there was no sin in the world 

prior to father Adam's transgression. It tells us that 

there was no death in our race until the divine sentence 

fell upon Adam as the penalty for his sin. It 

thus accords with Genesis, in showing us that father 

Adam in the image of God occupied an exalted position, 

and not a low and almost bestial condition, as 

the Evolution theory teaches. It teaches us that 

Adam fell from divine favor and lasting life (which 

the Apostle assures us was not through ignorance— 1 Tim. 2:14) 

into sin, alienation from God, and under 

the sentence of death, with its associated sickness, pain, 

decay and degradation: and hence that these evils are 

not our inheritance through poor workmanship on the 

part of the Creator, but are our inheritance by heredity, 

by reason of father Adam's transgression, disloyalty, 

disobedience to God. 

Nor does the Apostle leave the matter here, but 
pursuing the same thread of thought, he assures us 
that all hope of escape from this sentence of death, 
and this alienation from God, centers in Christ Jesus 
our Lord. He thus implies most distinctly that Evolution 
hopes are worse than useless, inasmuch as they 
would frustrate and make void the very faith in Christ 
and his redemptive work which is essential to the 
blessed condition of reconciliation with the Father. 

Notice now how the Apostle contrasts the first 
man, Adam, and his failure, and the blight which came 
through that failure upon all his posterity, with the 
faithfulness of "the man Christ Jesus" who bought us 
with his own precious blood, to release us from the 
Adamic penalty. He says, "As through one offence 
sentence came upon all men to condemnation [death]; 
so also through one righteous act, sentence came upon 
all men to justification of life. For as through the 
disobedience of one man the many were constituted sinners, 
even so through the obedience of the One [Jesus] 
the many will be constituted righteous,. ..that as 
sin reigned unto death, even so grace [favor] might 
reign unto eternal life, through righteousness, by Jesus 
Christ our Lord."— Rom. 5:18-21. 

In harmony with this same thought is the Apostle's 
expression in his letter to the Corinthians (1 Cor. 15:21,22), 
"Since through a man there is death, 
through a man also there is a resurrection of the dead; 
for as all in Adam die, even so all in Christ shall be 
made alive"— brought back from present dying, imperfect 
conditions to the perfection of life. 

Indeed, all the Scriptural statements— that "Christ 
died for our sins," that he "suffered, the just for the 
unjust, that he might bring us to God," that "God 
was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not 
imputing our trespasses unto us [but unto our substitute, 
our Redeemer]," that God "might be just, and 
yet be the justifier of them that believe in Jesus," that 
"he is the propitiation [satisfaction] for our sins, and 



not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world," and that "by his stripes we are healed"— all 
these and many other Scriptures of similar import, 
which will occur to your mind, most positively contradict 
the Evolution theory, and with equal positiveness 
uphold the Scriptural theory that man was originally 
created perfect, "upright," in God's image,— 
and that he fell from that exalted position into sin and 
degradation, mental and physical, from which he needs 
first to be ransomed with a corresponding price, and 
secondly to be saved or recovered to perfection of being 
and everlasting life. 

Have you ever read the Plan of the Ages— the first 
volume of the MILLENNIAL DAWN series? 

A.— I have not; altho I have in my library four 
volumes of the series which were presented to me by a 
dear Christian brother who seemed very solicitous that 
I should investigate their teachings. 

B.— Taking my own experience as a criterion, you 
have been missing a good thing. For while you might 
not at first or second reading agree with all of the 
author's presentations, it would be impossible for you 

R2395 : page 352 

to leave even the first volume without some increase 
of knowledge respecting the divine Word and character 
and plan of salvation. I assure you that the thoughts 
therein suggested have brought a great blessing to me, 
and a much greater reverence for the Bible than was 
before possible in my limited knowledge of it, and of 
the lengths and breadths, and heights and depths of 
the divine character and plan therein set forth. However 
little of it you may ultimately accept, I certainly 
urge upon you its careful investigation. 

The author begins with his subject at the very 
point to be desired by thinking minds: viz., an examination 
of the Scriptures themselves to see what proper 
claim they have as to credibility. In the light of the 
presentations therein made, I have a deeper love and 
reverence for the Bible as the Word of God than I 
ever before had, and was thoroughly forearmed against 
the form of modern infidelity known as "Higher Criticism." 
Otherwise the bold assertions of present-day 
scholarship, that Isaiah wrote nothing beyond the 
twenty-eighth chapter of the Bible-book which bears 
his name, and similar statements respecting other portions 
of the Word, might indeed have unsettled my 
confidence in its divine authorship and inspiration: but 
armed with the internal evidences of the truth of the 
Scriptures which MILLENNIAL DAWN presents, my 
faith can rest secure and unassailable. 

Now I can see that the claims of these worldly 
wise professors, Higher Critics,— that our Lord and 
the Apostles in their various quotations from the twenty-ninth 
chapter of Isaiah, and onward, erred in saying 



that they were written by Isaiah, whereas they were 

R2396 : page 352 

written by some other and unknown writer— these 

claims, so far from causing me now to lose confidence 

in the wisdom and inspiration of our Lord and the 

Apostles, and in general in the Bible, have quite a contrary 

effect: they cause me to utterly lose confidence 

in worldly wisdom, and the more firmly to rely on the 

wisdom which cometh from above, so that I am enabled 

to see in this very matter of "Higher Criticism" 

a fulfilment of Isaiah's prophecy, "The wisdom of their 

wise men shall perish."— Isa. 29:14. 

A.— I think myself that much of the boasted 
knowledge of self-styled higher critics is merely guesswork, 
and a desire to be highly esteemed amongst men 
for their erudition. Some of their startling claims furnish 
cheap advertising, and bring men into notoriety 
who would be little known in the world except for these 
extravagant and unsustained and frequently unsustainable 
pretentious claims,— assertions. 

B.— As we still have a little time before reaching 
your station, let me give you a little outline of the divine 
plan, as set forth in the book I mention— MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. As you are a Presbyterian I will first 
give you its presentations respecting the doctrine of Election, 
for I know that will be of special interest to you. 

A.— We Presbyterians are not preaching the doctrine 
of Election, nor holding it so stoutly as we used to do. 

B.~ Ah yes, I know— I know— not that you are 
disinclined to be elected, nor that you wish to drop that 
feature of it; but because the doctrine of an election 
implies the opposite doctrine of a non-elect class: and 
the theory that that elect class is a "little flock," composed 
only of the "saints," implies that the non-elect 
class is of terribly large proportions. The difficulty 
which confronts you is that neither your own hearts, 
nor the hearts of intelligent worldly people, can any 
longer countenance the thought that all the hundreds of 
millions of the non-elect were predestinated before their 
birth to an eternity of torment;— as the catechism puts it, 
"passed by" of the Lord, and not "elected to salvation." 

A.— Yes, there are difficulties, insurmountable 
difficulties there; and hence the matter is very rarely 
preached upon now. As you are probably aware, an 
effort was made to alter the statements of our Confession 
of Faith along these lines; but the majority did 
not favor a change, evidently fearing that any tampering 
might shake confidence in the Confession as a 
whole, and deprive the denomination of the prestige 
which attaches to others of its old, established and 
long revered dogmas. 

B.— Just so; and undoubtedly their course was 
worldlywise. But now, seeing these difficulties in the 
Calvinistic view of the doctrine of election, yet remembering 



that the Scriptures distinctly teach some kind of 
an election, you will be all the more interested in noticing 
what a beautiful doctrine it becomes under the light shed 
upon it by the book I mention-MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

It shows that there was an election during the 
Jewish age, by which that one nation, and it alone, 
was God's people, the recipient of his promises and 
providences, as says the Prophet Amos (3:2), "You 
only have I known [recognized] of all the families of 
the earth." The Apostle Paul also points this out, 
saying, "What advantage hath the Jew? Much every 
way, chiefly because to them were committed the oracles 
of God." (Rom. 3:1,2.) But the writer of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN points out that the Scriptures say 
nothing whatever respecting the damnation or eternal 
torment of the other non-elect nations outside of Israel. 
He points out, further, that there was a system of 
election in vogue to some extent before the Jewish age, 
viz., that Abraham was elected or chosen to be the 
father of the faithful; that his parents and relatives 
were not chosen, nor in any manner connected with 
him in his election; that even his friend and nephew, 
Lot, was debarred from any share in that election; 
that the elect line proceeded from Abraham, not to his 
firstborn son, Ishmael, but to his second son, Isaac, and 
that the same election proceeded through Isaac, not to 
his first-born son, Esau, but to his second-born, Jacob, 
surnamed Israel. The author of DAWN points out that 
the Scriptures say nothing whatever respecting a condemnation 
of Abraham's non-elect relatives and friends 
and children, but, on the contrary, mention some of 
them favorably, and promise them other blessings, outside 
the special line or purpose of the election. 

Our author proceeds to point out (and to cite 
abundant Scriptures in evidence) that the work of this 
Gospel age— the selection of the Gospel Church— is 
likewise in the nature of an election, in that God during 
this age is not attempting to bless the whole world, 
but merely certain portions of it,— not attempting to 
save the whole world, but merely to elect a Church, a 
"royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people," 
out of it. But he points out that no Scriptural statement 
either says or implies that all the remainder of 
mankind not thus elected during this Gospel age are to be 
damned and tormented forever, but quite to the contrary. 

A.— Some of those thoughts are decidedly good 
and helpful— but I am not prepared to endorse the 
thought that God has not been trying to save the world, 
during this Gospel age. 

B.— Yes, that thought strikes us peculiarly at first, 
because we have been inclined to decide for God what 
he is to do, and how and when he is to do it, instead 

R2396 : page 353 

of humbly admitting that no man, of his own wisdom, 



knows anything about the divine arrangements. Rather, 
we should humbly and teachably inquire at the 
divine oracle, respecting the divine program. 

The Lord declares through the Prophet, "My 
word that goeth forth out of my mouth shall not return 
unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, 
and shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it." (Isa. 55:11.) 
Since, therefore, "All his purposes shall be 
accomplished," and since we know it to be a fact that 
the Gospel has not in the past reached more than one-tenth 
of humanity, and even to-day reaches very few 
more than that proportion, it follows that if "All his 
purposes shall be accomplished," it cannot have been 
the divine purpose to have sent the Gospel message to 
every creature during this age,— thus far at least. 

A.— That is sound enough logic, and it is Scriptural, 
however it may conflict with our prejudices. But 
since the author you mention is such a stickler for the 
Scriptures, how does he account for the breadth of the 
Gospel commission, "Preach the Gospel to every creature," 
and for the Apostle's statement, "The Gospel 
which is preached to every creature under heaven?" 

B.— The answers are very satisfactory, I think 
you will admit: the author shows that as the Law was 
given to Israel alone, and not to the other nations, so 
the Gospel was preached "to the Jew first," and to 
the Jew only, up to the time that they rejected the 
Messiah and their national favor ended. This turning 
point is clearly marked in our Lord's words, "Now I 
say unto you, Your house is left unto you desolate." 
This statement was made just five days before his crucifixion, 
at which time his work took on its larger proportions; 
for our Lord Jesus died not only for Israel, 
—"to redeem those who were under the Law,"— but the 
value of his death extended beyond that people, as it 
is written, "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted 
death for every man." (Heb. 2:9.) And it was after 
he had thus "died for all" and had risen again, that he 
gave his disciples the broader commission for the Gospel, 
to which you have referred. Previously, when 
sending them out two and two to the cities of Israel, 
he said "Go not into the way of the Gentiles," and his 
declaration after his resurrection, viz., "Go ye into all 
the world and preach the Gospel," was meant to contradict 
their thought that the Gospel message was to 
be to the Jews only. He would have them understand 
that henceforth the message is for any member of the 
human family, because every member of it has been 
redeemed. Of similar import is the Apostle's statement, 
"This Gospel which is preached in all the world:" 
it is no longer a Gospel restricted to one nation of the 
world, but is open to any who have ears to hear and 
hearts to receive it— "even as many as the Lord your 
God shall call." 

A.— Even so, while accepting that as a satisfactory 
answer to my question, I cannot see that God is a 



"respecter of persons," and that there is any special 
election now in progress, even tho my church so teaches, 
and I have so confessed to believe. 

B.— Let us look at that point. I will voice the 
arguments of MILLENNIAL DAWN on this subject, and 
you shall tell me afterward whether or not they meet 
the question fully, broadly, satisfactorily. 

I call your attention to the fact that the Gospel 
light arose in Palestine, which lies at the juncture, we 
may say, of three continents— Europe, Asia and Africa. 
It would have been nearest to have sent the 
Gospel southward into Africa, to its benighted millions: 
but Africa still lies in darkness, touched with 
the light of truth only a little upon its northern borders. 
It would have been almost as near to have sent 
the Gospel light eastward to India's hundreds of millions, 
and into China with its hundreds of millions: 
but India and China have lain in darkness for eighteen 
centuries, except as little glimpses or flashes of the 
light of truth have reached them. Europe lay farther 
away, but to Europe, and through Europe to America, 
the Lord has been pleased to send the light of the Gospel, 
"A light to lighten the Gentiles." 

Nor are we to suppose that the coming of the Gospel 
light to these lands that have been so greatly blessed 
by it was a matter of chance or accident. Quite to the 
contrary, a few words recorded in the Acts of the Apostles (16:6,7) 
relating to the mission of the great 

Apostle to the Gentiles, St. Paul, show us unquestionably 
that the sending of the Gospel to Europe was of 
divine intention— predestination— choice or election. 
The narrative is that, while Paul and his company had 
purposed to go into Asia, the spirit suffered them not to 
do so, but providentially hindered their going; and while 
they were thus perplexed and seeking to know the 
mind of the Lord, the Apostle Paul had a dream in 
which he saw a man of Macedonia beckoning to him and 
saying, "Come over and help us." As a consequence 
of these divine providences, and gathering from them 
the Lord's will in the matter, the Apostle and his co-laborers 
at once proceeded to Macedonia, there beginning 
the preaching of the Gospel in Europe. When 
Paul returned to Palestine, and apparently with no 
thought of further prosecuting the work in Europe, 
divine providence permitted him to be arrested and sent 
a prisoner to Rome: and there the same divine providence 
held him a prisoner for a long time, but gave 
him sufficient liberty to preach the Gospel there for a 
number of years. It was from these providential lightings 
of the Gospel lamp in Europe that all the great 
blessings which have reached us proceeded. 

Now tell me, Do not these facts prove that divine 
providence has had much to do with the progress and 
direction of the lamp of truth?— Are they not a manifestation 
of divine election or selection? Mark you, I 
am following the hypothesis presented in MILLENNIAL 



DAWN, that the non-elect and non-enlightened are 
similarly and proportionately uncondemned. Nor am 
I claiming in this that God is a respecter of persons. 
It is quite another thing that God may have been, nay, 
evidently has been, a respecter of races, and has specially 
blessed and favored certain branches of the Aryan 
race in Europe and America. But the fact, that the 
white race has been more abundantly blessed with the 
light of the Gospel than others, is not to be understood 
to signify that when members of other races heard and 
appreciated the Gospel, they were repulsed or rejected 
by the Lord. This view is in full harmony with the 
suggestion that God is no respecter of persons, but that 
"In every land he that feareth God and worketh righteousness 
is accepted of him." In harmony with this, 
the author of MILLENNIAL DAWN holds that, while 
the elect Church will probably be composed chiefly of 
the highly favored white race, nevertheless, it will 
probably have in it representatives out of "every kindred, 
people and tongue." 

A.— The theory as you present it is certainly consistent 
at every point with the facts of history, and 
the statements of Scripture; and if our theological 

R2397 : page 354 

opinions have been at variance with these, it is high 
time for correction. 

B.— Let me interrupt myself to say that the author 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN, in harmony with your last expression, 
claims that his presentations are not the result 
of superior wisdom or ability on his part; but are 
discernible now because God's "due time" for their 
unfoldment to his people has come. He points out 
that we are now in "the Time of the End," spoken of 
in Daniel's prophecy, and evidenced by the running to 
and fro and general increase of knowledge. He holds 
that the unfolding of spiritual and Scriptural truths 
is also referred to in that prophecy, in the statement 
that "The wise shall understand." He is particular, 
moreover, to distinguish between the wisdom of 
this world (much of which is at this time to be proved 
foolishness) and the wisdom from above; and holds 
that the truly wise are those humble ones who are willing 
to be "taught of God" through the Scriptures. 

A.— Consistency certainly marks all the features 
of the theory you are presenting; and I am glad to see 
that the author of MILLENNIAL DAWN takes so humble 
a view of his own work, ascribing the merit and 
the wisdom of what he presents to the great fountain 
of wisdom, Jehovah himself; but proceed with the outline, 
please, for we are nearing my station. 

B.— Our author holds that the election of the 
Church, which is progressing during the present or 
Gospel age, is by the Heavenly Father, Jehovah, tho 
through his Son, our Lord Jesus. He quotes our 



Lord's statement, "No man can come unto me, except 

the Father which sent me draw him," and applies it 

and limits it to the present age, and to this selection 

or election of the Church,— variously called the Body 

of Christ, the Bride of Christ, the Royal Priesthood, 

etc. He then quotes the words of our Lord Jesus, "I, 

if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me" (John 12:32), 

and applies this to a future age— the Millennial 

age— in which Christ and the glorified Gospel 

Church (in the glory of the heavenly condition and 

power) shall both rule and bless the world of mankind, 

and bring back into harmony with God and to human 

perfection all who will then accept God's grace, eternal 

life under the conditions of the New Covenant. 

Thus seen, the election of the Church, so far from 

meaning a damnation of the non-elect, implies a future 

blessing for the world of mankind in general (the non-elect), 

in that a favorable opportunity for attaining eternal 

life will be granted to all. 

A.— But I see several objections. Let me put them 
to you. Wherein would be the consistency of first 
making an election from amongst the world, and subsequently 
dealing with all the remainder in exactly the same manner? 

B.--I see your difficulty, which arises from the 
fact that I am endeavoring to state the great divine 
plan very briefly, whereas really what I am telling you 
fills four volumes. To answer your objection: Our 
author shows most clearly, fortifying every point with 
Scriptural texts and citation, that the elect Gospel 
Church is called to a "heavenly calling," to a change 
of nature,— from human nature, a little lower than the 
angels in its perfection, to be partakers of the divine 
nature, far above angels, principalities and powers. 
But very different from this will be the blessing which 
God will offer to mankind in general, through the 
elect Church, during the Millennial age, viz., an offer 
of restitution. One of his proof texts on this subject 
I remember is Acts 3: 19-23. Here the Apostle Peter, 
speaking on the day of Pentecost, under inspiration, 
refers to the second coming of Christ, and the blessings 
which then shall come to the world in general. He 
refers to the complete Christ (Jesus the Head and 
the Church his Body) as the antitype of Moses, the 
Lawgiver, declaring that this Great Lawgiver then 
raised up in power and authority over the whole world 
shall bless those who will hear and obey him, and shall 
destroy in the second death all who will not then obey 
him. And the Apostle speaks of this period of the reign 
of the glorified Christ (Head and Body) as "the times 
of restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began." 

Restitution is the blessing which God has in store 
for mankind in general,— for all who shall gladly accept 
this blessing at the hands of the Redeemer when 
the due time shall come for it to be offered to them. 
And by accepting it, we mean accepting the then to 



be proffered blessing of restitution upon the terms or 

conditions of obedience which will accompany the offer. 

The word restitution is simple enough and easily understood: 

it signifies neither more nor less than a return 

to primeval conditions. Those who shall ultimately receive 

at the Lord's hands this blessing of restitution to 

the full, will have gotten fully back into the divine 

favor, and fully free from all the blemishes and imperfections 

of humanity which have tainted the entire 

race to putrefaction. It will mean, therefore, not only 

physical health, strength and perfection, but also mental 

and moral ability restored. In a word, it will mean 

a return to that moral image and likeness of God in 

which Father Adam was created, and from which he 

fell, and we by him under the law of heredity. 

The author claims that as God had already created 
various orders of spirit beings before creating man, 
he determined that as a further exercise of his creative 
power, he would make an earthly creature in his own 
likeness, and put him in possession of the earth for 
his home, adapting him constitutionally to it, and providing 
the earth with various orders of animals, also 
adapted to it, and placing man as lord of earth in 
charge, subject, however, to Jehovah as his Overlord. 
He points out that the intrusion of sin was not unforeseen 
by divine wisdom, and that its permission for six 
thousand years has not in any degree altered the original 
divine purpose; and that, consequently, when the time 
shall come, there shall be no more dying, no more sighing, 
no more crying, because the former things will 
have passed away (Rev. 21:4); the condition of things 
which will be permitted to remain, and that to all eternity, 
will be— this earth, a Paradise, fully peopled with 
a human race, who, through knowledge and experience 
shall have learned to know their Lord and Creator, 
and to have absolute confidence in his wisdom, 
his love, his justice and his power, having learned that 
his ways are ways of pleasantness, and all his paths are 
peace;— a race which shall have passed through experiences 
and tests which will have destroyed from 
amongst it all who in any degree are in sympathy with 
unrighteousness; leaving only those who shall, of their 
own free will, delight to do the will of the Father who 
is in heaven. 

He points out that in the divine plan God, foreseeing 
and not preventing Adam's disobedience, and thus the 
entrance of sin and death into the world, decided to utilize 
that evil for the special trial, testing, proving, of an 
elect Church, whose members, by a change of nature, 

R2397 : page 355 

will pass from being men, a little lower than the angels, 
to be new creatures of the divine nature, far above 

R2398 : page 355 



angels in glory and power. Calling these to so very 

high exaltation, even his own divine nature, "to glory, 

honor and immortality," it is appropriate that they 

shall first be subjected to crucial tests, as to obedience 

to the Father, and be perfected for that new nature 

through sufferings and disciplines, otherwise described 

as presenting their bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable 

to God through Christ and the merit of his 

sacrifice. It is for this reason that the Gospel Church 

is called during the present age, while sin abounds and 

the prince of this world, Satan, is permitted to have 

much power through those who possess his spirit. 

Those who would make their calling and election sure 

to a place in this Heavenly Kingdom, as heirs of God 

and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord, are required 

to show their fidelity, their love, by such zeal 

for God and for righteousness during the present time, 

when sin prevails, as will surely imply to them self-sacrifice 

—the sacrifice of human interests. It is this 

class, now being called, that is required to walk in the 

"narrow way." The way is narrow, because of the 

prevalence and power of sin in the world: and this is 

permitted of God in order to thus test the elect Church 

"whose names are written in heaven— regardless of 

earthly denominational lines and systems. 

On the contrary, as our author points out, the 
Scriptures everywhere indicate that the Millennial age, 
in which the world will have blessings from him, will 
be a period of blessing, of refreshment, of restitution, 
when "the Sun of Righteousness shall arise with healing 
in his beams," and "all the knowledge of the Lord 
shall fill the whole earth as the waters cover the great 
deep;" because "all shall know him, from the least unto 
the greatest." 

We get, in the words of the Psalmist, the strong 
contrast distinguishing between the present age when 
evil holds sway, and the coming age, when the Lord 
our righteousness shall assume control of the world, 
establishing his Church with himself in glory as the 
Kingdom of God; comparing the Gospel age to a night, 
to be followed by a morning of light and blessing, he 
says, "Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh 
in the morning." (Psa. 30:5.) Again, the Scriptures 
represent that the Millennial age will be introduced 
by the binding of all evil influences represented 
by Satan, that the world may no longer be deluded, 
deceived, misguided by Satan and his servants, willing 
or ignorant.— See Rev. 20:1-3. 

A.— Your presentations have given me considerable 
to think about, dear brother, and have answered 
several of my objections. And this thought of restitution 
being the Lord's promise for the obedient of the 
world of mankind, which Peter declares is more or less 
the theme of all the holy prophets since the world began, 
certainly deals a death-blow to my Evolution theory: 



for nothing can be plainer than the inference that 
the restitution to be inaugurated at the second coming 
of Christ is in the nature of a blessing to mankind, a 
great blessing, whereas, if the Evolution theory be in 
any sense of the word true, restitution would be the 
worst thing that could possibly happen to poor humanity. 
If our race began life as a protoplasm, or even as 
one step removed from monkeys, "restitution" would 
signify a loss of all that Evolution claims has been 
gained in human development: it would mean his return 
to bestial conditions— an injury, an evil, a curse. 

I see clearly, as I never saw before, that we must 
decide between this human Evolution theory, and the 
teachings of the divine Word. And as one result of 
our conversation I feel my old love and reverence for 
the Bible springing up again— indeed more than I ever 
had, because I am seeing new beauties, yea, grandeurs 
in it, of which I had never dreamed. I now begin to 
appreciate the Apostle's expression respecting the 
lengths and the breadths, the heights and the depths of 
the love of God, which passeth all human understanding. 

B.— I am glad to hear you thus express yourself; 
and glad to tell you that you but echo the sentiments 
of my own heart and mind: and I urge that you begin 
at once, not merely a reading, but a systematic study, 
of these books which you say you have in your library. 
But before we part let me mention another point of 
their teaching, viz., that the seed of Abraham meant 
the larger Christ,— not Christ Jesus our Lord merely 
(altho all the merit of salvation is fully accorded to 
him, and his sacrifice), but also his redeemed, called, 
chosen and faithful followers of this Gospel age are 
members of this Seed of Abraham. This is supported 
by Gal. 3:16,29. The latter verse declares that, since 
we belong to Christ (as the bride belongs to the bridegroom; 
or, as the body belongs to the head of the body 
by which it is directed and represented), we are thus 
and therefore members of this promised Seed of Abraham, 
and heirs of the promise made to that Seed. 

That promise, you will remember, reads, "In thy 
seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 
There can be no question that the promise has never 
yet been fulfilled, and that it never can be fulfilled except 
through such a resurrection and restitution process 
as our author points out;— for all the families of 
the earth include not only the living families, but all 
who have ever lived, from Abraham's day to the present 
time, the vast majority of whom have gone down 
into the great prison-house of death, without the slightest 
blessing or enlightenment; and without any hope 
except as it is contained in this promise— that in due 
time the whole world of mankind, justly brought back 
from under the death penalty, shall be blessed with an 
opportunity of return to divine favor and the attainment 
of everlasting life, by God's grace, operating 
through the elect Church, Head and Body .—Rom. 11:31. 



A.— This is certainly a grand hope for the world, 
as well as a glorious prospect for the elect Church. How 
strange it seems that Bible students for so long have 
overlooked these gloriously bejeweled promises! 

B.— "In due time" is the secret which explains the 
entire matter. We are to remember, too, brother, that 
the six thousand years of earth's experiences with evil 
seem long to us because of the brevity of our lives and 
present conditions: from God's standpoint, as the Apostle 
points out, a thousand years are but as yesterday, 
or even as a watch in the night, after it is past. The 
night of sin has only had six watches after this measurement, 
and the morning of everlasting righteousness 
and blessing is just about to dawn. 

A.— Another question: How about the Day of 
Judgment? What and when will that be? 

B.— Our author shows conclusively from the 
Scriptures that it is not one of our days of twenty-four 
hours, but "a day with the Lord"— a thousand years: 
that it will be the thousand years of Christ's reign,— 
the Millennium. During that Day of Judgment the 
world will be on trial or on judgment for eternal life, 
as we, the called out ones of this Gospel age, are now 

R2398 : page 356 

on judgment or on trial; only that our trial is, as already 
pointed out, severer, along a narrow "way." 
The Apostle distinctly tells us that we, the Church, 
shall not come into condemnation (trial or judgment) 
with the world in the next age, but pass now from 
death to life, before the world's day of judgment begins. 
(John 5:24; 1 Cor. 11:32.) He also declared-"God hath 
appointed a [future] day, in the which he will judge 
[grant trial to] the world, in righteousness"— by Christ. 
And he distinctly tells us that when the world of mankind 
will be on trial (during the Millennial age), the 
overcoming elect Church then in glory, partakers of 
the divine nature, glory, honor and immortality, will 
be the judges of the world, associated with their Lord. 
He says,— "Know ye not that the saints shall judge 
the world?"— 1 Cor. 6:2. 

A.— And what about the finally impenitent at the 
close of the Millennial age, and those who in this age 
sin against the holy spirit? What will be their doom? 

B.— God's law changes not. As it was expressed 
to Adam, and executed against him, so it still stands 
the same to-day— "The wages of sin is death." (Rom. 6:23.) 
The prophet, speaking of the Millennial age, 
declares that then none shall die for inherited sins, as 
all die now, but that it will be an individual trial, with 
an individual penalty against all who shall then sin 
wilfully. His declaration is, "The soul that sinneth, 
it shall die." He reminds us of the proverb now in 
general application, viz., "The fathers ate a sour grape 
[sin], and the children's teeth are set on edge [all of 



Adam's posterity are fallen, depraved, dying, as a result 

of his transgression];" but assures us that this 

shall not be true in the next age. None will die except 

for his own personal wilful sin. God willeth not 

the death of him that dieth, but would that all should 

turn unto him and live.— Ezek. 18:23,32; 2 Pet. 3:9. 

The Apostle, speaking of wilful sinners, declares 
that they "shall be punished with everlasting destruction 
from the presence of the Lord and from the glory 
of his power." Whoever will not have God's gift of 
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord, cannot have 
life at all, for "All the wicked will God destroy."— 
Psa. 145:20. 

A.— What then about hell, purgatory, etc., so 
generally believed throughout Christendom? 

B.— The general view is a great and serious error 
which has done much to hinder many of earth's best 
minds from careful consideration of the Word of God; 
because they believed the Bible to teach the God-dishonoring 
doctrine that the majority of his creatures, 
with his foreknowledge, consent and predetermination, 
would be eternally tormented. The simple teaching 
of the Scripture is terrible enough, without depraved 
human embellishments of flame and agony indescribable. 
The great hell to which the entire human family 
was consigned because of sin is the great prison-house 

R2399 : page 356 

of death,— the tomb. The wages of sin is death; 

and there would have been no resurrection, no future 

life, except for our Lord's great sacrifice on our behalf. 

Christ ransomed or bought us with his own life— he 

died for our sins and thus secured for man legal privilege 

to be resurrected, restored. Thus it is written, 

"I will ransom them from the grave."— Hosea 13:14. 

You are probably aware that the word translated 
"hell" in our Old Testament Scriptures is in Hebrew 
sheol, and signified the death state, and never in any 
sense or use of the word a place or condition of torture. 
You probably have noticed also that the same Hebrew 
word has been translated still more frequently "grave" 
and "pit,"— much nearer its correct signification in 
our language. You have also noticed that the word 
hades of the New Testament Greek is the exact equivalent 
of the Hebrew word sheol, and is always used to 
translate it wherever a passage is quoted in the New 
Testament. Hades, therefore, signifies the same as 
sheol, viz., the tomb or the death state. In the New 
Testament the word tartarus occurs once, descriptive 
of the place or condition in which the fallen angels are 
reserved, waiting for their trial in the Millennial age 
(for the glorified Church is to grant them also a trial 
forlife).-lCor. 6:3. 

The only other Greek word of the New Testament, 
translated "hell," is the word gehenna, which, as all 



scholars recognize, is applied in our Lord's parables to 
the Valley of Hinnom, outside the city of Jerusalem, 
where the offal of the city was destroyed. It was used 
as a symbol of the Second Death, in which all found 
unworthy of life shall be destroyed from amongst men 
as offal. But I will take pleasure in sending to you 
gratis a little tract, bearing upon this subject, entitled, 
Do the Scriptures Teach that Eternal Torment is the 
Wages of Sin? It points out various misconceptions 
and misinterpretations of our Lord's parables, and of 
the Book of Revelation, in which alone anything is 
found which has even a semblance of teaching eternal 
torment. The punishment of sin is death, and it will 
be an everlasting punishment in that there will be no 
resurrection from the Second Death. 

A.— But will there be no future retribution of any 
sort for evil deeds, etc., of the present life? 

B.— Oh, decidedly yes! Future retribution is distinctly 
taught in the Scriptures, but no punishment 
that will be hopeless except the punishment of deliberate, 
wilful sin, the Second Death. All other punishment 
will be reformatory in its character and tendency. 

The Roman Catholic doctrine of purgatory is evidently 
a corruption or perversion of the Scriptural 
teaching respecting a future retribution during the Millennial 
age, which will be not merely a time of blessing, 
but also a time of retribution. All wilful sins 
against light and much knowledge will receive stripes 
in proportion to their wilfulness, and the light and 
knowledge sinned against. Every such transgression 
undermines character and debases the individual, and 
in the Millennial age each will come forth from the 
tomb in the moral condition in which he entered: hence 
he will have that much more of a journey before him 
as he shall attempt to "go up" on the highway of holiness 
—to return into full harmony with God. And his 
corrections in righteousness, his chastisements, his 
stripes, will be proportionately more than those who 
now, equally vile, were ignorant of the will of God, 
and hence did not violate knowingly nor undermine 
their consciences and characters. 

A.— Grand! Sublimely grand! Reasonable, just, 
good, loving!— yet just what we should expect of him 
who declares, "My thoughts are not as your thoughts, 
nor my ways as your ways, saith the Lord, for as the 
heavens are higher than the earth, so are my thoughts 
higher than your thoughts, and my ways higher than 
your ways." Thank God that I have met you, dear 
brother, and that you so kindly, yet pointedly and 
forcefully have brought to my attention the fact that 
I was on the wrong track, and was fast losing whatever 
portion I ever had of the Gospel of the cross of 
Christ, and was laying hold upon a false gospel of 

R2399 : page 357 



Evolution, which is not another gospel, but merely a 
theory, a human speculation, and as I now see it, radically 
in opposition to the divine revelation. This is 
my station. Good bye! I must preach this fuller Gospel. 

B.— Good bye! I am glad to hear you say that you 
will preach the true Gospel, of which the Apostle Paul 
said that he was not ashamed. (Rom. 1:16.) And, my 
brother, let me assure you that if you fulfil this resolve 
it will doubtless mean that you are thus making your 
calling and election sure to a place in the elect Church. 

A.— How so? Is the Kingdom the reward of preaching? 

B.— Not exactly; the Kingdom is the reward of 
faithfulness to the Lord through evil and through good 
report— the reward of becoming dead with him to the 
world— the reward of suffering for righteousness' sake 
—the reward of laying down our lives for the brethren. 
All the brethren are preachers— declarers of the whole 
counsel of God to the extent that they have learned it 
and have ability and opportunities for presenting it to 
others. This is their duty as well as their joyful privilege 
now, as it will be, under more favorable conditions 
in the next age— telling the whole world of the privilege 
of reconciliation to God, through the blood of the cross. 

But what I meant in your case is this: and I mention 
it to forearm you, and to strengthen you when 
the trial time shall come. While your heart is burning 
with the love of the Lord and the grandeur of his 
plan of salvation, you fondly hope that your brethren 
in the ministry, and Christian people everywhere, will 
receive the message of divine love which unlocks the 
Word of God, and is now "meat in due season:" you 
even anticipate that they will receive it with joy and 
gladness. But you are mistaken, dear brother. Only 
comparatively few have ears to hear the truth, or eyes 
to discern the real beauties of the exceeding great and 
precious promises of the Scriptures. 

To your surprise, they will not only reject these 
"good tidings of great joy which shall be to all people," 
as was announced at our Savior's birth, and prefer 
the horrible inconsistencies received through tradition 
of the fathers, and utterly antagonistic to every 
proper idea of justice and love and goodness,— but 
more than this, so blinded are they by prejudice that 
they will hate you, just as the Jews hated our Lord 
and the Apostles in the end of their age, because they 
announced the truths of the Gospel then being ushered 
in. Remember our Lord's words, "Marvel not 
if the world hate you. Ye know that it hated me before 
it hated you." "Whosoever shall live godly in 
this present time shall suffer persecution." 

The Master of our house was called Beelzebub, 
and we must not hope to be treated more kindly. Remember, 
too, that it was the nominal professors of the 
Jewish Church that opposed the Gospel, and that parallel 
requires that it should be the nominal professors 
of the Gospel Church that will oppose the Gospel of 



the Millennial Kingdom. But, dear brother, be faithful 
to the Lord and to his truth and he will be faithful 
to you, and eventually say, "Well done, good and 
faithful servant, enter thou into the joys of thy Lord." 
Remember, too, if you want further reading matter 
along these lines, and tracts for distribution, to address 
the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, at 
Allegheny, Pa. Good bye! 



LATEST VIEWS OF EVOLUTIONISTS. --Prof. Japp, 
a distinguished biologist, has expressed as his latest 
conclusion that the decided difference between organic 
and inorganic molecules precludes the possibility of 
the spontaneous evolution of life. 

Herbert Spencer, in Nature (Oct. 20th), discussing 
the same question, declares as his latest opinion 
that "Life is incomprehensible." 



R2400 : page 357 

FIGHTING AGAINST GOD. 

-DEC. 11. -JER. 36:20-32.- 

"The word of our God shall stand forever."— Isa. 40:8. 

JEREMIAH prophesied in the days of Josiah and 

of his four successors, Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, 

Jehoiachin and Zedekiah. He was of about the same 

age as Josiah, and seems not to have been seriously ill-treated 

by that reformer: altho, as noted in our last lesson, 

he was passed by when the king sought heavenly 

counsel respecting the Book of the Law and the turning 

away of the penalties for sin therein recorded. 

Jeremiah's position was a peculiarly trying one, for 
altho his prophesying evidently had a marked effect and 
greatly influenced the king and the princes and the 
people in cleansing the land of its idolatry and in reestablishing 
the worship of Jehovah, yet he was not permitted 
to compliment the people on these measurable 
reforms, and to promise them a return of divine favor, 
as did the false prophets of that time, and was considered 
unpatriotic. On the contrary, under the Lord's 
inspiration, he kept pointing out to Israel the flagrant 
sins of the past, and their natural tendency to leave the 
Lord and to follow other gods in idolatry. Under various 
pictures he represents Israel as wholly indifferent 
to the Lord's goodness of the past, wholly negligent of 
the covenant relationship entered into with him as a 
nation, except when they got into adversity, when their 
repentance would be but for a short time, and only from 
the selfish motive of desire to escape the troubles which 



their own course had brought upon them. 

The Lord's messages, at the mouth of Jeremiah, 
practically held out no hope for a permanent return of 
divine favor in the near future; but on the contrary predicted 
that Judah would be carried away captive as Israel 
(the ten tribes), her sister, had been. And as tho 
emphasizing this thought, the Lord declared to Jeremiah, 
"Tho Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my 
mind could not be [changed] toward this people: cast 
them out of my sight."— J er. 15:1-7. 

Thus Jeremiah was what would be esteemed a 
prophet of evil— a pessimist. It is not surprising, therefore, 
that in his obedience to the Lord, in his faithfulness 
in speaking forth the word of the Lord, he became greatly 
disesteemed of his fellow countrymen, who doubtless 
would have honored him highly, had he prophesied 
unto them smooth things, promises of coming blessings 
and greatness as a nation. Thus we see that Jeremiah 
had not only the opposition of the idolatrously disposed 
people of the kingdom, but the disfavor also of the reformers 
of his day, who thought indeed that they were 
doing a grand work, and should be complimented thereon, 
and should have messages of divine favor. 

We cannot avoid noting the remarkable similarity 

R2400 : page 358 

of Jeremiah's position to that of the Lord's people to-day, 
who are enlightened with the present truth, and 
who, as the messengers of God, declare this truth. 
Similarly these note with pleasure the fact that there are 
many great reforms in progress at the present time, in 
Christendom. Nevertheless, they are obliged to speak 
from the divine standpoint, "He that hath my word let 
him speak my word." (Jer. 23:28.) And in thus speaking 
the word of the Lord they oppose and contradict 
the many fanciful dreams of present day reformers who 
are vainly hoping that as a result of civilization and 
through human efforts, and especially those of their 
party, all the promised blessings are about to flow to 
the world of mankind, and thus by human efforts establish 
righteousness in the earth, and bless all the heathen. 

The Lord's faithful mouthpieces of to-day, Jeremiah-like, 
are obliged to contradict these fanciful dreams, 
and to point out that they are unreasonable as well as 
unscriptural— that much of the present-day progress, 
civilization, benevolence and loving-kindness of Christendom 
is only an outward veneer, a drawing near to 
the Lord with the lips, and in some of the outward 
forms of conduct, while the hearts of Christendom are 
far from him, and far from the law of the New Covenant 
—perfect love toward God and toward the neighbor. 

The Jeremiah class of to-day is obliged to point out 
that all the various efforts being put forth for the conversion 
of the world will never bring the desired result, 
"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is 



done in heaven;" but that on the contrary the increase 
of the earth's population is far more than keeping pace 
with the increase of even nominal Christian Church 
membership, so that, as someone has reckoned recently 
(basing the calculation upon the various censuses from 
1833 to the present time), at the present rate of increase 
of the non-Christian world over the professedly Christian 
world, Christianity would entirely disappear from 
the earth within seven hundred years. The estimate 
shows a loss of about one per cent, every ten years. 

And as Jeremiah was, in faithfulness to the Lord, 
bound to proclaim the coming overthrow of the kingdom, 
so the Lord's people of the present time who have 
his word of present truth, cannot disguise or withhold 
the fact that a great time of trouble is approaching— is 
nigh, even at the door— and that it will mean the complete 
obliteration of the present order of things in anarchy. 
On this account we are esteemed by many to be 
pessimists, and prophesiers of evil things only; our opponents, 
in their bitterness, entirely overlooking and 
ignoring the fact that we present at the same time and 
from the same Word of the Lord the most glorious optimism 
conceivable— and show most clearly that the 
approaching time is merely the precursor of the great 
blessing which God has promised shall come to all the 
families of the earth, not through the imperfect powers 
of fallen men, but through the perfect powers of our 
glorious Lord and his glorified Church, his Bride, who 
will then be with him, his joint-heir in the Kingdom. 

The method by which the Lord communicated his 
message to and through Jeremiah and the other Old 
Testament prophets is not distinctly set forth in the 
Scriptures; except that the Apostle Peter declares that 
they "spoke and wrote as they were moved by the holy 
spirit." Many Bible students overlook this fact, and 
hence attempt to explain the peculiar predictions, etc., 
of the prophets, as tho they were their own thoughts, 
the results of their own reasonings, expressions of their 
own views, or opinions. Quite to the contrary, they 
were God's views, God's expressions, and God's illustrations; 
and the prophets merely did, spoke and wrote 
what the Lord directed. The only wilfulness of the 
prophets, as we may understand it, was that they willingly 
gave themselves up to the Lord, thus to be his 
mouthpieces: the Lord would not take as his mouthpiece 
and prophet an unwilling, inharmonious person. 

To our understanding, the Lord spoke to these 
prophets of olden time much after the manner in which 
the evil spirits now speak to spiritualist mediums— 
"clairaudiently." In other words, we believe that the 
fallen angels, personating the dead, make use of certain 
channels of human nature, which in time past God 
made use of in communicating the truth to his prophets.* 
As a guard upon this point, however, let us remember 
that God no longer speaks to his people in this way, 
but has closed the canon of his revelation by speaking 



"unto us through his Son" and his specially commissioned 
and empowered apostles.— Heb. 1:1,2. 

Our present lesson is located in the days of King 
Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah. Jeremiah had been restrained 
of the liberty which he possessed during the 
lifetime of King Josiah, the reformer, and altho not imprisoned 
was apparently forbidden to address the people 
in public. He therefore adopted (doubtless at the divine 
instance) the method of having a scribe take down 
his prophecy in writing, and Baruch was the one found 
worthy of this service, altho he well knew that it meant 
the loss of the king's favor and the putting of himself 
on the unpopular side of an unpopular matter. After 
Baruch had written the prophecy respecting Jerusalem, 
declaring its utter overthrow at the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, 
etc., he (as the representative of Jeremiah, who 
was not permitted to teach) entered into the court of the 
Temple and read the prophecy in the hearing of all the 
people, who came there to worship. Some heard with 
interest and astonishment, and as a result the prophecy 
was brought to the attention of the king, peradventure 
he, as the representative of the people, might take some 
steps toward repentance, which might save the people 
from some of the disaster, even tho as a whole it might 
not be prevented. When the king heard respecting the 
matter he was curious to hear it also, but he became so 
incensed and indignant at what he considered the extreme 
improbability of the prophecy that, taking the 
scribe's knife, he cut the manuscript into small pieces 
and burned it in the fire before him. 

Jeremiah's God-directed course may serve as a lesson 
to God's people of to-day, who have "present truth" 
to present. Their message is to be delivered, and if they 
are hindered or restrained or forbidden to speak it in the 
temple (in the nominal churches), they should adopt 
some other method of presenting their message to the 
attention of those who are seeking to worship the Lord. 
They may do this either by the written or the printed 
message. As a result, the right ones will hear, and yet 
when the knowledge of the present condition is brought 
to the attention of those in power, they will be similarly 
disrespectful to the message, and skeptical respecting 
its divine authority. They may even attempt to destroy 
the printed page, or hinder its circulation, but the attempt 
will be futile, as it was in the case under consideration. 

Amongst those who were present at the destruction 
of the Lord's message by the king, three only offered 
any protest, and they manifested no indignation, no 



*See What Say the Scriptures About Spiritualism?— 10c, this office. 
R2401 : page 358 
sorrow, but merely advised in a worldly-wise way that 



the king be not too rash. So there are to-day those who 

R2401 : page 359 

have some interest in present truth, some knowledge respecting 

it, and who, nevertheless, for fear of their influence 

in worldly-church and political circles would do 

no more than advise a more liberal course. Meantime, 

realizing the king's attitude of heart and opposition to 

the message, Jeremiah and Baruch fled and hid themselves, 

or, as expressed in the lesson, "The Lord hid 

them"— prevented their royal enemy from finding them. 

We shall not be greatly surprised if in the not very distant 

future not only the message of present truth will be considerably 

in disrepute before those in high positions, but 

also its servants and promulgators: these also may need 

to hide from injustice, but the Lord is able to shield them. 

The king may have thought that he had utterly 
wiped out the Lord's message and annulled it when he 
burned the roll, but the result was quite to the contrary. 
At the Lord's instance Jeremiah prepared another manuscript 
containing the same prophecy, and with additional 
matter, and the king brought upon himself additional 
trouble, as a punishment for his contumacy. 

It is still possible to endeavor to destroy God's 
Word, tho all such efforts will fail: the Word of God 
will eventually triumph. It may be attempted variously: 

(1) By rejecting the Word of God, the Bible— perverting 
its statements and ridiculing them. 

(2) By speaking of its truths irreverently and connecting 
them with funny stories, and thus vitiating its 
influence upon speaker and hearers. 

(3) By neglecting it, leaving it unread, unstudied. 

(4) By forbidding people to read the Bible, or even 
by limiting or hindering Scriptural investigation. 

(5) By persecuting those who preach and teach it 
conscientiously because their interpretations are contrary. 

(6) By misrepresenting the Word of God, substituting 
for its teachings the traditions of men— hymnbook 

and creed theology, misrepresenting it to be Bible 
theology— and thus misrepresenting God's character and 
plan, while professedly serving him, honoring his Word. 

(7) By skipping over and ignoring certain teachings 
of the Scriptures, because they do not harmonize with 
preconceived opinions and preferences, as on election, 
free grace, the Second Death, etc., etc. 

All of these are modern methods of fighting against God, 
sure to bring punishments— darkness, divine disfavor. 



R2401 : page 359 

THE HOLY LAND DESOLATED. 
-DEC. 18.-JER. 52:1-11.- 



"Ye shall seek me and find me, when ye shall 
search for me with all your hearts."— Jer. 29:13. 

MORE than a thousand years had elapsed from 

the time God led Israel out of Egypt to be 

his covenanted people, and during that entire period 

they had been rebellious. While manifesting toward 

them his favor, it had been accompanied with chastisements, 

defeats in battle, captivity to surrounding nations, 

pestilence and drouth, intermingled. God had 

faithfully kept his part of the covenant during all that 

time, chastising them for unfaithfulness, nevertheless 

in great mercy hearkening to their repentance and promise 

of reform, and delivering them, and blessing them. 

Now the time had come to give them a more severe lesson 

than they had ever previously had, and to take 

away their national independence completely. 

The Lord's determination, as expressed through 
the Prophet Jeremiah, was that he would deliver them 
into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, and that the land 
should lie desolate for seventy years, and that their 
King Zedekiah should be the last one who would sit 
upon the typical throne of the Lord. The prophecy 
concerning these matters was most explicit, declaring, 
"Thou profane and wicked prince of Israel, whose day 
is come when iniquity shall have an end, thus saith the 
Lord God, Remove the diadem, and take off the crown: 
this shall not be the same: exalt him that is low [humble] 
and abase him that is high [proud]. I will overturn, 
overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more, 
until he come whose right it is; and I will give it him." 
-Ezek. 21:25. 

The Lord dealt with Israel tenderly, carefully, giving 
them every opportunity to learn the needed lessons: 
(1) In the separation of the kingdom into two parts, 
and the object lesson furnished to Judah (the loyal remnant) 
to notice the works of idolatry in Ephraim (the 
disloyal ten-tribe kingdom). To a certain extent this 
for a time was beneficial to Judah. (2) When they 
witnessed the captivity and dispersion of the ten-tribe 
kingdom because of disloyalty to Jehovah, the lesson 
should have been deeply impressed. 

Judah represented those Israelites who were faithful 
to the Lord, those who trusted in the promises, all 
of which centered in Judah: and, as we have seen, into 
their territory many of the faithful of the ten tribes 
removed. Yet with all these lessons, and with the instructions 
of the prophets, the history of the nation was 
one of unfaithfulness to their great King, Jehovah. Now 
the time for the change which God saw best to bring 
upon them had come, and nothing could avert it, as we 
saw in the last lesson. Nevertheless, they were given a 
hope that at the end of a certain period of seventy years' 
chastisement the Lord would graciously bring back those 
who reverenced him. And it is worthy of note that 



only those who had respect unto the Lord and to the 

promises made to their fathers would find any inducement 

to return; for the Land of Promise meanwhile had 

become a veritable wilderness, while seventy years residence 

in a new land would root and attach to it all who 

had not considerable faith in God's promises. And altho 

the edict of Cyrus gave permission to all of the multitudes 

of the entire twelve tribes then in captivity in 

his dominion to return to Palestine, less than fifty-five 

thousand persons availed themselves of it and returned. 

The others were faithless, better pleased to remain in 

Babylon. The whole number of the children of Israel 

at that time must have been at least two millions "scattered 

abroad." 

Thus did the Lord sift out from that nation all except 
the more faithful families; to give them a better 
opportunity of profiting by his instructions and disciplines, 
and to the intent that, if possible, a sufficient 
number of that people should be brought to a condition 
of heart-readiness to receive Messiah at his first advent, 
and to be received by him as his joint-heirs, his elect 
Bride. God's dealings with that nation did develop, 
as we know, a considerable number who received the 
Lord, and to whom he gave liberty to become "sons" 
and of the Kingdom class. (John 1:12.) Nevertheless, 
these were but a "remnant" selected out of that 
nation, after it had been sifted, as we have seen, several 
times. And these, fortunately for us Gentiles, were not 
enough to complete the elect number, and hence the call to 
joint-heirship with Christ has been extended also to us. 

R2401 : page 360 

By Israel's failure to develop a sufficient number to 
complete the elect Body of Christ, this great privilege 
and blessing has come to the Gentiles;— "to take out of 
them a people for his name," to complete the elect number 
of the Seed of Abraham which is to bless all the 
families of the earth.— Gal. 3:29. 

Another thought: there has been a parallel between 
the experiences of Fleshly Israel and Spiritual Israel. 
During the period of Moses and Joshua and the Elders 
that outlived Joshua, Fleshly Israel prospered, because 
obedient to the Lord: so the Church, Spiritual Israel, 
prospered during the days of our Lord and his apostles. 
By and by, neglecting the Lord, they became worldlike, 
and the result was the splitting off of the ten tribes: so 
the Christian Church, becoming worldly through neglect 
of the Word of the Lord, suffered the loss of the 
great majority in the "falling away" of Papacy, which 
substituted the mass for the ransom and worships the 
creature ("saints," relics, the Virgin, etc.) instead of 
the Creator. As the Lord sifted the faithful of the ten 
tribes into the two tribes (Judah), so he gathered the 
faithful out of Papacy. And as he sifted Judah, so he 
has been sifting Protestants to gather out the "jewels." 



As only a remnant of the whole of nominal Fleshly Israel 
was found worthy in the Jewish "harvest," so only 
a remnant of nominal Spiritual Israel will be found 
worthy of the Kingdom in the present "harvest." But 
how glad we are to know from the Lord's Word that 
neither those sifted out during the Jewish age, nor those 
sifted out during the Gospel age as non-elect, were sifted 
into eternal torment: and that, altho they will be caused 
to suffer "stripes" in proportion as they knew to do 
well and did it not, yet they were all redeemed and are 
all to be brought into the clearer light of the Millennial 
Kingdom and thus be blessed with opportunity for restitution 
and eternal life through the elect Church— the 
Christ, Head and Body. 

The captivity of Judah by Nebuchadnezzar was in 
two parts: (1) He carried captive the chief of the 
warriors and craftsmen, and noble people of the land, 
about eighteen thousand being specified— Daniel and 
his companions being of this number. (2 Kings 24: 12-18.) 
He left the poor and less capable people in the 
land, appointing over them as under-king the uncle of 
Jehoiachin, viz., Zedekiah, whom he compelled to take 
an oath of allegiance to the Kingdom of Babylon. (2) 

R2402 : page 360 

The second captivity was eleven years later, and was 
the result of Zedekiah's unfaithfulness to his oath of 
allegiance, for he attempted to throw off the yoke of 
Nebuchadnezzar. 

This is one of the points at which chronologists in 
general blunder. They begin to count the seventy years 
mentioned by the prophet from the captivity of Jehoiachin, 
instead of eleven years later, at the captivity of 
Zedekiah. They very generally fail to notice an important 
item; viz., that the Lord does not specify through Jeremiah's 
prophecy, seventy years of captivity, but seventy 
years of desolation of the land without an inhabitant— 
See chapter on Chronology in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II. 

The fulfilment of two very remarkable prophecies 
is noted in the concluding verses of this lesson. The 
Prophet Ezekiel had explicitly declared (1) that King 
Zedekiah should be led into Babylon a captive, should 
live there and die there, and nevertheless never see the 
city. (Ezek. 12:10-13.) (2) Apparently to the contrary 
of this was Jeremiah's prophecy, while he was in 
a dungeon in Jerusalem during the siege; he declared 
that Zedekiah should speak with Nebuchadnezzar mouth 
to mouth, and see his eyes. Our lesson shows how 
both of these predictions were fulfilled: Zedekiah did 
indeed see the eyes of Nebuchadnezzar and did talk 
with him; then, his eyes being put out, he was carried 
a prisoner to Babylon, in which city he lived without 
seeing it. Thus sometimes the Lord speaks to us 
through his prophets matters which seem contradictory 
and require considerable faith; yet subsequently, 



when we note the fulfilment of the predictions, these 
peculiarities of statement and fulfilment serve to strengthen 
faith, and to convince us that the affairs about us are 
not occurring haphazard or by chance, but so far as God's 
people are concerned (spiritual as well as natural Israel), 
they are all under the divine supervision and guidance. 

In Ezekiel's prophecy of the dispersion of the Jews 
the Lord intimates that he would pursue them even in 
foreign countries with the sword and famine and pestilence, 
so that the worst characters amongst that people 
should be cut off, and thus the sifting be the more complete. 
If there were anything in the Scriptures to indicate 
that the Israelites, in coming under the terms of 
the Law Covenant at Mount Sinai, became liable to a 
penalty of eternal torment if unfaithful to it, it would 
be indeed a terrible thought; but there is no such intimation 
anywhere. The highest penalty of their Law 
was death: "He that violated Moses' law died without 
mercy." Consequently, even if our Lord Jesus had 
not come, or if at his coming he had accomplished nothing 
for those who were under the Law, the worst penalty 
they could be subjected to was death. Hence, if the 
death of Christ had effected nothing as respects the Jews 
under the Law Covenant, but had affected the Gentiles 
only, bringing them forgiveness and the possibility of a 
reconciliation to God and the attainment of eternal life, 
it would but prove that Israel according to the flesh was 
disadvantaged by the Law Covenant entered into at 
Mount Sinai. But the Apostle, divinely guided, points 
out to us explicitly that our Lord's death not only redeemed 
those who were not under the Law Covenant, 
but also that those who were under the Law Covenant 
were "redeemed from the curse of the Law."— Gal. 3:13. 

Accordingly, we have the good hope that not only 
the living Gentiles shall come to the light and blessing 
of the Millennial Kingdom (Isa. 60:3), but also the 
living Jews at that time; and that eventually that Light 
shall be manifested to all the families of the earth (Isa. 40:5; 
Luke 3:6)— the dead as well as the living— and 
it is to this end that the Lord has promised that the 
hour is coming, in the which all that are in their graves 
shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, and come 
forth (John 5:29)— that all may have a trial, a judgment, 
under the favorable and righteous conditions 
which his Kingdom will inaugurate. 

This future hope, as respects Israel, is expressed in 
our Golden Text, "Ye shall seek me, and find me when 
ye shall search for me with all your heart." The Apostle 
Paul assures us that during the present Gospel age natural 
Israel has been nationally "blinded," so as not to 
have been able to discern the Lord; but he also shows 
us that when the Gospel Church shall have been completed 
from amongst the Gentiles, favor shall return to 
Israel, they shall be saved from their blindness, and 
obtain mercy at the hands of the glorified Spiritual Israel: 
and then, through Spiritual Israel and reclaimed 



Natural Israel, the blessings of the Lord, the knowledge 

of his grace, shall be extended, with all the blessed opportunities 

that implies, to all the families of the earth. 

-Rom. 11:25-32. 



page 361 