Follow Up Interest With Discernment During the Holiday Season
1 December is a month when many of those who have shown interest in our message will likely be busy with holiday activities. Therefore, when following up interest, we will need to be discerning and perhaps be prepared to get to the point quickly, unless the householder shows a desire for a longer conversation.
2 Give Advance Thought to What We Will Say: We should always have clearly in mind what we want to say. This requires referring to our notes on the previous visit and refreshing our memory as to points covered in the conversation and any unanswered question that was left with the householder.
3 If the suggestion in paragraph 5 of the above article was used, upon returning we could say:
▪ “At this time of year, many people are thinking about the birth of Christ. The last time we spoke, I promised to share an interesting fact with you about the city where Jesus was born. Did you know that the Bible foretold 700 years in advance that Jesus would be born in Bethlehem?” Allow for a response. Then, after reading Micah 5:2, you could say: “That is an amazing prophecy, is it not? While this is an interesting Biblical fact, did you know that Bible prophecies are also coming true in our day?” If the person has time, we could continue the conversation, or if he is busy, we might offer to return and discuss this further with him.
4 If the tract “Will This World Survive?” was left, we might say the following:
▪ “Note what is stated here on page 3, under the subheading ‘The Sign.’ This concerns prophecies that Jesus said would mark the last days. [Consider two or three prophecies with the householder.] Would you say that there is evidence these prophecies are being fulfilled in our day?” If genuine interest is discerned and time permits, you may wish to suggest he examine the Greatest Man book. Show how chapter 111 goes into more detail with regard to the sign that Jesus gave. If only the tract is left, on the next visit you could lead the discussion into another tract or a brochure such as The Government That Will Bring Paradise or “Look! I Am Making All Things New.”
5 Offering a Home Bible Study: If we leave the Greatest Man book with the householder or he already has a copy, it would be good to demonstrate a home Bible study by using chapter 111. We can use a method similar to that used at the Congregation Book Study. If the study continues to progress, we could change over to studying one of the brochures or go directly into the Live Forever book.
6 Let us always be prepared to follow up on all interest. We must be discerning and always endeavor to pave the way for a future visit by raising interesting questions at the end of each conversation. This will help us to be “completely equipped for every good work.”​—2 Tim. 3:17.

