Keep Speaking About the Things You Have Seen and Heard
1 Even when threatened with beatings and imprisonment, the apostles stated to their opposers: “We cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.” (Acts 4:20) They appreciated the value of Jesus’ works and teachings.
2 The good news about Jesus and his Kingdom is just as important for people today as it was then. Therefore, we should seize every opportunity to speak about what we have seen and heard from God’s Word. People are usually in a better frame of mind for speaking about religious matters during a holiday season, and this opens extra opportunities to witness.
3 Youths, Speak at School: Many young Witnesses take advantage of opportunities to witness to classmates and teachers. A young Witness who always endeavors to keep alert to current topics of discussion among classmates took advantage of an incident at school and approached teachers and classmates with an appropriate publication. The result? She placed 35 books in one day! Since many minds are turned toward Jesus Christ and thoughts of peace at this time of year, would it not be a good time to let classmates and teachers know how Jesus as reigning King can solve world problems?​—Compare Luke 2:14.
4 If your refraining from sharing in religious traditions connected with Christmas becomes an issue, you might say:
▪ “I do not share in Christmas festivities because such celebrations do not honor Jesus as our only means of salvation and the only one who will bring an end to war and racial problems. [Quote or read Acts 4:12.] Jesus is no longer a baby but a reigning King. This book, The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived, discusses all of Jesus’ teachings and miracles and shows how he will bring an end to human suffering.” Then show the illustration in chapter 133, and read the second paragraph on the next page. Show other points you feel may appeal to the person. If adequate interest is shown, explain how the book is made available.
5 Speak to Workmates: One brother placed 63 books by just putting a copy of the Greatest Man book on his desk. Its attractive appearance and the title itself prompt questions. You might simply ask a workmate: “Who would you say is the greatest man who ever lived?” Then add: “This book covers in detail the entire life of Jesus, discusses every speech he gave, answers questions many ask about his miracles, and gives other interesting details. It is a thorough review of what the Bible teaches about Jesus and proves without question that Jesus Christ was the greatest man who ever lived.” Then refer to Napoléon’s comment about Jesus as quoted in the third paragraph of the introduction to the book.
6 Similar opportunities may arise to witness to neighbors or unbelieving relatives. Pray that Jehovah will give you the boldness and ability to speak up at the proper time. (Acts 4:29, 31) What we have to say about Jesus will warm the hearts of thinking people who are righteously inclined. What better experience could we have than helping a classmate, workmate, neighbor, or relative get on the road to eternal life?​—John 14:6.

