Service Meetings for December
Week Starting December 7
Song 218
10 min: Local announcements and pertinent Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Suggest ways of stimulating interest in magazines to be featured in the field service this weekend.
15 min: “Incite Others to Look Intently at Jesus.” Encouraging talk, outlining value of Greatest Man book in helping people take up right worship.
20 min: “Share Accurate Knowledge About Jesus Christ.” Questions and answers. Demonstrate use of new tract as suggested in paragraphs 2 and 3.
Song 205 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 14
Song 20
10 min: Local announcements. Include accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Commend congregation for generous support of local needs as well as Society Kingdom Hall Fund and Society’s worldwide work. As time permits, relate selected experiences in using tracts and possibly the Greatest Man book to help people take up right worship. Announce special witnessing arrangements for December 25.
10 min: “Keep Speaking About the Things You Have Seen and Heard.” Talk. Include selected local experiences on informal witnessing.
15 min: “Using Tracts to Produce Beneficial Results”​—Part 1. Question-and-answer consideration of paragraphs 1-8 of insert. After paragraph 5, demonstrate using the tract Enjoy Family Life to begin a conversation. After paragraph 8, demonstrate an informal witness with a tract.
10 min: Question Box. Talk by elder.
Song 71 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 21
Song 53
 8 min: Local announcements; include announcement for special witnessing on January 1. Suggest one or two talking points that can be used in introductory comments this weekend in field service.
15 min: “Follow Up Interest With Discernment During the Holiday Season.” Discussion with audience. Demonstrate points in paragraphs 3 and 4.
22 min: “Using Tracts to Produce Beneficial Results”​—Part 2. Question-and-answer discussion of paragraphs 9-16 of insert. After paragraph 10, demonstrate how to start a Bible study with a tract. After paragraph 13, demonstrate how to use the tract Will This World Survive? to start a study.
Song 128 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 28
Song 196
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Demonstrate how to use literature that will be featured locally in January.
10 min: “Be Training Yourself With Godly Devotion as Your Aim.” Encouraging talk by Theocratic Ministry School overseer. Explain clearly how Talk No. 2 is to be given, and remind those who are assigned Bible highlights that they should not make extensive comments on portion of Bible assigned for Talk No. 2.
13 min: “You Can Find Comfort in Times of Distress.” (w92 7/15 pp. 19-22) Encouraging talk by an elder.
12 min: Local needs.
Song 103 and concluding prayer.

