Share Accurate Knowledge About Jesus Christ
1 In our field ministry during December, we will feature the book The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived. What will you say to start a timely Bible discussion, and how will you introduce this excellent publication?
2 Using Our New Tracts: Some publishers have found success in using tracts to discern a person’s interest even before offering other literature. How can we be helped to accomplish this? By featuring our new tract Will This World Survive?
After an appropriate greeting, you might say:
▪ “We are asking people if they would agree that Jesus Christ was the greatest man who ever lived. [Allow time for reply.] Of course, many men have influenced the course of human affairs, and some have contributed to the progress of the human race, but notice what sets Jesus Christ apart from all others. [Read John 17:3.] No one else has the power to grant everlasting life to mankind. [Turn to page 3 of the tract.] When Jesus was here on the earth, he described events that would occur prior to the world’s end. But he also encouraged his disciples to rejoice because these events would mean that deliverance was getting near.” After briefly discussing some features of the sign of Christ’s presence, direct attention to the back page, which shows some of the blessings of his Kingdom rule.
3 A young publisher or one who is new or inexperienced might feature the illustrations in a tract as a means of introduction.
Using the tract “Will This World Survive?,” a publisher could open to pages 3 and 4 and say:
▪ “Notice these two pictures, one of a plane dropping bombs in wartime and the other of a starving child. [Turn to page 5.] Look at these pictures of an earthquake and of a sick man in a hospital bed. [Pause.] The Bible shows that such terrible things will soon come to an end.”
4 If the person appears to be interested, read Revelation 21:3, 4 either directly from the Bible or as quoted in the tract on page 6. Depending on the interest shown, you could highlight additional information. When genuine interest is manifested, you may be able to explain briefly the overall nature of our work, leave the Greatest Man book, and arrange for a return visit.
5 Lay Groundwork for a Future Visit: Of course, whether we left a tract, the Greatest Man book, or other literature or just had a pleasant conversation, we might say: “The next time I come, I would like to share an interesting fact with you concerning the city where Jesus was born.” Be sure to take careful note of the call and the interest shown.
6 The Kingdom offers the only genuine hope for mankind. Let us show our earnest desire to share with all that we meet the “accurate knowledge of the sacred secret of God, namely, Christ.”​—Col. 2:2.

