VOL. XXIV. SEPTEMBER 1, 1903. No. 17 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 339 

Death of Christ a Puzzle to Dr. 
Morgan 339 

A Naval Officer on Personal 

Religion 340 

Our Memorial Number 341 

Followers of Jesus: Crossbearers 342 

Overcoming Evil With Good 347 

Great Opportunities Misused 350 

Public Ministries of the Truth 352 

Special Items 338 

page 338 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



FAVORABLE METHODS OF SERVICE. 



The chiefest service we could commend, open to all 
who are unencumbered and in active use of their faculties, 
is the Colporteur work. It is an honorable form of ministering 
the truth from house to house, as the apostles 
served. It is a service which the Lord seems to have 



blessed as much or more than any other for gathering the 

"wheat." It is apparent at once to all that to sell such 

books as the DAWNS at 35 cents each, cannot be for money-making 

that it is merely another way of preaching the 

truth. No other religious books are sold at any such price. 

Indeed, few subscription books sell for less than two to 

three dollars each. Any who can serve in this work are 

invited to write to us for "Hints to Colporteurs." 

EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT, LEATHER EDITION. 



We are mailing this edition to all whose orders are now 
in, and all new orders will have prompt attention. Remember 
that the price of this book, in leather, on thin paper, 
is $2.50— a year's subscription to the TOWER being given 
free with each when desired. In cloth binding, the price 
is $1.50, a year's subscription being given free with each. 



R3234 : page 339 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
DEATH OF CHRIST A PUZZLE TO DR. MORGAN. 



THE Rev. G. Campbell Morgan preached on the 
life of Christ to a large congregation at the 
Fifth Avenue Presbyterian church yesterday. 
"In the light of the revelation of the life of Christ, I 
come face to face with a great moral mystery," said 
Dr. Morgan. "There is some infinite meaning in the 
death of Jesus, and it is the stumbling block of my 
faith. At the cross of Christ I must be either an infidel 
or a believer. In the presence of the death of Christ I 
am compelled to deny the existence of a moral governor 
and admit his death a most terrible blunder or the 
presence of the most wonderful love that man has 
known. Notwithstanding the wonderful teachings of 
this man, God permitted him to die at the age of 
thirty-three. Humanly speaking, his work was undone 
—just commenced, as a matter of fact. Not a 
volume written, not a school founded, but just as he 
reached the commencement of his career he was foully 
murdered. I want an explanation of this. My mind 
demands it."— Exchange. 



It is astounding that any man should consider 
himself competent to preach the Gospel who does not 
know why Christ died. It is still more astounding 



that a body of Christians should appoint, engage and 
salary, as their teacher, a man who gives us every reason 
for believing that he needs that some one teach 
him the first principles of the doctrine of Christ. We 
can only conclude that the people recognizing and 
employing such a teacher are similarly ignorant of 
Christian fundamentals. 

To what advantage is it that thousands of church 
edifices are built every year, and that millions of 
money are spent on theological seminaries, and on salaries 
for preachers, organists and choristers, if this is 
the net result;— ignorance of the fundamentals. 

Are such people, who know not why Christ died, 
to be considered Christians? Certainly not. It is not 
good clothes, nor Sunday observance, nor even good 
morals that constitute men and women Christians, but 
faith— faith in the very thing that these people confess 
that they know nothing about. A Buddhist or 
Mohammedan or Confucian may have, and some of 
them do have, everything that a Christian has except 
this one all-important essential to Christianity— faith 
that Christ died as man's sin-offering, as his ransom-price, 
in order that God might be just and yet be the 
justifier of sinners who believe in this sacrifice and by 
faith accept forgiveness of sins and become on this 
basis followers of Christ. 

How plain the whole matter from the standpoint 
of the ransom, its necessity and results. How clearly 
we can see that all the sermons and books imaginable 
would have been of no avail until first of all the New 
Covenant had been sealed with the precious blood. 
Hearken to our Lord's words, "The Son of Man came 
...to give his life a ransom for many." (Matt. 20:28.) 
He came not to preach and write books. Others 
under divine power and inspiration could do and 
have done those things, but he alone had an unforfeited 
life "to give for the life of the world." As he 
said again, "O fools, and slow of heart to believe all 
that is written in the prophets: ought not Christ to 
suffer and to enter into his glory?" (Luke 24:25,26.) 
He did suffer death— "the just for the unjust"— and 
thus made atonement for our sins, paying the death 
penalty against us. He did enter into his glory and 
is fully prepared to give forth the vivifying blessing 
so much needed by the whole groaning creation. 

Why then did he not at once— as soon as glorified 
—begin the Kingdom work of rescuing Adam and his 
children from the grasp of sin and its penalty, death? 
Because in the divine plan it was arranged that first a 
church-bride should be selected as his companions in 

R3234 : page 340 

sufferings and future glories. Soon the testing of 
those called to this join t-heirship will be completed 
and then our prayer, "Thy Kingdom come," will be 



answered, and the blessing of the world at the hands of 
the Good Physician and his bride will begin. The 
great uplift of that blessed Millennial day will be not 
merely physical but mental and moral— not partial 
and temporal, but to those who will to obey it will be 
made complete and everlasting. 

A NAVAL OFFICER ON PERSONAL RELIGION. 



Captain Mahan, of the U.S. Navy, evidently 
knows something else than naval warfare. He delivered 
an address worthy of being considered by a larger 
audience than heard it. He said:— 

"In my judgment the Church of today, laity and 
clergy, have made the capital mistake in generalship 
of reversing the two great commandments of the Law; 
the two fundamental principles of her war, established 
by Christ himself. Practically, as I observe, the laity 
hold, and the clergy teach, that the first and great 
commandment is 'Thou shalt love thy neighbor as 
thyself.' Incidentally thereto, it is admitted, Thou 
shouldst love the Lord thy God.' It is of course too 
egregious an absurdity to openly call that the second 
commandment. It is simply quietly relegated to a 
secondary place. 

"You may perhaps dispute this deduction as a 
matter of fact or remind me of St. John's words, 'He 
who loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, can 
not love God whom he hath not seen.' It is evident, 
however, on reflection that St. John is in no sense inverting 
our Lord's order. He simply appeals to evidence. 
This man says he loves God. Very well, 
where is the proof of it? Does he love his brother? 
If not, he certainly does not love God, for the love of 
the brethren is the sure, inevitable fruit of loving God. 
In fact the whole missionary spirit, and much that is 
not narrowly missionary, involves love for brethren 
whom we have no more seen than we have seen God. 
The love of God is the one sure motive and source of 
the love for man." 

Is it not true, Captain Mahan inquires, that within 
the last thirty years the Church has been teaching 
that "a man's personal piety is of small consequence 
alongside of his external benevolent activities"? Has 
not the Church come to stand for the idea that "external 
activities, outward benevolence, are not merely 
the fruit of Christian life, but the Christian life 
itself"? He continued: 

"Is not the judgment of the world expressed, 
and is it not a true judgment, in the words of indifferent 
contempt for a man who is trying to save his own 
soul— his miserable soul, as I have sometimes read? 
And yet what is a man's soul? It is the one thing 
inexpressibly dear to God, for which, if there had 



been but one, he was content to give his Son, and this 
he has intrusted to man as his own particular charge. 
I do not say his only charge, but the one clearly and 
solely committed to him to make the most of. It 
is the talent which he is to multiply by diligent care; 
not that he may delight in it himself, but that he may 
present it to God through Jesus Christ.. ..Because 
care of one's own soul, by internal effort and discipline, 
seemed selfish, men have rushed to the extreme 
of finding in external action, in organized benevolence, 
in philanthropic effort, in the love of the neighbor— 
and particularly of the neighbor's body, for the neighbor's 
soul was naturally of not more account than 
one's own— not merely the fruit of Christian life, but 
the Christian life itself. That the kingdom of God is 
within you, an individual matter primarily and in 
essence, and only in consequence, and incidentally 
external, as all activity is but a manifestation of life 
and not life itself— all this was forgotten. This I conceive 
to be the state of the Church now, I mean as an 
organization; for I doubt not the multitudes of earnest 
cultivators of their own souls for the glory of God- 
perfecting holiness, as St. Paul says, in the fear of the 
Lord." 

There is but one remedy, declares the Captain, 
and that is the restoration of "personal religion"— 
"the direct relation of the individual soul to God— to 
that primary place in the Christian scheme which it 
has momentarily lost. In conclusion he said: 

"Within this generation there has been given 
much vogue to a secular phrase, the prevalence of 
which seems so indicative of the temper of the day as 
to point just where the sagacious Christian warrior, 
crafty as St. Paul was to seize opportunity and capture 
men with guile for Jesus Christ, may lay hold upon 
men's hearts and minds. Self-culture— we have all 
heard much of it; sweetness and light, and all the 
rest of it. No new thing. The Stoics cultivated themselves, 
their personality, that they might reach self-sufficingness, 
which, being attained, could be presented 
to themselves in the form of self-contentment. 
Let this human conception receive consecration. 
What is self culture, but deliverance from evil unto 
good— salvation from sin? And who shall thus save 
his people? Who but Jesus Christ? And what is 
Personal Religion but the cooperation of man's will 
with the power of Jesus Christ, that man's soul, man's 
whole being, may be saved; not for his own profit 
chiefly, but that he may lay it, thus redeemed, thus 
exalted, at the feet of him who loved him and gave 
himself for him." 



The "salvation" of the philosopher is the growing 
one today, everywhere; because faith in the Bible 



is giving way to Higher Criticism and Evolutionism, 
which are mere human philosophies. A living faith 
must have a foundation in the divine revelation, the 
Bible. It alone shows what righteousness is and that 
"there is none righteous, no not one." It alone 
shows how sin came into the world (Rom. 5:12) and 
that personal faith in a personal Savior is the only 
ground for hope of a personal salvation. 

"Truth people," as well as others, need to be on 
guard on this subject. Some of them seem to get the 
false impression that head-knowledge is the basis 
of brotherhood. While encouraging Bible study 

R3235 : page 341 

and growth in knowledge we must still recognize 

heart-salvation as the aim and object of all our proclamations 

of the Gospel. Knowledge is merely the 

lamp which guides the way toward heart-salvation,— 

"sanctification of the spirit [mind] through the belief 

of the Truth." 

With some, the thought that "our salvation is to 
be brought unto us at the revelation of our Lord and 
Savior" at his second advent seems to mean that it 
would be a mistake to speak also of a present heart-salvation 
translating us, even now, out of the kingdom 
of darkness into the kingdom of God's dear Son. We 
may be sure that none will attain the "great salvation" 
promised to the elect who does not in the present 
time experience heart-regeneration or salvation from 
the love of sin. 



R3235 : page 341 

OUR MEMORIAL NUMBER. 

OUR subscribers have recently received Vol. I. of 
the MILLENNIAL DAWN series as a number of 
this journal. This cheap edition we are supplying 
at 5c per copy postpaid to any address you 
please in the United States and Canada, or 9c per 
copy to any foreign address, except Canada. Confident 
that our readers will want to send these out to 
their friends in large quantities, we have given an 
order for 300,000 copies, and of these we have already 
received 100,000. Thus you see we are prepared for 
your orders and ready to execute them promptly— 20 
copies for $1, or more or less at the same rate. 

The experience of our readers we are sure agrees 
with our own, viz., that tracts and sample TOWERS 
and conversations and sermons are valuable in spreading 
the Present Truth only in proportion as they lead 
up to a study of the DAWNS. Whoever will not give 
time and attention to a careful reading of the DAWN, 



will apparently never become thoroughly rooted and 
grounded in Present Truth. And those who are most 
clear in the Truth have re-read the books several 
times. These books stand re-reading, because they 
are practically the Bible put in another form— Bible 
topics treated systematically,— the testimony of the 
various prophets and apostles, etc., being gathered 
together and arranged under the various appropriate 
heads. We could wish that our readers would all begin 
afresh the study of these volumes. It is noted 
sometimes how rapidly beginners now make progress, 
and occasionally seem to outstrip others who have been 
much longer in the way. The reason generally is 
that they have studied the DAWNS more recently, and 
therefore have the various features more distinctly 
before the mind, with their strong interlocking and 
corroborative testimonies. 

Our readers are aware from the annual reports 
that large numbers of DAWNS are continually going 
out, but very few, perhaps, are aware that the first 
volume has passed the one million (1,000,000) point, 
and is rushing along more rapidly than ever before. 
The new WATCH TOWER edition at 5c per copy may 
be considered a memorial of the one million copies 
already in circulation. The Lord's hand seems very 
markedly manifest in connection with this great sale; 
for booksellers, under the influence of denominational 
prejudice, will not handle the DAWNS. The Lord 
seems to intend that it shall be circulated only by 
those who are consecrated to him and his service; and 
he is raising up evangelists— colporteurs— who are 
carrying this message of the divine plan of the ages 
to all parts of the world. We are continually finding, 
too, that some of these have borne fruit without our 
knowledge— some coming into the light of Present 
Truth without learning of the WATCH TOWER and 
getting into our list. We trust that all of the dear 
brethren and sisters who love to serve the Truth will 
be more and more on the alert to introduce the WATCH 
TOWER to all of the consecrated, who have a deep interest 
in the things of the Kingdom. We want their 
names on the list, and that they should have the regular 
visits of the TOWER, whether they can afford to 
pay for it or not. We have a fund for the very purpose 
of paying the subscriptions of those who cannot 
afford to pay. 

We cannot say that all who purchase the DAWNS 
are deeply interested in them. Quite the contrary. 
Some are prejudiced by misrepresentations so that 
they will not read, even after having purchased them. 
However, we do find indications which lead us to 
believe that, when the great time of trouble shall be 
upon the world, many of the sincere-hearted who now 
are prejudiced by misrepresentations will look up these 
books and study them earnestly, and receive both comfort 
and profit from them under the trying conditions 



in which they will then be placed. 

When we inform you that over 14,000 DAWNS 
(quite apart from the new cheap edition) went out during 
June, as many more during July, and that the August 
output bids fair to be still larger, you will get an 
idea of the growing magnitude of the harvest work. 
It keeps us busy urging our printers and binders up 
to the notch, thus to keep the colporteurs in every 
quarter properly supplied; and all hands connected 
with the service here are endeavoring to do with their 
might for the service of the Lord and his cause. The 
WATCH TOWER office force consists of twenty-five persons 

R3235 : page 342 

engaged in various parts of the service, yet we 
do not do any printing or binding of our own. Five 
printing establishments are turning out papers, books 
and tracts, so that the total number employed in the 
work, directly and indirectly, must be very considerable. 

Incidentally, we note that the Volunteer work, 
this year, is progressing remarkably. The two million 
Volunteer tracts prepared in the Spring are practically 
all in circulation, and another million is ready 
for delivery now. These are aside from our ordinary 
tracts, which are going out freely also. Order all you 
can use judiciously. 

Pray for the divine blessing upon our service, and 
join to the extent of your ability in the reaping work 
of this time, and thus add to your joy, both now and 
everlastingly. 



R3235 : page 342 

FOLLOWERS OF JESUS: CROSS-BEARERS. 

"If any man will come after me, let him deny himself 
and take up his cross and follow me."— Matt. 16:24. 

OUR Lord's invitation to forsake all and follow 
him is presented in very different language 
from the usual invitations given in his name 
today;— the thought, the sentiment, is wholly different. 
The general thought today, in connection with 
an invitation to "Come to Jesus," might be expressed 
thus:— "We invite, we urge upon you to escape an 
eternity of torture, of misery, by accepting Jesus as 
your Savior. It is a question of eternal happiness or 
eternal misery, and, therefore, you have practically no 
alternative, but must accept him." How different from 
this is our Lord's presentation of the matter in this 
text. He says nothing whatever about there being 
no choice, nor about an eternity of misery for those 
who do not elect to become his followers. His words 



imply that it is a matter of choice with the individual, 
and not a matter of compulsion in any sense of the word. 

Our text contains no urging, no insistence that 
there is no alternative. On the contrary it presents 
to the mind obstacles which must be encountered by 
those who become the Lord's followers— the crosses 
they must expect; and thus it invites them to consider 
well what they are doing, before taking the step. 
The invitation contains neither rant nor cant, but is, 
in every sense of the word, logical and reasonable, 
and so stated as to avoid any misunderstanding. In 
this respect it corresponds with our Lord's other utterances 
on the subject; as, for instance, when he 
gave the parable of the man who proposed to build a 
house and laid the foundation, but afterwards was not 
able to complete the structure. On this parable the 
Lord builds the teaching that his followers should 
count the cost of discipleship, in the same cool, methodical, 
calculating manner in which they would count 
the cost of the erection of a building; and that they 
should make sure that they sufficiently desire the result 
to carry forward the conditions necessary to 
attain them. His words are, "Then said Jesus unto 
his disciples, Whosoever doth not bear his cross and 
come after me, cannot be my disciple." He explains, 
further, that this implies that he will love the Lord 
more than father and mother and wife and children 
and brethren and sisters— yea, more than his own 
life.-Luke 14:26-30. 

Furthermore, it is proper that we notice the class 
of people to whom the Lord addresses these searching 
requirements of discipleship. He addressed not vile 
sinners, not aliens, strangers, foreigners from God's 
covenants and blessings; but those who were already 
the recipients of these— Israelites. Our text shows 
that his invitation was addressed to those who were 
already, in some sense of the word at least, our Lord's 
"disciples"— believers in him and, to some extent, 
already cooperating with him. And so, still, we understand 

R3236 : page 342 

these words to be applicable, not to sinners 
but to those who have accepted of God's grace in 
Christ to the forgiveness of their sins. The Lord is 
seeking a very special class of followers, separate not 
only from the world in general, but separate and distinct 
from the ordinary class of followers or disciples. 
Without prejudice to the general interests of the 
world, the blessing of which will come in due time; 
—without prejudice to the general disciple or believer, 
who will experience some blessing, some favors more 
than the world;— our text is pointing out the conditions 
of that highest degree of discipleship, the reward 
of which will be to be with the Master, see him as he 
is and share his glory as joint-heir with him in the 



Kingdom which the Father has promised him— 
through the instrumentality of which Kingdom all 
the ordinary disciples and the world in general shall 
be eventually blessed. 

Our Lord wished, evidently, to draw a sharp line 
of distinction between all other classes and those followers 
who would walk in his steps, bearing their 
crosses after him. It is of this class that he declares, 
"No man having put his hand to the plow and looking 
back is fit for the Kingdom of God." (Luke 9:62.) 
This special class must be thoroughly imbued with a 
zeal for God and for righteousness; must gain some 
reasonable conceptions of the good things which God 
has in reservation for them; must have some appreciation 
of the Kingdom privileges, else they will not be 
persevering enough, nor zealous enough, to "fight the 

R3236 : page 343 

good fight of faith" and overcome the spirit of the 

world, with the Lord's assisting grace. It will require 

these qualities of heart, in addition to the grace, 

mercy and strength which the Lord has promised, to 

enable them to take up their cross and follow the 

Lord in the narrow way of self-sacrifice. And it was 

not only a kindness on the Lord's part to make clear 

and definite the terms of the sacrifice, but it was reasonable 

also that he should not inveigle any into 

taking such a course contrary to the true zeal of their 

hearts. It was eminently proper that he should put 

the matter just as he did put it and that we, as his 

followers and mouthpieces, should present the matter 

to each other and to all who purpose to become his 

disciples in the same straightforward manner. 

Some might be inclined to think that urging to 
accept the Lord and to seek to be his follower, with 
the thought that any other course would mean eternal 
torture, might be considered a deception which would 
work out benefit to the deceived ones— a deception 
which would do good rather than harm. We dispute 
this. We hold, on the contrary, that the erroneous 
teaching has done great injury in various ways. 

(1) Its misrepresentation of the divine methods 
and arrangements has caused many to doubt not only 
the love but the justice of God. 

(2) While people have theoretically claimed that 
only those who follow closely in the footsteps of Jesus 
and take up their crosses, following him in self-sacrifice, 
will be saved, and all the remainder of mankind 

be damned to eternal torture, nevertheless few believe 
it, few act upon such a belief, few are making 
an effort to be followers of the Lord as if they 
believed it; and extremely few of the many who are 
not trying to take up their crosses and follow the 
Lord give evidence of any fear of an eternity of torment 
because of neglecting his words. 



(3) As a consequence there is a nominal church 
of professed followers of Christ, extremely few of 
whom are followers in the sense comprehended by the 
Lord in the text. 

(4) As a result of this, nominal Christianity and 
nominal discipleship having crowded out the true 
condition of discipleship which our Lord specified as 
necessary to joint-heirship in the Kingdom, we find 
that nearly all the preaching and other religious efforts 
and services of today are going in another direction 
entirely— to produce merely justified believers, 

and not to produce the sanctified followers described. 

(5) As a consequence, present conditions, teachings, 
etc., are extremely unfavorable to the development 

of the very class which this Gospel age was 
intended to select and perfect as joint-heirs with their 
Lord in the Kingdom. 

It is because, under the Lord's providences, the 
mists of the dark ages are scattering and the light 
of the Millennial morning creeping in, that we are 
privileged to see the inconsistencies and falsities of 
the traditions of men which have beclouded the inspired 
records; and, therefore, we are led to inquire 
for the "old paths," and to listen, not for the confused 
babel of error, but for the clear words of the 
great Shepherd of the flock and his inspired representatives, 
the apostles. Listening to these— listening 
to the voice of God through these— the inspired plan 
of God is becoming clear and luminous to us, and its 
every feature reasonable, harmonious and beautiful. 

It is from this standpoint that we are enabled 
to view our text with pleasure; and seeing the 
grand designs of our Almighty Father, are enabled 
to rejoice that we are accounted worthy, through our 
Redeemer's merit, to be invited to walk in his footsteps 
and to take up our crosses and to follow him 
through evil and through good report. And we are 
assured of his sustaining grace by the way, and of 
final victory and joint-heirship with him in the Kingdom, 
if we thus continue steadfast to the end. 

"If any man will come after me," signifies, If 
any man desires to be a follower of mine, to walk in 
my steps of obedience to the Father's will, and to 
share with me in the Father's reward. Such are to 
know that the cost of such discipleship will be cross-bearing. 
Cross-bearing signifies endurance of trials, 
difficulties, disappointments— the crossing of the human 
will and preferences by circumstances and conditions 
permitted of the Father. Our Lord's will was 
fully submitted to God, so that it was his delight to 
do the Father's will, and this must be our attitude to 
commence with; but after this consecration has taken 
place comes the trial and testing. If we were in 
heaven, where all is in full accord with the divine will, 
we could have no crosses from the time we fully consecrated 
to the Lord; because our wills being in accord 



with the Father's will and with all righteousness, 
and there being nothing in heaven contrary to that 
which is right, we would be in accord with everything, 
and everything would be in accord with our newly 
consecrated minds. Our crosses come because we 
are living in "this present evil world," because the 
spirit of the world is contrary to the Lord and his Spirit 
of righteousness and equity, and because our Adversary, 
Satan, seeketh continually to stumble and 
ensnare us; because, also, our new wills are circumscribed 
and hindered and opposed by the desires of our 
natural bodies, which are more or less in accord with 
the things of this present time, its conditions, its aims, 
its sentiments; and because the new will strives to use 
the body in a manner and in a service which, under 

R3236 : page 344 

present evil conditions, continually causes it annoyance 

and suffering. These things are to be taken 

into consideration as the cost of discipleship— the cost 

of a share in the Kingdom and its glory, honor and 

immortality, promised to the "called, chosen and 

faithful." 

"GOD KINDLY VEILS OUR EYES." 

It is fortunate for us that in the outstart we do 
not, can not, estimate or appreciate the full meaning 
of the words, sacrifice, cross-bearing, etc. If we could 
look into the future and see from the start the various 
trials and difficulties to be encountered in the "narrow 
way," doubtless few of us would have the courage to 
make the consecration and the start— if we could not 
see or appreciate, beforehand, the rewards and blessings 
which under divine providence come to us in connection 
with every trial— more than compensating us for 
every earthly self-denial and endurance. Nor can we 
in advance appreciate how the Lord wishes to test our 
zeal and our faith, by letting us come to the crosses 
of life one at a time, and letting us see their ruggedness, 
—hiding from us the assisting hand by which, as 
soon as we take hold of the cross and put forth our 
efforts, our Lord lifts the real weight of it, so that we 
have no more at any time than we are able to bear. 
So careful is he of all those who thus become his footstep 
followers and cross-bearers, and prospectively his 
joint-heirs in the Kingdom, that he will not "suffer 
them to be tempted above that they are able, but with 
the temptation will provide also a way of escape."— 
ICor. 10:13. 

SACRIFICING PRECEDES CROSS-BEARING. 

The first step in following the Lord is properly 
designated in the Scriptures a sacrifice; but it is not 



a taking up of the cross. When we sacrifice our wills, 
when we submit ourselves fully to the Lord, it is the 
sum of all sacrifice— in the sense that the giving up 
of the will means the surrender of our all to the Lord, 
that his will may be done in respect to all our affairs. 
The will is the individual, the ego, and holds the command, 
the rulership of our time, influence, abilities, 
and every talent; hence the surrender of the will to 
God means a surrender of all these things to him. 
All subsequent sacrifices which we may make in the 
Lord's service are included in and represented by this 
sacrifice of the will. If the will changes, draws back, 
ceases to be obedient to God, ceases to be submissive 
to his arrangements, the whole condition changes and 
the relationship to God as a member of the body of 
Christ terminates. But if the will continues faithful 
to God and desirous of serving him and his cause, 
though the service and cross-bearing be not done faithfully, 
the Lord will carry such through, and by chastisements 
and corrections in righteousness they shall 

R3237 : page 344 

ultimately be "saved so as by fire"— by tribulation. 

This is the essence of the doctrine of "the final perseverance 

of the saints." So long as they continue to 

be consecrated— to have their wills sanctified to the 

Lord— they continue to be his, even should they, from 

lack of zeal, fail to win the prize offered to the zealous, 

the "overcomers." 

But if the will remain loyal to the Lord, and the 
crosses are approached and lifted and borne in faith 
and trust, not only will the Lord's grace suffice, but 
his comfort and assistance will be given in the narrow 
way;— so that its trials and difficulties may be esteemed 
as "light afflictions, but for a moment." 
Eventually this class shall be the victors, joint-heirs 
with the Master in his Kingdom, because by his assisting 
grace they shall have walked in his footsteps faithfully, 
even unto death— and that with greater ease 
and peace and joy and satisfaction than others who 
with less zeal seek to avoid the crosses of their 
consecration. 

The statement that the consecration of the will 
—its surrender, its sacrifice, that the Lord's will may 
be received instead— is not one of the crosses we are 
called on to bear, may need further explanation. In 
order for the sacrifice of our wills to be acceptable to 
the Lord at all, it must be no cross to us; the desire 
to give up our own will and to accept God's will must 
be a joy, a pleasure. Our wills must be sacrificed 
willingly, else the sacrifice will not be accepted of the 
Lord, and we shall have neither part nor lot with him. 
Unless the will be joyfully resigned to the Lord's 
will, all subsequent sacrificing or cross-bearing will 
count nothing whatever to our advantage. Our Master's 



expression respecting the surrender, the sacrifice, 
of his will to do the Father's will, illustrates this matter 
clearly; and it will be noticed from the language 
that there was no cross connected therewith. 

Our Lord's sentiments were, "I delight to do thy 
will, O my God; yea, thy law is within my heart." 
(Psa. 40:8.) And so all who would be his disciples 
must not only count the cost of cross-bearing because 
of the opposition of the world, the flesh and the devil, 
but they must have a somewhat similar spirit to that 
of our Lord in connection with the sacrificing of their 
wills; they, too, must delight to have God's will done 
in them— delight to surrender or sacrifice their own 
wills. Let us see this clearly, and if there is anything 
lacking in respect to the sacrifice of our 
wills let us give it our first attention. He who has 
completely sacrificed his will to the Lord's will has 
gained the victory at the start which will make all the 
remainder of the "narrow way" comparatively easy. 
He who has merely hacked and mutilated his will 

R3237 : page 345 

instead of killing it outright, will find extra difficulty 
at every step of his journey, and can never gain the 
victory until he has finished the sacrifice which he 
imperfectly began. 

IN WHAT DOES CROSS-BEARING CONSIST? 

The Master's cross-bearing did not consist in 
fighting the weaknesses of the flesh, for he had none; 
nor are these weaknesses of the flesh our crosses. 
Because all our weaknesses of the flesh are fully covered 
by the merit of our Lord's sacrifice; our standing 
before God is as New Creatures and not as imperfect 
fleshly creatures— the imperfections of the flesh, 
which are contrary to our wills and opposed by them, 
being fully pardoned by the Lord. The Lord's cross-bearing 
consisted in the doing of the Father's will under 
unfavorable conditions. This course brought upon 
him the envy, hatred, malice, strife, persecution, etc., 
of those who thought themselves to be God's people, 
but whom our Lord, who read their hearts, declared 
to be of their father, the devil. We are not able to 
read the hearts of those about us who profess to be 
the Lord's people, yet we may be sure that there are 
plenty still who profess the name of God and of Christ 
and who have none of his Spirit and are not his children, 
but are the children of the Adversary,— begotten 
of an evil spirit. 

Since we are walking in the same "narrow way" 
that our Master walked, we may reasonably expect 
that our crosses will be of similar kind to his— oppositions 
to our doing the will of our Father in heaven- 
oppositions to our serving his cause and letting the 



light shine out as our Master and Leader directed. 
It is a pleasure for us to do the Father's will— no 
cross about that. We delight not only to consecrate 
our wills, but the Lord's law of righteousness is in 
our hearts to such an extent that we delight to serve 
the right, the Truth. Our cross-bearing comes when 
we find that the Truth, so beautiful to us, so charming, 
is hated by others and draws upon us their anger, 
malice, hatred, as the same truths drew the same 
opposition upon our Master. Our faithfulness in 
cross-bearing consists in our willingness to stand up 
for the Truth and for every principle of righteousness; 
—meekly, humbly, yet firmly, speaking the truth in 
love, no matter what the cost of friendships broken 
or enmities enkindled, or evil words spoken against 
us falsely for the Truth's sake. 

Our Master forewarned us of just such experiences 
when he spoke of our crosses in following him. 
He was explaining the matter more fully when he 
said, "Marvel not if the world hate you, ye know 
that it hated me before it hated you." "If ye were 
of the world the world would love his own: but because 
ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you 
out of the world, therefore the world hateth you." 
If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, 
—prince of devils,— think it not strange if they 
will call his followers by evil names also. Yea, he forewarned 
us, "They shall say all manner of evil against 
you, falsely, for my sake." He even implied that 
some who are not children of the devil would be found 
amongst the persecutors of the cross-bearers, and assured 
us that some of these would verily think that 
they were doing God service. And are they not doing 
God and us also a service in the sense that Satan 
is serving God's purposes in the present time, 
in the persecution of the Church;— in making her 
path a "narrow" one, and filling it with difficulties; 
that thus the Lord's faithful cross-bearers might 
be tested and proven, and that he might thus select 
and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of 
good works and zealous of the Truth? 

CROSS-BEARERS MUST BATTLE WITH THE FLESH, ALSO. 

While we pointed out, foregoing, that cross-bearing 
is quite separate from battling with the weaknesses 
of the flesh, nevertheless whoever has the 
mind of Christ, whoever is seeking to be a cross-bearer 
and to stand up as a representative of the Lord and 
the Truth in the midst of a wicked and perverse generation, 
as an ambassador of God, will surely realize 
that he could not be an acceptable ambassador and 
could not claim that his will is sacrificed to the Lord's 
will, if he did not strive against the weaknesses and 
imperfections in himself as well as stand for the general 
principles of righteousness and truth everywhere. 



The Apostle included this thought and much more in 
this expression,— "He that saith he abideth in him 
ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked." 
(1 John 2:6.) He is to walk as our Lord walked, 
in his general deportment and relationship to everything 
that is good; and correspondingly to avoid 
everything that is evil. He is to walk as nearly as 
possible in the footsteps of Jesus. 

This, however, does not mean that he either 
should or could, in an imperfect body, walk up to all 
the perfection of his Lord, who even in the flesh was 
perfect. It means just what it says, that we should 
walk as he walked— in the same way, in the same 
direction, toward the same mark and standard that 
he recognized and established. The Apostle Paul gives 
us a suggestion along this line, very helpful when 
rightly understood. His words are, "The righteousness 
of the law is fulfilled in us who walk not after 
the flesh but after the Spirit." (Rom. 8:4.) To walk 
after the flesh is to walk after sin— to knowingly, 
willingly, intentionally, do those things which we 

R3237 : page 346 

recognize to be contrary to the divine will, even 
though we should not go to the extreme of wickedness. 
So, likewise, to walk after the Spirit does not 
mean to walk up to the standard of the Spirit, which 
would be impossible for us who were born in sin, 
shapen in iniquity, and thus blemished by sin according 
to the flesh. As "New Creatures" we are living 
in the earthly tabernacle, which is imperfect; and so 
long as we are thus limited, we cannot do all that we 
would. As "New Creatures," begotten of the holy 
Spirit, we desire to do perfectly. We desire that every 
thought, word and act should be perfect in the sight 
of our heavenly Father,— as perfect as were those of 
our dear Redeemer; but this we know from the Scriptures 
and from experience is impossible. We are glad, 
therefore, that the Lord shows us, as in this statement 
of the Apostle, that what he requires is that we should 
walk after the Spirit;— that he does not require of us 
that we should walk up to it, which would be an 
impossibility. 

It is because we could not walk up to the Spirit, 
up to the perfect standard of the divine requirement, 
that God has mercifully provided an arrangement of 
grace on our behalf. By this grace, those who start 
as members of the body of Christ, to walk in the footsteps 
of Jesus— to walk henceforth not after the flesh, 
but on the contrary to walk after the Spirit, and as 
nearly as possible up to the Spirit's requirements- 
have their deficiencies made up for them by their Redeemer's 
meritorious sacrifice. The divine arrangement 
for this is a unique one, which adapts itself to 
the various conditions and circumstances of each and 



all called to walk in this narrow way. If one by reason 
of being well born and having a good environment 
has for this reason a better balanced and 
equipped mortal body in which the new mind can 
exercise itself with the greater freedom;— and if such 
a one by reason of these advantages be able to walk 
nearer to the Spirit's standard than a less favored 
brother, whose will, however, is equally loyal to the 

R3238 : page 346 

Lord, the divine arrangement is that each shall have 
imputed to him grace sufficient,— so that both may be 
counted perfect— counted as having walked up to the 
Spirit's requirements. 

This matter may be more clearly before our minds 
if we imagine a scale marked off from naught (0) to 
one hundred (100)— a scale on which we will suppose 
moral stamina to be measurable, one hundred representing 
the full, complete character which God requires. 
On this scale imagine five brethren with 
different degrees of physical imperfections, yet all 
fully consecrated to the Lord, all seeking to the best 
of their ability to "walk not after the flesh but after 
the Spirit"— as nearly up to the full (one hundred) 
standard as possible. One has ten points of character, 
another twenty, another thirty, another forty, another 
fifty. From the Lord's standpoint, because they are 
all trusting in Christ and walking in his way, and 
seeking to do his will, they are all counted as up to the 
full standard, one hundred— all acceptable with the 
Lord— the weakest as well as the strongest of them. 
This wonderful divine arrangement for man's necessities 
tells of the wisdom of God as well as of his mercy 
and love. Who else could have devised such an equitable 
plan, by which whosoever cometh unto the 
Father through the Redeemer, with full consecration 
of heart, of will, and full intention of life, might be acceptable 
—nothing short of perfection being acceptable. 

It is for this reason that we are told that we are 
reckonedly justified— "justified by faith." Mark 
now the words of the Apostle, "Where sin abounded, 
there did grace so much more abound." He here 
expresses a general principle of the divine arrangement. 
Those hearing the invitation in this present 
time, and desiring to accept God's grace and call, are 
all thus put on an equality: he who has little character 
with many weaknesses and imperfections, has accredited 
to him of the Lord's grace and merit proportionately; 
he who has more of character naturally and 
who needs, therefore, less of grace, gets also according 
to his needs. But let it be clearly noted that there 
is "none righteous, no, not one"— none who can come 
up to the divine standard. All need to have the Lord's 
merit imputed to them, and hence the Lord makes 
this arrangement for all who would approach him and 



accept his favor, his call to joint-heirship with his 
Son. They can have neither part nor lot in the matter 
until they have acknowledged their own imperfections 
and have accepted the imputed merits of our 
Redeemer, "In whom we have redemption through 
his blood." 

All of the Lord's people— not all of the nominal 
church, not merely nominal disciples, but the true followers 
mentioned in the text— are not only walking 
in the same pathway, but similarly all find it narrow 
and difficult. Similarly all in this pathway have the 
same spirit, mind or disposition— to do the Father's 
will and to serve his cause. This is the Spirit of 
Christ, and by it all men may take knowledge of his 
disciples; they, like him, will be loyal to the principles 
of righteousness and truth. They will be willing 
to suffer opposition and persecution for the Truth's 
sake, for righteousness' sake, and thus with him to be 
cross-bearers. 

The Apostle Paul brings out this thought when, 
writing to the Corinthians respecting Titus, he asks, 
"Walked we not in the same spirit? Walked we not 
in the same steps?" (2 Cor. 12:18.) Assuredly Paul 

R3238 : page 347 

and Titus must have been walking in the same spirit 

and the same steps if they were both walking in the 

Spirit and steps of the Master,— taking up life's crosses 

and following him. And this, dear brethren and sisters, 

will be true of each and all of us. While we each 

have our individual peculiarities and differences of temperament, 

conditions, surroundings, opportunities, etc., 

the same spirit and the same steps can be noted in all 

who are followers of the Lamb. "If any man have not 

the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his." If any man 

walk not in the footsteps of Jesus he is not one of his 

followers, in this special sense pointed out by our text, 

and consequently would not be one of the joint-heirs in 

the Kingdom. But let us keep in memory the Lord's 

assurance that his grace is sufficient for us, and that 

his strength is made perfect in our weakness, and that 

this is the victory that overcometh the world— even 

our faith. 



R3238 : page 347 

OVERCOMING EVIL WITH GOOD. 

-1 SAM. 26:5-12,21-25.-AUGUST 30.- 

Golden Text.— "Love your enemies, 
do good to them that hate you." 



THIS lesson concerns the seven years of David's 
experiences as a fugitive from the envy and hatred 
of King Saul. The latter, though still the 
nominal representative of the Lord upon the throne of 
Israel, had lost the divine blessing and power which, 
in considerable measure, had been transferred to David 
after his anointing to be Saul's successor. The lesson 
brings before our minds in sharp contrast the king, 
whose better judgment was overcome by evil impulses, 
and David, the "man after God's own heart," who, 
although far from perfect, strove successfully for mastery 
over himself, and overcame promptings of evil 
under the guidance of principles of righteousness. We 
are not to think of David as perfect. Neither are we 
to be blind to his faults and sins, nor to excuse them 
nor to copy them. David was not one of the "saints" 
in the New Testament sense. He lived at too early a 
date to share in the high calling, nor could he follow 
in the footsteps of Jesus, since the Captain of our salvation 
and our forerunner in the narrow way had not 
yet come. David was a man after God's own heart, in 
the sense that he was full of faith in God and aimed 
aright. At heart he desired to do the Lord's will, and 
wherever he failed of this it caused him grief and led 
him to repentance. He lived before the time of God's 
revelation of his own character and plan and perfect 
will concerning his people. All things considered, 
David's attainments in faith and obedience were quite 
remarkable, so that although as a whole he was not to 
be considered as a model or pattern by the Church of 
the Gospel age, nevertheless many beautiful illustrations 
of proper faith and obedience may be drawn from 
his career, and some of them are noted in the lesson 
before us. 

The seven years from the time David fled from the 
wrath of Saul until Saul died must have seemed to David 
a peculiarly long period of trial of faith and patience. 
His own course had been a noble and true one. He 
had served his king and his nation most loyally, yet he 
suffered as a reward. He was for a time an exile in a 
foreign land, and his father's family was obliged to 
remove to Moab for protection. It must have seemed 
peculiar to David that the Lord should permit him, 
anointed to succeed King Saul, to be thus delayed from 
coming into his kingdom, and instead to be hunted 
and persecuted as an outlaw. This, however, was a 
valuable test of his faith, and doubtless helped to 
strengthen its roots, and thus to make his character 
stronger and his trust in the Lord firmer. But besides 
this, we may readily see that those seven years were 
valuable to David as a preparation for his kingly 
office. They made him intimately acquainted with the 
people and their usual manner of life and general sentiments 
—acquainted also with the neighboring peoples. 
Above all, he became intimately acquainted with the 
Lord, and, we may be sure, learned to trust his providences 



even where he could not trace them. Several 
of the Psalms were either written during this period 
and describe David's experiences on the spot, or written 
subsequently describing the lessons learned from 
those experiences. Amongst these Psalms may be 
mentioned numbers 34, 52, 56, 57, 63. 

Spiritual Israelites who have already received the 
adoption and anointing of the Lord to future service as 
kings and priests, who shall reign on the earth with 
our blessed Lord and Head, to bless all the families of 
the earth, can easily trace valuable lessons in the trying 
experiences of David at the time of this lesson. 
The Prince of this world is our enemy, not because we 
have done evil, but because he realizes that he has but 
a short time, and because he has a spirit that is opposed 
to the Lord's Spirit in us. We too, at times, may 
wonder why the Lord— having anointed us and assured 
us of the glory, honor and immortality in the 
Kingdom— permits us to have such trying experiences 
and such severe conflicts with the world, the flesh 
and the devil. The reason becomes evident as we 
learn the way of the Lord more particularly— as we 
learn that the present "afflictions which are but for a 
moment [comparatively] are working out for us [fitting 

R3238 : page 348 

us for] a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 

glory." We have need of patience, and that can only 

be gained by trials. We have need of faith, and that 

can only be developed by necessities. We have need 

of experience for our future work, which can be gained 

only by such experiences, which permit us to be 

touched with a feeling of the infirmities and difficulties 

and trials of those about us, to whom we shall be ministers 

and representatives when we reach the throne. 

For us, then, as for David, the lesson of present experiences 

is to resist evil,— and not with evil but with 

good. 

In considering the story of David and other Bible 
heroes we are impressed with the candor of the narratives 
—that the evil things of their conduct are told with 
the same frankness as their good deeds. This is one of 
the peculiarities of the Bible and one of the internal 

R3239 : page 348 

evidences of its truthfulness. How easy it would have 
been to have glossed the history of David so as to have 
avoided everything that would be to his discredit; and 
how surely this would have been done, especially in 
the case of a king, had the preparation of the Bible not 
been under divine supervision. Some, we are sure, 
incline to the thought that the Bible would have been 
much better reading had some of the faults of its prominent 
persons been omitted; we, however, are not sure 



of this. The story of the trials and failures and repentances 

of some of these noble characters have been no 

less blessings than the records of their noble deeds and 

sentiments. As some of the Lord's people have realized 

their own weaknesses in the flesh, having at times 

come short of their ideals in the battle against sin, they 

have found encouragement in the experiences of others 

related in the Scriptures— not to delve further into sin 

but to realize that "there is forgiveness with the Lord 

that he might be feared." As such have noted the 

failures of David on various occasions and his repentance, 

contrition and restoration to the Lord's favor, it 

has given them courage to similarly repent and to similarly 

trust in God's mercy and in their own forgiveness, 

and similarly to be encouraged to arise from their 

dejection and sin and start afresh in the battle for righteousness, 

truth, purity, etc. 

Our lesson deals with one of David's experiences 
when pursued by Saul. The erratic course of King 
Saul under the control of an evil spirit doubtless led 
him to deal unjustly with other men, as he did with 
David,— with some for one cause, with some for another. 
Such people as incurred Saul's enmity, and 
those that were forced to become fugitives and to be 
ranked with outlaws, sought out David and put themselves 
under his superior control. These numbered at 
one time 400 and later on 600. (1 Sam. 22:2; 25:13; 27:2.) 
These men, hindered from engaging in the ordinary 
pursuits of life by reason of the king's erratic 
course, moved about from place to place, and, since 
they must eat, their presence was doubtless an affliction 
upon the farmers wherever they went. Their 
foragings may have been carried on in harmony with 
the Jewish law, which provided that any hungry persons 
might enter any farm, orchard or vineyard and 
eat to his satisfaction without molestation. 

Doubtless it was because the people of the village 
of Ziph desired to curry the king's favor, and also because 
they feared the foragings of so many men, that they 
sent word to King Saul that David and his company 
could be found in their vicinity. The king hurriedly 
gathered a troop of 3,000 and went to the place, probably 
anxious to capture David and his followers. The 
latter, however, were not so easily caught; indeed they 
were much better used to scouting than the regular 
army would be. They readily ascertained all about 
the king and his army, while the king knew little or 
nothing of them. 

The story shows how David with one trusty companion 
went into Saul's camp. King Saul and the 
whole army were sleeping without tents, clothed in 
their outer robes, as is frequently the custom in Palestine 
even yet. The king lay not in a "trench" but in 
a space or corral formed by the army wagons; and at 
his head, to distinguish him from the rest of the army, 
his spear was erected near his head-rest, as is still the 



custom among the chiefs of the Bedouins of that country. 

Secure in the thought that David and his handful 

of followers would be afraid of the king and his 

army and would not think of coming nigh them, no 

provision had been made for pickets or watchmen, so 

that David and his companion readily found the king, 

and could have murdered him in his sleep and escaped 

without detection had they chosen so to do. It was 

not that David was so obtuse that he could not see the 

advantage that would come to him that he refrained 

from killing the king, but because of his respect for 

God and his loyalty to him. David recognized fully 

that God was the King of Israel, and that God had set 

Saul in the position he occupied and anointed him as 

king; and that it was the duty of the people to honor 

the king as God's representative. (Kings among the 

Gentiles are not thus divinely set.) He did not have 

so weak a conscience as would have permitted him to 

reason that as God had anointed him to be Saul's successor 

he had now providentially put Saul's life in his 

power. On the contrary he reasoned properly that 

God was still King and that he had all the power necessary 

to dethrone Saul and to bring him to the throne 

in his own way; and that the Almighty needed not 

the assistance of murder on his part for the accomplishment 

of his plan. 

R3239 : page 349 

To make the test still stronger David's companion 
suggested all this, and proposed to carry it out; so that 
the entire matter might have been done without David 
saying a word or lifting a finger. To a weaker mind 
this would have been an extremely strong temptation 
—he would have argued with himself that the crime 
would not be his,— that by merely keeping silent and 
refusing to interfere the whole matter might be accomplished 
by another. But David knew that his companion 
would not act without his consent, either formal 
or implied. He recognized that the responsibility 
still would be his, whoever might be the tool in the 
murder. He decided that he would not meet Saul's 
envy, malice, hatred and murderous spirit with the 
same spirit,— returning evil for evil,— but, instead, he 
would requite his evil and murderous intentions with 
mercy. This was not merely a matter of policy, but 
evidently David never had in his heart any murderous 
spirit towards Saul, for this was now the second time 
he had him in his power and might have destroyed 
him. We are not to suppose that David loved Saul 
with an affectionate love any more than he would have 
loved any other person of such a character. He loved 
him in the sense referred to in our Golden Text— with 
the kind of love it is proper to feel toward our enemies; 
—the love of sympathy and compassion which, however 
it might disapprove the character, etc., of the 



enemy, would neither do him injury nor encourage 
others to do so, but would spare his life and be ready 
in any manner to do him a kindness. 

There is a good lesson here for all spiritual Israelites. 
We are to recognize the Lord's appointments and 
permissions, not in respect only to earthly governments, 
but also, and particularly, in respect to those whom 
God has set in the Church. Even though such should 
become enemies of righteousness, it is not for us to 
accomplish their destruction. The Lord, who called 
us to the Kingdom and who has promised to give it to 
us in his own due time, declares it his will that in the 
present time we should live peaceably, and to exercise 
patience, moderation and kindness even toward our 
enemies— toward those who would destroy us or who 
are pursuing us with the intention of assassinating our 
characters, or what not. We are not to render evil for 
evil, nor railing for railing, nor slander for slander; 
but contrariwise, are to speak as kindly of our enemies 
as we can, and to think as generously of them as possible 
—in no sense of the word either physically or with 
our tongues or otherwise may we retaliate or manifest 
their spirit, but return good for evil, mercy and compassion 
for malice and injury. 

After David and his companion had reached a position 
of safety, and when the proper time had come, 
they hailed the king and his chief general, and called 
their attention to the fact that the king's life had been 
in jeopardy, but had been spared; and as proofs they 
showed the spear and water bottle and informed the 
king that these would be returned to a messenger whom 
he might send for them. It was not improper that 
David should let all know the spirit of magnanimity 
which had controlled his conduct in this matter. The 
king at once recognized the situation, and had manhood 
enough to confess it promptly and to apologize 
for his own contrary course. David's procedure conquered 
him. 

The results of well-doing are not always so apparent 
as in this case, because some evil-doers have less 
character and principle than had Saul,— unappreciative, 
envious and malicious as he was. But even if 
our rendering of good for evil fail to bring the acknowledgment 
of the evil-doer it nevertheless is right, and 
becomes a blessing to us. It is the evil-doer who loses 
by his failure to be conquered by our kindness. Although 
Saul evidently repented, David knew better 
than to trust himself to his power; and there is a lesson 
in this for us also, viz., that while generous toward 
our enemies, returning them good for their evil, we 
should not be too readily convinced of reformation on 
their part, but should realize, as David did in Saul's 
case, that he was under control of an evil spirit, and 
that therefore any acknowledgment of wrong or profession 
of reformation should be esteemed a passing 
emotion rather than a change of disposition until reasonable 



time should be given for a demonstration of a 
change of heart. 

David's answer to Saul, under all the circumstances, 
was a model of truthfulness and forbearance. 
He neither affirmed nor denied Saul's guilt, nor did he 
solicit the king's favor and mercy. On the other hand 
he declared his confidence in God— that he would deal 
with every man according to his righteousness and 
mercy— and showed that it was his respect for God and 
his standards that spared the king's life. He declared 
that as he had shown mercy toward the king he was 
trusting in the Lord to show mercy toward him, and 
that in the Lord— not in the king— he trusted for 
compassion and help, to deliver him from all tribulations. 
To what extent David appreciated the high 
standard of his own expression we do not know. Being 
a prophet, he frequently typified the Christ, Head 
and body. His words are certainly more appropriate 
for the Church than they were for him personally. 
David was still under the Law and must therefore be 
judged by the Law, which, as the Apostle declares, 
proves that there is none righteous, no not one. In our 
day, however, we may be covered with the robe of 
Christ's righteousness, so that "the righteousness of 
the Law may be fulfilled in us who are walking not 

R3240 : page 350 

after the flesh but after the Spirit." Our heart intentions 
for righteousness are acceptable to the Lord under 
the merits of Christ's sacrifice. Our desires and endeavors 
to be faithful to him and to his Word are 
accepted instead of perfect works, and hence we may 
expect that in due time the Lord will accept us in the 
Beloved, to the glory of his Kingdom. Again David's 
sentiments are ours and his principles those which appeal 
to us when he declares that God would have mercy 
upon him as he had mercy upon Saul. This is the 
very essence of our Master's teaching— "If ye forgive 
not men for trespasses against you neither will your 
heavenly Father forgive your trespasses"— he who 
shows no mercy shall obtain no mercy. 

As Saul recognized the spirit that was in David as 
being more righteous than his own, and declared that 
ultimately David would be prospered greatly, so do the 
enemies of spiritual Israelites realize the difference between 
their conduct and that of those who are guided 
by the Lord's Spirit— although they do not often candidly 
acknowledge the matter as did Saul. The class 
represented by Saul is a numerous one. It discerns 
and acknowledges righteousness but follows unrighteousness: 
it discerns the good but opposes it with evil. 
Let us, in respect to faith in God and desire to please 
him, be like David, whose name signifies Beloved, and 
who, as already intimated, in many respects was a type 
of the Beloved— Christ, Head and body. 



R3240 : page 350 

GREAT OPPORTUNITIES MISUSED. 

--1 SAM. 31:1-13.-SEPTEMBER 6.- 

Golden Text:— "There is a way that seemeth right unto a man; 
but the end thereof are the ways of death."— Prov. 14:12. 

KING SAUL'S life as a whole was a blunder and a 
failure. It opened with grand possibilities and 
opportunities under divine favor and the love 
and adoration of his countrymen. Not only his personal 
qualities were in many respects estimable, but even his 
physical proportions— head and shoulders above his 
fellows, goodly to look upon, and attractive to his people 
—had added to his influence. Yet he failed. A 
valuable lesson may be drawn by each of us from the 
causes of his failure. A contemporary sums up his case 
thus: 

"Saul had many noble and lovable qualities, such 
as bravery, promptitude— in his earlier days modesty 
and generosity. All these he had by nature, but there 
is no sign that he ever sought to cultivate his moral 
character or to win any grace that did not come naturally 
to him; nor is there any reason to suppose that 
religion had ever had any strong hold upon him. From 
the baleful influence of his selfishness, as before some 
hot poison-wind, all the flowers of good dispositions 
were burned up, and the bad stimulated to growth. 
His earlier virtues disappeared and passed into their 
opposites. Modesty became arrogance, and a long 
course of indulgence in self-will developed cruelty, 
gloomy suspicion and passionate anger, and left him the 
victim and slave of his own causeless hate. He who rebels 
against God mars his own character. The miserable 
last years of Saul, haunted and hunted as by a demon 
by his own indulged and swollen rebellion and unsleeping 
suspicion, are an example of the sorrows that ever 
dog sin; and, as he fell by his own sword in his final 
battle at Gilboa, the terrible saying recurs to our memory: 
'He that being often reproved hardeneth his 
neck, will suddenly be destroyed, and that without 
remedy.'" 

Saul's difficulty, which led to all this disaster, was 
his selfishness— and he was not unusually selfish either. 
The great majority of mankind are equally selfish- 
self-willed; and the great majority, like him, make a 
failure of whatever possibilities were before them at the 
first. As David's career illustrates the wisdom and advantage 
of an early consecration to the will of the Lord, 
and the blessing which must surely attend such a 
course— even though those blessings be accompanied 



with trials and difficulties— so Saul's course in a general 

way illustrates the error of those who measurably 

ignore the Lord and attempt to direct their own paths. 

Such will surely find themselves misled by their selfish 

ambitions as Saul was by his. Saul's two special transgressions 

were: (1) his offering of sacrifice, which, according 

to divine arrangement, he had no right to offer 

(1 Sam. 13:1-14); (2) his disobedience of another 

direct command of the Lord, as recorded in 1 Sam. 15:1-13. 

It may be argued that King David also erred 

and did contrary to the Lord's will on several occasions, 

but we are to notice the wide difference between these 

two characters, in that David's heart was apparently 

always loyal to the Lord, and that when overtaken in 

a fault his sorrow therefor was sincere and led to greater 

carefulness in the future. With Saul, on the contrary, 

the difficulty seems to have been with the heart— that 

at heart he was not submissive to the Lord's will but 

was guided by his own will, and merely repented and 

apologized through fear of consequences and not from 

sorrow at having deviated from the Lord's way. 

Herein we may note a great difference between 
people nominally the Lord's today: The truly consecrated 
may stumble, may err, but at heart they are 
ever loyal to the Lord and wish to serve and please 
him. These are spiritual Israelites indeed, and the 
blessing of the Lord is upon them. The other class 
professes to be the Lord's people, but at heart are far 
from him, and merely draw nigh with their lips and 
outward ceremonies. They have neither part nor lot 

R3240 : page 351 

with the others, and will surely reap the results of their 
own self-will so far as any opportunities under the present 
call are concerned. Another writer has well 
said: 

"When Saul forsook God there necessarily was a 
separation between him and God; and an evil spirit 
took possession of his heart. We see no sign of God's 
doing anything direct to hasten Saul's doom. He was 
left to work out the natural results of an evil heart, and 
a life guided by passion and selfishness, without the 
help and direction of God. He spent his time in hunting 
David instead of overcoming his enemies. His 
kingdom was thus neglected, his people discontented, 
many of his best men abandoned him and went over 
to David, and together were driven into the enemies' 
country. His army lost courage, and in the last great 
battle he was weakened and worn by spending the 
night in consulting a witch instead of preparing for his 
work. So that he perished miserably by suicide at 
last. 'He ate of the fruit of his own way, and was 
filled with his own devices.'"— Prov. 1:3. 

Our lesson concerns the closing days of Saul's experiences. 
The Philistines with an army had penetrated 



the kingdom of Israel, and Saul, with an opposing 

army, went forth to engage them in battle. The 

two armies encamped not far from Nazareth. We can 

easily imagine the dejection of mind which led King 

Saul on the night before the battle to consult the witch 

at Endor. In his self-will he neglected the Lord's will 

in general and was filled with hatred for David, because 

he realized that it was the Lord's will to ultimately 

bring the latter to the throne of Israel. He 

realized, therefore, that in opposing David, who did 

him no harm, but was really one of his most loyal subjects, 

he was in fact fighting against God. And now, 

on the eve of battle, it is no wonder that he felt downcast 

and dejected, because when he sought to inquire 

of the Lord he got no response. He bethought 

him of the witch of Endor and concluded to inquire of 

her respecting the outcome of the battle on the morrow. 

Here again he knew that his course was in opposition 

to the divine will; for he himself had given instructions 

for the execution of the Lord's command of Deut. 18:10,12; 

Exod. 22:18. His course in this matter 

illustrated the quality of his disposition which the Lord 

disapproved. Knowing that communication with the 

evil spirits through mediums was disapproved of God, 

he nevertheless pursued the wrong course. Similarly 

some of God's people today, notwithstanding the 

instruction of the Scriptures that they should not seek 

those having familiar spirits, etc., have attended Spiritualistic 

seances "just to see how it is done." Such 

a disposition to be careless of the Lord's instruction, 

self-willed, was the one which got Saul into trouble 

and surely will make trouble for those who have it today. 

God is not pleased with those who are careless 

of his commands: he lets them take their own way as 

he permitted Saul to take his own way; but, however 

wise such a self-willed way may appear at the time, the 

end is sure to be disastrous so far as peace and fellowship 

with the Lord are concerned. Only those who are 

fully committed to the Lord and who love the Lord's 

will better than their own can expect to have fulfilled 

toward them the promise, "All things shall work together 

for good to them that love God." 

The narrative of the lesson is very simple and requires 
very little comment. Saul and three of his sons 
and his entire bodyguard perished in the battle, in 
which the Philistines seemed to have specially pursued 
the royal party. Saul committed suicide, lest falling 
alive into the hands of his enemies they would have 
tortured him, as was not infrequently the custom in 
that day. The Philistines, of course, rejoiced in his 
discomfiture, and as an evidence of their victory his 
head was sent as a trophy to one and another of their 
cities. They were worshipers of the goddess Ashtaroth, 

R3241 : page 351 



and as a memorial of their victory Saul's armor was 
hung in one of her temples. The bodies of Saul and 
his sons were fastened to the outside wall of the city of 
Bethshan as a mark of special indignity, but they were 
soon recovered by men from the tribe of Manasseh, 
who, probably to prevent further desecration to the 
bodies, burned them, and subsequently buried the 
ashes, unconsumed bones, etc. 

The Golden Text is worthy of being committed to 
memory by all. Its lesson is that we are not competent 
to guide and direct our own affairs; that we need 
divine counsel. Human judgment would be unreliable 
even if supported by absolute knowledge; but in view 
of our deficiency in knowledge as well as in judgment, 
very evidently to man many ways seem right and wise 
and advantageous and desirable which, pursued, lead 
to disappointment and chagrin and ultimately would 
lead to death— second death. The wise, proper course 
for all, therefore, is to realize and acknowledge our own 
insufficiency, unwisdom, and to look to our great Creator 
for guidance. Happy are those who heed the 
Scriptural injunction, "Remember now thy Creator in 
the days of thy youth." The earlier this right course 
is begun the better will be the results every way, the 
easier will it be for us to bend our wills to the will of 
the Lord; and the lessons and satisfaction and peace 
coming to us through the Lord's guidance will be the 
more precious. A full consecration of the heart and 
life and all our interests to the Lord, that his will may 
be done in us in all things, is the consecration necessary 
to the bringing of every justified believer into 
fellowship in the body of Christ, which is the 
Church. 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 