Help New Ones to Make Spiritual Advancement
1 Have you had the joy of studying with someone to the point where he took his stand on Jehovah’s side? It is a precious moment when someone symbolizes his dedication by water baptism. Each year tens of thousands take this step, but just as children need guidance as they grow, new ones also need assistance in making spiritual advancement.​—1 Cor. 4:14-17; 2 Cor. 6:13.
2 No doubt we all rejoiced to see so many new ones in attendance at the Memorial celebration on April 12. Now we need to help them become better acquainted with Jehovah and his organization. How can we do this? Invite and bring newly interested Memorial attenders to the congregation meetings regularly, and help them to get acquainted with others in the congregation. Encourage them to attend the “Trust in Jehovah” District Convention as well as the next scheduled circuit assembly. Make good use of the information on pages 14-15 and 18-19 of the Doing God’s Will brochure. Do not hold back, judging that they may not be ready. Many have begun regular association a short time after their first contact with the truth.
ASSISTING BIBLE STUDENTS
3 Can more be done to assist our Bible students? Have you taught them how to study? Do they need help to prepare for and participate in congregation meetings? Encourage them to join the Theocratic Ministry School when they qualify. This will provide them with valuable training and give them confidence. Regular participation in the meetings contributes greatly to spiritual advancement.
4 Try to get to know the Bible student well without prying into his personal life. Are there obstacles holding him back from progressing spiritually? If you note that he has adjustments to make in matters of Christian living, kindly and tactfully help him with these.
5 Congregation Book Study conductors could arrange to meet those who are studying and encourage them to attend the book study regularly. When visiting a book study group, the service overseer could review with the book study conductor the Bible study activity in that group. They may wish to accompany some of the publishers on their home Bible studies and offer spiritual encouragement. Additionally, when the circuit overseer visits the congregation, he or his wife will be happy to accompany publishers on Bible studies. The service overseer can review the file of Bible study reports and make appropriate arrangements for publishers to take the circuit overseer or his wife along on their Bible studies.​—Rom. 1:11; Phil. 1:25; please review km 3/81 Question Box.
6 After a new one is baptized, we continue helping him to make further progress. (Gal. 6:10; 1 Pet. 1:22; 4:8; Phil. 3:13-16) Please be sure to complete the two recommended publications with the student, even if he may have attended the Congregation Book Study when either one or both of these publications were being studied. (km 3/83 p. 4; km 9/83 p. 7) Failure to do this may leave the student unprepared spiritually to stand on his own. If anyone feels that because of personal circumstances he is unable to assist a Bible student to reach spiritual maturity, he should talk to the elders about the matter.​—See km 5/86 Question Box.
7 The joy we receive in seeing a new one make advancement on the way of life culminates in seeing him grow to Christian maturity. He, too, will then be in a position to assist other new ones in making advancement as we all unitedly work toward the goal of life.​—1 Tim. 4:16.

