Maintaining Joy in Our Ministry
1 What incomparable joy is to be found in serving Jehovah God! It is just as he said long ago through the prophet Isaiah: “Look! My own servants will rejoice . . . Look! My own servants will cry out joyfully.” (Isa. 65:13, 14) Why do Jehovah’s people rejoice and cry out joyfully today? Because of their spiritual prosperity as they dwell in a spiritual paradise. This joy moves them to share in the all-important work of helping others come to know Jehovah and share in his goodness.
2 Learning about present-day increases as set forth in the Yearbook brings us much joy. The same was true of Jesus’ disciples in the first century. News of Jehovah’s blessings upon the preaching work was a source of encouragement. (Acts 15:3, 4) As the ingathering speeds up today, we are encouraged to keep busy in the ministry. Why is the month of May a very favorable time to do that? The weather is usually mild and this year May has five weekends, so many will find it an ideal time to auxiliary pioneer.
BE CONVINCED
3 Heartfelt conviction motivates us to speak to others about our hope. (Luke 6:45) It helps us even in territory that may seem unproductive. We need to persevere, relying fully on Jehovah just as David did, who said: “O Jehovah, may you open these lips of mine.”​—Ps. 51:15; 63:5.
4 Such conviction is the product of strong faith, genuine hope, and Christian love. (1 Cor. 13:13) These qualities are cultivated through diligent personal study, application of what we learn, and perseverance in prayer. (Rom. 12:12) With Jehovah’s loving help, a positive attitude toward our service can be developed and maintained. In this way our joy in the ministry is sustained.
5 May is the second month of the Watchtower subscription offer. Each issue of The Watchtower contains lifesaving information. We benefit from the spiritual food it contains and so will others if they receive and read this magazine regularly. By having a subscription, each issue will be available in their home. With our neighbors’ welfare in mind, we want to take advantage of every opportunity to offer the subscription. If the householder is busy, a brief presentation of the subscription offer may be made. If refused, offer the current magazines.
6 We know that doing Jehovah’s work brings eternal joy not only to us but also to those who listen and act on what they hear. (Phil. 4:4) As the good news of the Kingdom reaches the hearts of many other righteously inclined individuals, may we continue to rejoice in Jehovah, and may Jehovah’s blessing be on our efforts in the ministry.​—Ps. 32:11.

