Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MAY 3
Song 20
10 min: Appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry and local announcements. Encourage support of magazine work on Saturday, May 9.
15 min: “Maintaining Joy in Our Ministry.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Feature two demonstrations when considering paragraph 5. In the first demonstration, use current Topic for Conversation and offer the Watchtower subscription, which the householder accepts. In the second demonstration, the householder interrupts by saying: “I’m busy.” Publisher then uses a suggested response from the Reasoning book under “Conversation Stoppers” and makes offer of current magazines, featuring a specific article.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Starting Home Bible Studies.” Questions and answers. In paragraph 3, present demonstration showing a publisher asking a pioneer or other experienced publisher for assistance in starting a Bible study. Show how to prepare by using “Look!” brochure. After demonstration, chairman points out that each householder is different and has specific needs and interests. Stress importance of advance study and prayer. In paragraph 5, show the same publishers making a return visit and starting a study using paragraphs 1-4 of the “Look!” brochure.
Song 126 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 10
Song 157
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Announce Society’s acknowledgment of any contribution sent in during April. Theocratic News.
18 min: “Responding to Jehovah’s Love During Youth.” Question-and-answer discussion. May interview exemplary young publisher who has auxiliary pioneered in the past or who plans to do so on school vacation.
10 min: What Youths Are Doing in Jehovah’s Organization. Under direction of an elder or well-qualified ministerial servant, have interviews with or brief reports by well-trained youths on how young Witnesses around the world are making a fine contribution to the Kingdom proclamation. Could include local experiences along with some of those on pages 12-13, 41-2, 51, and 57-8 of the 1987 Yearbook.
 7 min: Discussion of Question Box by elder.
Song 164 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 17
Song 93
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to share in magazine work on fourth Saturday. Announce plans for holiday witnessing. Read “A Fine Expression of Brotherly Love.” Warmly commend brothers for local response and mention the continuing urgent need for Kingdom Halls.
15 min: “Help New Ones to Make Spiritual Advancement.” Questions and answers. In discussing paragraph 2, include brief demonstration showing how to encourage newly interested one to attend district convention. Using pages 18 and 19 of Doing God’s Will brochure, publisher invites new one to accompany him and his family.
20 min: “1987 ‘Trust in Jehovah’ District Convention”​—Part One. Question-and-answer consideration of insert, paragraphs 1-16. Highlight importance of everyone’s gaining utmost benefit from convention program.
Song 116 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 24
Song 214
 8 min: Local announcements. Inform congregation of older booklets available for June offer. Encourage all to pick up supplies this week. Give brief presentation of booklets, using current Topic for Conversation if time permits.
17 min: “Following Bible Principles​—The Superior Way.” Talk by elder based on article in February 1, 1987, Watchtower. Give particular emphasis to material under heading “Subjection​—How Far?”
20 min: “1987 ‘Trust in Jehovah’ District Convention”​—Part Two. Question-and-answer consideration of insert, paragraphs 17-29. Emphasize that good conduct and dress are expected of all in congregation. If any particular problems have been noted locally, may wish to comment on these. As time permits, discuss “District Convention Reminders” that would apply. To be handled by presiding overseer.
Song 212 and concluding prayer.

