Presenting the Good News​—Starting Home Bible Studies
1 Jesus gave all of us a goal in our ministry when he commanded us to “make disciples . . . , teaching them.” (Matt. 28:19, 20) The most effective way to accomplish this is through the home Bible study arrangement.
2 Starting new Bible studies requires diligence on our part as fellow workers with God. (1 Cor. 3:9) Starting a study also depends a great deal on the heart condition of the individual. Jehovah’s spirit operates to draw honesthearted ones and gives us direction in helping them to grow spiritually. This is borne out by the experience of the Ethiopian eunuch. (Acts 8:26-31) He was reading the prophecy of Isaiah but could not understand it, despite his being a Jewish proselyte and an educated man. However, he had a proper heart condition. Jehovah’s spirit operated upon Philip to give the eunuch a clear understanding of the prophecy, moving him to request baptism.​—Acts 8:32-36.
3 Jehovah continues to use his servants today as instruments in helping honesthearted people to become disciples. How much Jehovah uses us is determined largely by our diligence, effectiveness, and willingness to be used as teachers. Success in starting Bible studies does not come automatically. It requires careful preparation coupled with a sincere desire to impart the truth to others. (Ezek. 9:4; Rom. 10:13, 14) To overcome objections, we should apply suggestions such as those offered in Our Kingdom Ministry and in the Reasoning book. If you need personal assistance in starting a Bible study, ask those who are experienced to help you. Arrange to work with the circuit overseer when he serves the congregation. The elders, ministerial servants, or regular pioneers may be able to work with you in the return visit work and help you start a Bible study. In this way you will learn how to get the best results from your ministry.
BE WHOLEHEARTED
4 Starting home Bible studies requires wholehearted exertion. (Col. 3:23, 24) That means working hard in the house-to-house ministry with the definite goal of finding individuals who want to study the Bible. We must be diligent in making return visits. We often call when people are not at home. Why not vary the times we call, returning when the people are most likely to be at home and more receptive to the Kingdom message? Some have found early evening to be an ideal time.
5 Return visits should be well planned, having the specific householder in mind. In some areas a simplified, direct approach is best. The latest brochures and tracts are designed to come right to the point on a particular subject. By acquainting ourselves with them, we may get better results.
6 Remember that even though we are well prepared and give an enthusiastic witness, a new disciple is made only with the help of Jehovah’s spirit. (1 Cor. 3:6) We should persevere in prayer, asking Jehovah to direct us and to open the hearts of those to whom we preach. (1 John 3:22) Jehovah will see to it that sheeplike ones, like the Ethiopian eunuch, receive an opportunity to accept the Kingdom message. By working in harmony with our prayers in behalf of sheeplike ones, we can become more effective in starting home Bible studies.

