Responding to Jehovah’s Love During Youth
1 Do you young ones in the congregation see the abundant evidence of Jehovah’s great love that surrounds you? Are you responding to that love in a way that is pleasing to him? How can you do that?
2 Most of you have loving parents who at great sacrifice to themselves have provided for you materially, spiritually, emotionally, and mentally so as to assure your getting a good start in life. Truly, this is a rich blessing from Jehovah. Additionally, through his organization, he has made available a number of publications and magazine articles designed especially for you, to help you get on in life and be able to cope with everyday cares. If you have taken advantage of these provisions, you are also well equipped to face difficult situations that confound today’s youth. Do you view all of this as evidence of God’s love for you?​—1 John 4:8, 19.
3 Jehovah has made the Bible available to all of us, whether old or young in years. And the ransom benefit he has provided through his Son Jesus Christ applies to young ones who exercise faith just as it does to faithful older ones. The Kingdom hope is yours, along with its promise of a paradise earth, where you can be free from troublesome anxieties that overwhelm so many of today’s young people who have not come to know Jehovah.
4 Does it not warm your heart toward Jehovah just to know that he has done so much for you even without your asking? (Rom. 5:8) But beyond just holding an inward feeling of gratitude, how can you respond to Jehovah’s love in a practical way?
SHOW HOW YOU FEEL BY ACTION
5 You can do things to make the truth your own. For example, you can make it your goal to read the entire Bible in a year. You can do this by determinedly reading four or five pages a day. Learn how to use the Index to find answers to your questions. Research and good study habits will contribute to your spiritual progress. (Prov. 2:2-4; 1 Tim. 4:15) Take the initiative to prepare for meetings and be prepared to comment. At meetings and conventions, take notes of main points and later discuss these with others. By such earnest efforts, you manifest genuine appreciation for what has been done for you, and you will grow spiritually.​—2 Pet. 1:5-8.
6 There are also things you can do to help the congregation. Helping older or infirm brothers in practical ways is a fine response to Jehovah’s love. Have you thought about making a regular contribution to cover Kingdom Hall expenses? Just reading Mark 12:41-44 will help you see that a small contribution from one with little means is much appreciated by Jehovah God and his Son. Volunteer your service when there is a need to clean the Kingdom Hall and its surroundings. There may be opportunities to work at conventions and circuit assemblies if there is a need.
HELPING OTHERS SPIRITUALLY
7 The apostle Paul responded to Jehovah’s love by going out of his way to help others spiritually. Even though you are young, you can do the same by progressively improving your ability and increasing the time you devote to the ministry. Do you have a personal goal of hours each week or month? Many young publishers have been able to conduct Bible studies with schoolmates or others. Perhaps you, too, can do this if you ask for Jehovah’s help and courageously put forth the effort. If you are baptized, auxiliary pioneering offers you a fine opportunity to help others spiritually during your school vacations. Can you encourage others to work with you in the auxiliary pioneer work?
8 Christians are warned against accepting God’s undeserved kindness and missing its purpose. (2 Cor. 6:1) May your response to Jehovah’s love prove that you appreciate what he has done for you. If you remember your Grand Creator during your youth, you can be sure of benefiting from his love for all eternity.​—Eccl. 12:1.

