From Our Readers
Caregiving—Meeting the Challenge  This excellent series of articles (February 8, 1997) encouraged me greatly. I am 17 years old, and I am caring for my grandfather who had a stroke and for my mother who had a nervous breakdown. It soothed me to read that it is normal to be annoyed with patients at times and to ask, ‘Why did this happen to me?’ I also appreciated the article about the practical assistance that can be given to the caregiver.
P. T., Italy
Your description of the feelings of the people who take care of ill loved ones was exact and full of understanding. I thank Jehovah that he incited you to write these beautiful articles. I am sure they will help all of us who are in this situation to reconcile ourselves to it and to continue serving Jehovah with rejoicing and zeal.
B. V., Czech Republic
Recently divorced, I am the mother of two teenagers, and my son suffers severely from ADHD (Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder). The stress associated with this load is enormous. Through the recent articles on caregiving, I was able to understand my feelings of embarrassment, anger, depression, and helplessness. On a positive note, older brothers in the congregation have taken my son under their wings. What a joy to see love put into action!
C. C., United States
My husband suffers from dementia and depends on my care. I was afraid that I wouldn’t be able to manage. Jeanny, mentioned in the articles, gave me courage when she advised: “Fear of what might happen is often worse than the reality.”
A. P., Slovakia
I was at one time a caregiver and felt many of the feelings described in the articles. Many times I couldn’t tell others about my frustration and guilt. These articles have enabled me to discuss my feelings.
F. F., Nigeria
I never thought such special articles would be published. My mother has been bedridden since 1989. As the only son, and having neither siblings nor a father, I had to assume the responsibility of caring for her. I agree with the last paragraph of the series—that Jehovah and his Son, Jesus Christ, are the most compassionate caregivers of all. On many occasions when the situation became desperate and I thought I could not cope, I would turn to Jehovah in prayer and beg him to help me. Simply by knowing that he was listening, I could feel the strength coming back to me.
M. A. M., Peru
My husband is sick, and I have experienced almost everything the magazine mentioned. I recall many occasions when brothers and sisters asked about my husband. Sometimes I got irritated, wondering, ‘Why do they always ask about him? What about me?’ Now I understand that such feelings are only natural.
M. A. I. I., Spain
Learning Disabilities  I am the parent of a ten-year-old son with severe ADHD. I am very happy to tell you that since the series “Help for Children With Learning Disabilities” (February 22, 1997) was published, several friends have told me that even though they had tried to understand the disorder and to help me, they had never fully understood how my son and I felt. Most commented that they would now be even more willing to assist. One sister in the congregation took the time to go over the article with my son and encourage him. My son later came to me and asked to read the magazine again.
L. A. D., United States

