The Beauty of Alpine National Parks
BY AWAKE! CORRESPONDENT IN FRANCE
CRYSTAL-CLEAR water flowing in a torrent, the gentle rustling of leaves in the wind, a cloudless sky overhead, the sunlight filtering through the trees. These are the delightful sights and sounds that greet us, and we are sure they are only the prelude to a magnificent day. Where are we? In the Écrins National Park, in the Dauphiné Alps, France.
At one of the park’s entrances at Ailefroide, at the edge of the forest, information panels indicate that certain activities are forbidden in the park, such as camping or lighting fires. We are invited to take any litter home with us, and we notice that dogs are forbidden, as they often frighten or disturb the indigenous fauna.
Their Purpose
But what exactly is a national park, and what purpose does it serve? The first one, Yellowstone National Park, in the state of Wyoming, was created in 1872 in the United States. Since then, many have been opened on every continent. In France, there are seven national parks, three of which are in the alpine crescent, which stretches from France to Austria. The first national park in Europe was created in 1914 in the canton of Graubünden (Grisons), Switzerland. Then, in 1922, the Gran Paradiso National Park, in Italy, was opened. Other national parks in the alpine crescent include Berchtesgaden, in Germany; Hohe Tauern, in Austria; Stelvio, in Italy; and Triglav, in Slovenia. The first national park in France was Vanoise, created in 1963.
The primary objective of national parks is to protect natural flora and fauna. It must also be noted that there are many other parks without national status that have exactly the same goal. Among these are the Vercors Regional Park, in France, and the Karwendel Reserve, in Austria. However, national parks have a special status that confers a certain authority upon their guards. They are authorized to fine those who do not follow park rules. For example, bringing a dog into a park in Switzerland can result in a fine of up to 500 Swiss francs ($350, U.S.).
Perhaps some think of that as excessive. But there are reasons for certain prohibitions and fines. Consider. On one occasion while in the Mercantour National Park, in the Maritime Alps in southeast France, we came across a tiny young chamois. It appeared to be on its own and completely helpless. However, we did not touch it, as we thought our scent might prevent its mother from accepting it back. But imagine if we had had a dog with us! The poor chamois would have been terrified, especially if the dog had started barking.
Does this mean that the guards are nothing more than park policemen? No, of course not. One guard we met in the Mercantour Park showed us where a herd of chamois had just passed by, leaving their tracks in the newly fallen snow. He pointed out the way the hooves left their imprint. This helped us to appreciate that in addition to preserving the natural balance in the park, the guards’ role is to inform and teach.
Nature’s Rich Menagerie
Farther along our path, on a distant hillside, we see chamois capering on the névés, fields of granular snow. We also catch sight of two marmots frolicking on the scree slopes. Some of these marmots are remarkably tame, approaching hikers, in hopes of receiving a treat.
Herds of ibex live in some alpine parks. They are most numerous in Gran Paradiso Park, in Italy. We were thrilled to see some at Mercantour. This southerly alpine park is rich in animal life. Mouflons, a type of wild sheep, roam freely, and wolves have reappeared in recent years. However, visitors need not worry, since the wolves rarely venture near the footpaths and they shy away from humans. In the past, bears also roamed the Swiss Alps, but the last one seen there was killed in 1904. In Western Europe brown bears can now be found in the Pyrenees, on the border of France and Spain; in the Cantabrian Mountains, in northern Spain; and in Abruzzi National Park, in central Italy. On the other hand, you can sometimes hear a stag bellowing in the Swiss National Park, where they are numerous.
Apart from the larger animals, however, there are plenty of smaller animals to delight the visitor, such as ermines and varying hares, which turn white in winter, as well as foxes, marmots, and squirrels. Additionally, myriads of insects, including magnificent butterflies and industrious ants, inhabit these regions. Bird lovers will certainly not be disappointed. You may catch sight of an eagle soaring high above your head or even, in the Swiss National Park and in Vanoise and Mercantour parks, a lammergeier, or bearded vulture. It is also quite common to hear the characteristic sound of a woodpecker’s beak striking the trunk of a tree in search of insects. Many ask how these mountain dwellers survive the winter in the Alps. These animals are well adapted to this environment, although harsh conditions do eliminate the sick and the aged.
Alpine Flora
Even the plants are protected in the parks. Consequently, it is forbidden to pick the flowers, including the magnificent orange lilies, which border our path. Perhaps you wonder why. Some plants—such as the famous edelweiss, the alpine anemone, the alpine rose, the mountain bluet, and some varieties of gentian—are rare, and it is vital to protect them to ensure their survival. The variety of flowers is truly impressive.
Nature’s beauty is also apparent in the trees that grace the parks. In autumn the larches’ golden hues adorn the forest. The arolla, or Swiss pine, on the other hand, seems to defy the rigors of winter, supplying a constant source of food for the bird commonly known as the nutcracker. This bird transports its harvest of pine seeds in its crop and then buries them for future consumption. In doing so, it contributes to the spread of the pine tree to places where it would not otherwise have reached. Without a doubt, we could spend all day observing the beauty that surrounds us. But if we are to reach the mountain cabin, we must press on.
We continue our walk and soon reach a more difficult trail. The chamois seem to be waiting for us in the forest, and we are able to take some photos. However, as we move closer, these beautiful creatures flee, apparently frightened by our approach. We reflect on the marvelous promise of God recorded at Isaiah 11:6-9: “The wolf will actually reside for a while with the male lamb, and with the kid the leopard itself will lie down, and the calf and the maned young lion and the well-fed animal all together; and a mere little boy will be leader over them. And the cow and the bear themselves will feed; together their young ones will lie down. . . . They will not do any harm or cause any ruin in all my holy mountain.” We rejoice at the prospect that soon the whole earth will become an immense parklike paradise, where men and animals will live together without fear.
[Picture on page 13]
A chamois at home in the French Alps
[Picture on page 14]
A cautious marmot in Vanoise National Park, France
[Picture on page 14]
An eagle at Mercantour National Park, France
[Picture on page 15]
Chamois climb in the French Alps
[Picture on page 15]
A young chamois
[Picture on page 16]
Alpine rose
[Picture on page 16]
Wild artichoke
[Picture on page 16]
Ancolie des Alpes
[Picture on page 16]
Ibex
[Picture on page 17]
Orange lily
[Picture on page 17]
Turk’s-cap lily
[Picture on page 17]
Panicaut des Alpes
[Picture on page 17]
Marmot

