Where Did All the Codfish Go?
THE codfish were so thick in the water that “a boat could hardly be rowed through them.” So said explorer John Cabot in 1497 as he described one of the world’s richest fishing grounds—the Grand Banks of Newfoundland. By the late 1600’s, the annual catch of cod at Newfoundland had reached almost 100,000 metric tons. During the next century, the yield doubled.
Today, however, the situation has changed dramatically. The codfish stock is now so depleted that in 1992 the Canadian government imposed its own ban on Atlantic cod fishing, leaving an estimated 35,000 people looking for work in other sectors. In 1997 the moratorium is still in effect. But where did all the codfish go?
During the 1960’s, international fishing fleets converged on Newfoundland’s offshore banks to harvest huge quantities of cod. By 1968, trawlers from more than a dozen countries were taking 800,000 tons of fish a year from Newfoundland’s banks. This was three times the annual average catch for the previous century.
While colder waters, the proliferation of seals, and the migration of codfish may also have played a part in the depletion of the codfish population, a large portion of blame for the cod disaster must be placed on human greed. “It was overfishing—pure and simple,” says one marine biologist.
What future is there for the Atlantic codfish? Some doubt that there are enough young fish to mature, spawn, and replenish the species. The Evening Telegram of St. John’s commented: “Canada’s oldest industry, the Atlantic cod fishery, will thrive only in history books.” However, there is hope!
The Bible assures us that soon, in God’s promised new world of righteousness, there will be no place for greed. (2 Peter 3:13) Jehovah will “bring to ruin those ruining the earth” and make the land and the sea abound with life to the blessing of those who want to serve and please him.—Revelation 11:18.
[Picture Credit Lines on page 31]
© Tom McHugh, The National Audubon Society Collection/PR
Mountain High Maps® Copyright © 1995 Digital Wisdom, Inc.

