Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will doubtless recall these points:
● Since Jesus Christ will hand over the kingdom to his Father at the end of his thousand-year reign, how should we understand the Biblical references that speak of his rule as having “no end”?
The Messianic kingdom will never come to a violent end and the fruitage of its fine accomplishments will remain for all eternity.​—P. 10.a
● How was Simeon’s prophecy about Mary’s being ‘run through with a sword’ fulfilled?​—Luke 2:35.
The fact that the majority rejected Jesus must have been distressing to Mary. However, when he was nailed to the stake like the worst kind of criminal, the effect on Mary was comparable to having a sword run through her.​—P. 29.
● Why does Jeremiah 22:23 refer to the city of Jerusalem as “Lebanon”?
Because of its lofty and magnificent location, Jerusalem was like mountainous Lebanon, with its proud cedars. Also, cedarwood was used extensively in the construction of the palace complex, making it like heavily wooded Lebanon.​—P. 38.
● Why is being a good listener especially important for those in supervisory capacities?
Listening to sound counsel from others can prevent one from making serious mistakes. Paying attention to the words of others may stimulate thinking, gives one understanding as to how others really feel and makes it possible to take needed steps to prevent minor problems from becoming serious.​—P. 51.
● At Proverbs 13:20, who are the “stupid ones” with whom a person should have no dealings?
They are not simply people who lack knowledge but individuals who are insensible to moral truth, godless persons.​—P. 68.
● How do Christians ‘show honor to one another’?​—Rom. 12:10.
They can do so by showing deep respect for their fellow believers and by taking them seriously, giving sincere, heartfelt attention and consideration to their words and feelings.​—P. 70.
● Why does the counsel of 1 Corinthians 11:4-6 regarding a man’s praying with uncovered head and a woman’s doing so with her head covered not necessarily apply to private prayers?
The counsel of 1 Corinthians 11:4-6 relates to congregational meetings and, therefore, applies to group prayer. This is evident from the fact that prophesying is mentioned along with prayer. Manifestly a person would not be uttering prophecies alone in his room where he might be saying his prayers.​—P. 127.
● How was Enoch “transferred so as not to see death”?
Evidently Jehovah God did not permit Enoch to experience the pangs of death or any awareness of dying but may have cut short his life while giving him a vision of marvelous future developments.​—P. 135.
● In determining the validity of marriage, should the decision of civil authorities be viewed as absolute?
No. The views of civil authorities regarding marriage vary from one country to another. They may even be at odds with one another. At times the views of the civil authorities are contrary to the Bible. For true Christians, the absolute authority is God’s standard respecting marriage as set forth in his Word.​—P. 184.
● What good reasons are there for showing confidence in responsible people?
Jehovah God has set the example in trusting his faithful servants. The showing of confidence often invites cooperation, encourages initiative, provides incentive and enables more to share in the joy of a job that is done well.​—P. 254.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1977.

