Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., FEBRUARY 15, 1917 


No. 4 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


GREAT STRIDES IN TEMPERANCE MOVEMENT 

While the church nominal makes little or no effort to correct
 the errors in her creeds, handed down from a dark and remote
 past, but exhibits a declining interest in real Bible study 
and rather encourages every effort to fasten still more firmly 
upon the minds of her supporters the doctrines of Higher 
Criticism and Evolution, nevertheless we cannot observe with 
indifference her interest in the direction of placing still further
 restrictions upon the liquor traffic in the various States 
and territories of the country. We quote from the Literary 
Digest: 

"The past twelve months in the religious world, comments
 a writer in the New York Herald, witnessed a 
great stride forward in the temperance movement, when 
four more States went dry at the elections in November, 
so that now there are twenty-three States in the 'dry* 
column. In this connection we learn from the report 
of the Board of Temperance of the Methodist Episcopal 
Church, that 

" 'The Territory of Alaska, by a 5 to 3 vote, expressed 
itself in favor of prohibition on November 7, 1916; but it 
is necessary that Congress put the policy into effect, as 
that body reserves the right to legislate on the liquor 
question for Alaska. Utah, by action of a pledged Legislature
, will pass a prohibition law, to become effective 
August 1, 1917. Florida, also by pledged legislative action
, will submit a prohibition amendment to the Constitution
 to be voted upon in the general elections of 1918. 

" 'Wyoming has a legislature pledged to prohibition 
submission, but the details of its action are not determined
. New Mexico is expected to vote upon the question
 in 1918. The Democratic primary of Texas has instructed
 the Legislature to submit the question to be 
voted upon July 28, 1917. Minnesota has a substantial 
dry majority in its Legislature, and will probably go dry 
in 1918. 

" 'It is practically assured that Kentucky and Nevada 
will vote upon prohibition, but, the time is not certain. 
Nevada will almost certainly go dry, and the result in 
Kentucky cannot be predicted. In Missouri and Indiana 
Btrong effort to induce the forthcoming sessions of the 
Legislature to enact statutory prohibition will be made. 
Iowa, with statutory prohibition, will, by its Legislature, 
submit prohibition for the Constitution for the second 
time, as is required by law before it may be voted upon/ 

"In evidence of the growth of church unity, our Herald 
informant points toward the merging of the two great 
branches of the Methodist church, North and South, and 
he recalls that last winter commissions of all American 
PTote&tant churches met at Garden City, L. I., for the first 
time, and adopted a general platform on which it recommended
 that the World Conference on Faith and Order 
proceed. We are reminded also that Pope Benedict XV. 
sent a letter to the commissions, assuring them of his 
'deep interest and prayers.' " 

THE ONE TBtTE CHXTRCH 
We view with increasing interest also the various moves 
made during the past year in the direction of "Church Unity." 


But Watch To web readers are not ignorant of what will follow
 the realization of "Church Unity," which would not be 
genuine church unity, but a Federation influenced, no doubt, 
by conditions of a threatening character growing out of the 
European War, and formed for self-protection and advancement
 at almost any cost. — Revelation 13:15-17. 

The desirability of oneness in the church of Christ is beyond 
dispute. The impropriety of sectarianism, or division, is after 
centuries of separation generally conceded. But so recently as 
twenty-five years ago many still defended the divided condition
 as being helpful. Invariably they pointed to our Lord's 
words, "I am the Vine ; ye are the branches. Every branch in 
me that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth 
more fruit." (John 15:1-5) It was claimed that the denominations
 are the branches. But the teaching of the Master here 
in that his people are related to him in an individual sense, 
and not as parties, sects^ or denominations. 

St. Paul sets forth the same great truth, declaring that 
Christ Jesus is the Head of the church which is his body; and 
that as the human body has many members under the full 
control of the head, except when diseased, so the church, as 
members in particular of the body of Christ, are all to be 
subject to the Lord as their Head. They are to be so connected
 to their Head, and thus with each other, that when one 
suffers, all suffer with him, and when pne rejoices, all rejoice 
with him, because they have fellowship "in the one Spirit of the 
Head. 

This true church has never been divided. Each member is 
united with the Lord, the Head, and through him to every 
other member of his body, which is the church. In this 
church there has always been maintained one Lord Jesus — 
one faith, his word of promise — and one baptism, consecration 
into his death. — 2 Timothy 2:11, 12; Ephesians 4:4-6. 
"IMAGE OP THE BEAST* '—GIVING IT IJFB 

Recently there was published in the leading newspapers of 
the country a dispatch from Washington, D. C M which bears 
the appearance of great significance to many of our readers. 
Several copies of this dispatch have been forwarded to us by 
persons deeply interested in the fulfilment of prophecies respecting
 Church Federation and in the manner in which the 
impartation of "life unto the Image of the Beast" will be 
brought about. — Rev, 13:15. 

While later developments will doubtless hurry along the 
fulfilment of Scripture relating to Babylon's downfall — "in 
one hour" — God's faithful people, "the wise/' will continue to 
walk in the light of his Word and rejoice in every evidence 
of its fulfillment, remembering that before Zion travails, she 
shall bring forth; before her pain comes, she shall be delivered 
of a man child. (Isaiah 66:7-9) The Head of this man 
child — Christ Jesus, glorified — was delivered before nominal 
fleshly Zion's travail eighteen hundred years ago. The body — 
"the church which is* his body" — shall be delivered prior to 
the collapse of nominal spiritual Zion, toward which we believe
 Babylon is now fast progressing. We give following a 
portion or the article referred to : 

"Private letters from the Vatican, received by Dr. A. 

Palmieri of the Library of Congress, a recognized writer 

on ecclesiastical subjects, announce that Pope Benedict 


[6043] 


(52-53) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


B*ooxi<yjc, N. V. 


XV. is about to appoint a commission of four cardinals 
to renew a movement begun by Pope Leo XIII., and abandoned
 by Pope Pius X., looking to a reunion of Christianity
 and the cultivation of friendly relations with the 
Anglican Church. A public announcement on the subject 
from Rome in expected soon. 

"Dr. Palmieri said that the new movement, as outlined
 in his advices, will be directed particularly toward 
an establishment of the reunion of the Russian church 
and the Papacy and to a thorough re-examination into the 
validity of Anglican or Episcopal ordinations, which was 
settled in the negative in a papal bull 'Apostolica Sedis,' 
by Pope Leo X. The interest of the pope in the problem 
of Christian unity is said to have been intensified by the 
recent progress of the world congress, initiated by the 
American Episcopal church, 

LONGS FOB REUNION 

" The new pope/ said Dr, Palmieri, summarizing the 
information received from Rome, 'has taken a considerable
 part in the efforts of neutral nations to establish 
peace among nations. The Vatican's efforts have been 
suggested not only by a humanitarian spirit, but by a 
longing for Christian unity and to end the conflict which 
long since has divided Christian churches. Efforts of 
Leo XIII. for carrying out the reunion of Christianity 
were abruptly stopped by Pius X., who aimed at an inner 
reform of the Catholic clergy and turned all his energies 
to the crushing of modernism [Higher Criticism and Evolution
]. 

" 'Benedict XV. thinks it is time to renew the policy of 
Leo XIII., also that a reestablishment of a political peace 
would be the first step toward renewed attempts to stop 
the splitting of Christianity into a greater number of 
sects. 

" 'It seems to the Vatican that the Orthodox Slavs will 
be very soon called to take a more active part in the 
life of western nations, either Protestant or Catholic, 
and that it is necessary to come to an understanding with 
them to avoid evils produced by religious intolerance. 
The newly planned commission of cardinals will pay attention
 to yearnings for unity, which from time to time 
manifest themselves in the Orthodox church, and to cultivate
 friendly relations with the Anglican church. 

WUJi REEXAMINE ARGUMENTS 

" 'One of the most important tasks of the new commission
 will be a thorough reexamination of the arguments
 pro and con on the validity of Anglican ordinations. 
The Bull 'Apostolica Sedis' by Leo X. has settled in the 
negative the problem of that validity, but generally theological
 schools assume a more favorable attitude toward 
acknowledgment of the validity of Anglican orders, and 
the new commission of cardinals will carefully ponder the 
reasons set forth by Russian and Anglican divines against 
the decision of Pope Leo X. The friendship of the Anglican
 church is appreciated by Roane, for she may be as a 
link of union between Roman Catholicism and Russian 
Orthodoxy.' » 

"SO MIGHTY AN EARTHQUAKE* ' 
The New York American continues to see and boldly proclaim 
editorially the "Earthquake" of Scripture. We quote as follows: 
"What direct effect the President's address will have upon 
the Governments of Europe we shall soon see. That his high 
object of universal justice, liberty and permanent peace 
can be obtained without a more definite and adequate plan 
and programane we frankly doubt. 

"But we suspect that the President was not speaking 
alone to governments. His notable address is an address to 
peoples, and we cannot help thinking that no man understands
 better than Mr. Wilson that this is the true purport 
of his words. 

"It is apparent to thoughtful men that this war, huge as 
it is, is only the prologue to a greater drama; that when 
the ruling classes have settled upon terms of peace with one 
another, they must then settle with the peoples they have so 
long ruled, and whom they have led or driven into this 
dreadful massacre. 

"Nothing that is still in the future can be more certainly 
expected to happen than a series of revolutions in the European
 States which will change the whole 'face of society; 


which will probably result in the complete overthrow of royalties
 and aristocracies and privileged classes, and out of which 
may form a federated, cooperative commonwealth of Europe. 

"We have said more than once, and we still firmly believe
, that the thrones of aristocracies of Europe are on their 
swift way to the junk-heap; that the moment the crushing 
pressure of military dictatorships is removed by peace, and 
the peoples of the warring nations are free to discuss with 
one another the leadership and policies and conditions which 
resulted in this gigantic crime against mankind, the fate of 
the old order of government and society in Europe would be 
written in unanimous revolution. 

"We do not believe that such an ideal peace concert of 
European governments as the President pictures so brightly 
can be achieved at a near-at-hand congress, for the very reason
 that we have no faith in the stability of the present 
European governments or the present political and social 
systems of Europe. 

"This, the most dreadful and destructive of all wars, will, 
in our judgment, usher in revolutions that will succeed both 
with the sword and with the ballot, and that will change 
the whole aspect of Europe and profoundly modify human 
society all over the globe. 

"Until that time, until the earthquake has spent its 
force, until the architects of ruin have levelled Europe's 
governments and social systems, and the architects of construction
 have erected new governments and new social systems
 on the destroyed foundations of the old, there can be 
no permanent concert of Powers for the purpose of maintaining
 peace or for any other purpose." 

THE BURNING BUSH 
The child of God needs no demonstration to prove the 
truthfulness of the Bible statement that a "bush burned 
with fire, and the bush was not consumed"; as, for instance, 
that respecting Moses and the "burning bush" (Exodus 3:1-3) ; 
but the following from the Scientific American will be of interest
 to Watch Towee readers : 

"One of the most remarkable plants in the world is 
certainly the so-called Burning Bush, Dictarrmus frominella
. This species is native to Western Asia, though 
nowadays commonly to be found in gardens in temperate 
regions. 

"A great many people who grow the plant are quite 
unaware of its strange habits. As a matter of fact the 
Dictamnus secretes a fragrant essential oil in great abundance
. This is produced in especially large quantities 
by the flower stems, in warm weather volatilizing so that 
the air surrounding the plant is impregnated. Further, 
this vapor is highly inflammable and, if a naked flame is 
brought near to the plant, the fumes at once take fire 
with a most singular result. The whole plant is surrounded
 with crackling shooting flames, reddish in color, 
and leaving a highly aromatic odor behind them. The 
Burning Bush is not injured in any way by the fire; for 
the flames do not actually come into contact with the 
plant itself. 

"Several conditions are needful if the experiment with 
the Burning Bush is to be a success. Thus it is essential 
that the air should be very dry and warm, also that 
there should be practically no wind. The best effects are 
secured only just after the opening of the flowers. It will 
be realized that these conditions cannot always be relied 
upon. A plan has recently been devised by means of which 
the inflammable nature of the vapors given out by the 
Dictamnus may be shown with startling effect, 

"A strong plant of the Burning Bush is raised in a 
pot. At the time when the flowers are just reaching perfection
 the plant is placed in a glass jar or a shade. 
This is closely covered for some hours before the time of 
the experiment. On removing the cover a light is held 
over the plant, when there is at once a tremendous 
outburst of flame. So great is the rush of fire that it is 
wise to keep one's face away from the top of the jar; a 
nasty burn is not by any means out of the question. 
After an interval of an hour or so with the jar or case 
closed up the experiment may be repeated with similar results
. 

"In connection with the Dictamnus St is rather remarkable
 that the species is common where the incident 
of Moses and the Burning Bush is said to have occurred." 


EXEMPTION OF SOCIETY PROPERTY FROM TAXATION 


Since there has been so much published by various newspapers
 concerning the taxation of the Association's property, 
and our effort to have the same exempt from taxes, we deem 


it proper that we should here give to the friends a statement 
of the facts. 

The laws of the land usually are very just. It is rather 

[6044] 


February IS, \$l? 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(53-54) 


remarkable that so many righteous laws have been enacted 
by imperfect men. It is quite evident that the law-makers have 
been guided in a large measure by the code of perfect laws 
which God gave to Israel through Moses. The law has been 
brought into disrepute in the minds of many, not because the 
laws are wrong, but because they are ofttimes enforced without
 reference to justice. 

Under the Membership Corporation Law of the State of 
New York, a corporation created and organized for the purpose
 of the mental and moral improvement of men and 
women, and for religious, charitable, scientific and historical 
purposes is exempt from taxation. This exemption is based 
upon the theory that the corporation is engaged in a work 
that is beneficial to the public in general, and therefore such 
work should be encouraged. 

In 1909 the Peoples Pulpit Association was created and 
organized under the Membership Corporation Act of the State 
of New York, for the purpose of aiding in carrying on the 
work in which the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society 
has been engaged for more than thirty years. The Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society is incorporated under the 
Pennsylvania laws, but certain legal requirements made it 
necessary to have a New York corporation in order to facilitate 
the work of the Society. Hence the Peoples Pulpit Association
 was organized. Its charter declares that it is organized 
for the purpose of the mental and moral improvement of men 
and women by teaching the Bible and preaching the Gospel 
by word of mouth and through the printed page, and for 
historical, scientific and benevolent purposes. This corporation
 first purchased the Beecher Home on Columbia Heights, 
thereafter, as the harvest work expanded, purchased an adjoining
 piece of property, and later constructed on the rear a 
new building, joining the three, thereby making one property, 
which is designated as the "Bethel Home." 

For some time after the organization of the Corporation 
the Tax Commissioners of the City of New York, upon examination
 of the property and the uses to which it was being 
put and is now put, readily exempted the property from taxation
; and for a time it was free from the burden of taxes. 
Later, some of the enemies of our work, seeking to make us 
all the trouble possible, filed a petition before the Commissioners
 of Taxes and Assessments of New York City, demanding
 that the Bethel Home be taxed. Considerable pressure 
was brought to bear on the Commission. A public hearing 
was demanded and had, at which hearing strenuous efforts 
were made to show that the Peoples Pulpit Association is 
not entitled to the benefit of the exemption law. The Commissioners
 were divided as to what they should do, and concluded
 that the matter should be submitted to the courts in 
order to get a final decision. The Commission therefore assessed
 the Bethel Home at the sum of $100,000. Counsel for 
our Association thereupon instituted a proceeding in the Supreme
 Court of New York upon a Writ of Certiorari. The 
Corporation Counsel, after long delay, filed and returned an 
answer in the Supreme Court, and the case came on for 
hearing in that Court before Mr. Justice Callaghan on the 
15th of January. The issues to be determined by this case 
involved not only the taxes upon the Bethel Home, but also 
those upon the New York City Temple; and there was involved
 the aggregate sum of between twenty-five and thirty 
thousand dollars, which the Association would be required to 
pay as taxes if the decision should be against it. 

The taking of testimony in the case occupied the greater 
part of one week. At the close of the hearing of the testimony
 the Corporation Counsel, who appeared on behalf of 
the Tax Commissioners of the City of New York, moved to dismiss
 the case and to leave the assessment standing, upon the 
ground that the Peoples Pulpit Association had not shown 
from the facts that the property was and is used exclusively 
for the purposes for which the corporation was organized, 
and was therefore not entitled to exemption. The Court 
overruled this motion. Counsel for the city then asked that 
the court permit the filing of- a written brief and argument 


in support of the city's contention, and that the court defer 
the decision until some future day, that such brief and argument
 might be considered. Mr. Justice Callaghan thereupon 
remarked from the bench : "I have not the slightest doubt 
that this organization comes clearly within the statute; if 
there were the slightest doubt in my mind I should give you 
an opportunity to submit briefs. It is shown conclusively that 
these premises as a whole are devoted to the purposes provided
 by the statute." 

The Court thereupon decided that the Peoples Pulpit 
Association was and is entitled to the benefits of the statute, 
and that it should be exempt from the payment of taxes upon 
the real estate involved. 

THE EAGLE 

The Brooklyn Daily Eagle, as is well known by the many 
readers of The Watch Tower, has for several years unjustly 
persecuted Pastor Russell and our Society; but we hope that 
its action wa3 based entirely upon a misapprehension, and 
that now, since that paper sees the true situation, its attitude 
may be different. In its issue of January 20, commenting upon 
the result of this case, the Brooklyn Daily Eagle said: 

"The People's Pulpit Association, founded in 1909 by 
the late Pastor Russell, yesterday won its suit for exemption
 from taxes on the property owned by it at 122-124 
Columbia Heights, known as 'Bethel Home/ and valued 
at $100,000. 

"Justice Stephen Callaghan of the Supreme Court, 
before whom the trial was held during the week, at the 
conclusion of the testimony yesterday afternoon, announced
 from the bench, without giving the Assistant 
Corporation Counsel an opportunity to present briefs on 
the case for the city, that he was satisfied that the Association
 was engaged in religious work within the meaning
 of the statutes and therefore entitled to exemption 
from taxes. 

" *I haven't the slightest doubt that this organization 
comes clearly within the statute,' Justice Callaghan Baid; 
'If there were the slightest doubt in my mind, I should 
give you an opportunity to submit briefs. It may not be 
true that every room in this house is used for the work 
of disseminating Bible tracts and literature, but it is 
shown conclusively these premises as a whole are devoted 
to that purpose. 

" It is not for me or any other judge to say whether 
or not these men are sincere in their work. For myself, I 
believe that they are and that their purpose is a righteous 
one.' 

"Mr. Durham tried to bring out the fact that when 
124 Columbia Heights was occupied by Henry Ward 
Beecher taxes were paid upon it, but Justice Callaghan 
rejected that evidence. 

"Joseph F. Rutherford, Pastor Russell's successor as 
head of the Watch Toweb Society, was the last witness. 
He testified that in 1909 he and four other gentlemen 
raised $10,000 between them to settle Mrs. Russell's 
claims for back alimony against the Pastor, and that 
these five gentlemen continued to subscribe $100 a month 
to pay alimony to Mrs. Russell from 1909 until the Pastors
 death in October, 1916. He declared that not one 
cent of this* alimony came from the treasury of the Society
. This arrangement to pay the Pastor's alimony, 
he said, was made while Pastor Russell was in Europe 
and was done without the Pastor's knowledge and consent. 
The money all came from the private resources of the five 
subscribers, he said. The expenses of Pastor Russell in his 
libel Buit against The Eagle were met in the same way, it 
was testified." 
It is understood that the City will appeal the case to a 
higher Court. Our counsel, however, feel confident that the 
higher Court will sustain the position of Mr. Justice Callaghan
, and that the tax* matter will be definitely settled in 
favor of our Association. 


The great Master, Christ Jesus, began to promulgate in 
the earth God's message of salvation to mankind. He pointed 
out that the forgiveness of sins and the blessings of life everlasting
 could come only to those who accept Jesus as their 
Redeemer and who walk in the ways of righteousness in the 
reverence of God. The apostles taught the sa*me doctrine 
as long as they were upon the earth. The teachings of Jesus 
and the Apostles pointed out that "the wages of sin is 
death"; that sin is the result of the disobedience of Father 
Adam; that this death sentence came upon all men by inWHO
 IS RESPONSIBLE? 

heritance as the offspring of Adam; that God provided redemption
 through the merit of Christ Jesus* sacrifice; that 
those in this age who exercise faith in the merit of nia 
sacrifice and who present themselves in full consecration 
to do the will of God receive the imputed merit of Christ and 
are accepted by Jehovah as joint-sacriflcers with the Lord 
Jesus; and that if thus continuing faithful unto death they 
are to be changed in the first resurrection to the divine nature 
to live and reign with Christ for the blessing of mankind and 
for the carrying out of the eternal purpose of Jehovah. They 


VII— 15 


[6045] 


(54-61) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, in. Y. 


further taught the coming of Messiah's kingdom; that this 
kingdom would be set up when the church is complete; that 
the church is the body of Christ and is selected without reference
 to creed or denomination, Jesus taught his disciples to 
pray, "Thy kingdom come," well knowing that the establishment
 of the kingdom would mark the beginning of blessings 
to the poor, groaning creation. 

After the death of the Apostles, false teachers arose 
and erroneous doctrines were put forth. Contrary to the 
Scriptures, the clergy was formed, as distinguished from the 
laity of common people. The clergy began to teach that the 
wages of sin is purgatorial torment or eternal torment; that 
the souls of all are immortal; and that death does not mean 
death, but the beginning of either bliss or torture; that only 
a comparatively small number would be saved and taken to 
heaven, and that all the others would be forever damned. 
They taught the divine right of kings to rule the people, and 
asserted that this right came to the kings through the ecclesiastical
 systems. Numerous sects and denominations were organized
, and spread these doctrines throughout the earth, 
each claiming that these teachings are supported by the Bible. 

In more modern times teachers of Higher Criticism have 
arisen in the church nominal, who have repudiated the Bible 
altogether, denying that any part of it is inspired; and denying
 that it is God's Word to man, but instead that it was 
written by men in ancient times who were less capable of 
writing than the modern clergymen. These and other clergymen
 calling themselves Evolutionists, teach that the Genesis 
story of the creation of man a perfect being and of his subsequent
 sin and fall, and of God's plan for redemption of man 
through the blood of Christ, is all nonsense and not worthy 
of the consideration of thoughtful men and women. The 
church nominal throughout the world for some time has been 
devoted chiefly to social functions and the teaching of almost
 everything except the Scriptures, The effect upon the 
people has been demoralizing to an alarming degree. 

ADVANCEMENT IN THINGS MATERIA!— DECLTJTE IK 
THINGS SPIRITUAL 

We call to mind that the forefathers of America migrated 
from Europe to New England because they believed the Bible 
and desired to teach it and to serve God according to the dictates
 of their own conscience. They taught and followed the 
Scriptures as best they could. After several hundred years we 
mark a great advancement in material things and a great decline
 in wrings spiritual. The Boston American, in its issue 
of Sunday, January 21, publishes almost a full page concerning
 the conditions prevailing especially in New Hampshire, 
under the title, u Grave Moral Decay Threatens Future New 
Hampshire." We quote from that article as follows: 

"Eighteen years ago the Governor of New Hampshire
 flaid: 

41 'The decline of the Christian religion, particularly in 
our rural communities, is a marked feature of the times, 
and steps should be taken to remedy it. No matter what 
our belief may be in religious matters, every good citizen 
knows that when the restraining influences of religion are 
withdrawn from a community its decay, moral, mental 
and financial, is swift and sure. 

" There are towns where no church bell sends forth 


its solemn call from January to January ;- there are villages
 where children grow to manhood unchristened; and 
there are communities where the dead are laid away without
 the benison of the name of Christ.' " 
Continuing, this article gives many instances of moral depravity
, attributing such to the fact that the people have lost 
faith in the Bible and do not hear its teachings. 

"THE HIRELING CARETH NOT TOE THE SHEEP" 
To whom then does the blame attach for this moral degeneracy
 — to the people themselves or to those who have 
claimed to be their teachers? The clergy have occupied, and 
yet occupy, positions of great influence amongst the people. 
A repudiation of the Bible by them could have none other 
effect than to destroy the faith of the people in the Scriptures
. Jehovah foreknew that such a condition would arise 
as we now witness; and he attached the blame therefor to 
the men who claim to preach the Gospel, but who in fact have 
turned the minds of the people away from his Word. Through 
his prophet, he said: "For amongst my [professed] people are 
wicked men ; they lay wait as he that setteth a snare ; they set 
a trap; they catch men [they set the snares and traps of 
Higher Criticism and Evolution]; as a. cage is full of birds, 
so are their houses full of deceit [they have practiced deceit
 upon the people] ; therefore they have become great and 
waxen rich [naany of the clergy say, "W)e are rich in wisdom; 
and none can teach us, not even the prophets and the 
apostles"] ; they are waxen fat ; they shine ; yea, they pass by 

the deeds of the wicked [unnoticed] Shall I not visit 

them for these things? saith the Lord; shall not my soul be 
avenged on such a nation as this? A wonderful and horrible 
thing is committed in the land. The prophets [preacher si 
preach falsely and tlje priests bear rule by their means; and 
the people love to have it so." (Jeremiah 5:26-31) Had the 
clergy faithfully performed their duty to teach the people 
the sweet message of salvation as spoken by Jesus and the 
apostles, and had pointed them to the coming of Messiah's 
kingdom, a different condition would prevail. 

The article above referred to is proof of the fact that the 
world now is experiencing what the Lord foretold through the 
Prophet Amos, saying, "Behold, the days come, saith the 
Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land ; not a famine 
of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of the hearing of the 
words of the Lord.' 1 — Amos 8:11. 

The Watch Towee Bible and Tract Society was organized
 for the very purpose of the mental, moral and spiritual 
improvement of men and women by teaching them the Bible. 
The Peoples Pulpit Association was organized under the 
law3 of New York for the same purpose. These two organizations
 have been spending hundreds of thousands of dollars to 
enlighten the people; while the majority of the clergy, claiming
 to be Christians, devote their time and efforts to the persecution
 of Brother Russell, whom the Lord bo wonderfully 
used to make known his message, and all who have assisted 
in making known the glad tidings. On the other hand, the 
lawmakers, who have not pretended to be interested in teaching
 the Bible, have enacted liberal laws granting to Bible societies
 and churches privileges that individuals and other corporations
 do not have. 


JESUS HEALS A NOBLEMAN'S SON 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "The Bewards of Faith/' published in issue of February 1, 1908, which please see.] 

JESUS AT THE POOL OF BETHESDA 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "He Went About Doing Good," published in issue of February 15, 1908, which please 

see.] 

JESUS FEEDS THE FIVE THOUSAND 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Ever Give Us This Bread," published in issue of February 1, 1905, which please 

see.] 

SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


30 TEARS 07 ASSOCIATION WITH PASTOR RUSSELL 
Dear Bbethren: — 

My heart goes out in love and reverence to the memory 
of our beloved Pastor Russell, and it is indeed a privilege 
to give testimony to his services and faithfulness. 

I was carefully reared under Christian influence, and 
tihus taught and learned reverence for God and his Christ, 
with confidence in his Word. However, with maturity 
came analysis of creeda, and their confusion and blasphemy, 
misrepresenting the character and plan of the Father of 
mercies and God of all comfort. This soon led me into 


agnosticism, in which there is neither chart, compass nor 
anchorage. In this state I floundered for some years, and 
finding no rest of heart, naturally became careless and at timee 
reckless. Finally, I determined to go direct to the Word 
of God and Btudy it; for I retained my faith in God and 
in Jesus as his Son and the Christ, though grasping . these 
fundamentals but vaguely, as I now discern. And I was rewarded
 by a growing knowledge, peace and assurance of 
faith that led me to more earnestly plead at the throne of 
grace for more light and strength to walk in it. 

Looking back, we all can discern the leadings and guid- 


[6046] 


FEBRUARY 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(6I-«2) 


ance of our Lord — his over care — and truly happy it was for 
me that I had come to a place of more knowledge of and 
trust in our heavenly Father and our dear elder Brother — 
Jesus; for at this period I entered one of the severest 
ordeals of my life and could only cry out for more light 
and more strength — for more power and faith to endure. 
In this crisis there came to me unheralded in the mail a blue 
paper-hound copy of Millennial Dawn, and thinking I saw 
in it something of Adventism, which in ignorance I disesteemed
, I promptly threw the book into my waste-paper basket
. Later in the day, and that I might make a seemingly 
intelligent and courteous acknowledgement to the donor, should 
he make himself known, I rescued the hook from the wastebasket
 and began what I purposed to be a cursory examination
 of its contents. Beginning at the dedication, I was at 
once impressed with the assurance that one who could so 
aptly quote Scripture as this writer, could surely teach me 
in the Word, and thus I met my brother and fellow-servant, 
Charles T. Russell. 

It is no disparagement to my revered father and mother, 
who richly deserve the love, honor and esteem in which I 
hold their memory, to say that the influence of Brother 
Russell on and in my life was the most salutary and beneficent 
that had entered it; and after nearly thirty years of various
 and intimate association with him, I can gladly say this 
influence was but deepened and broadened. His service and 
fellowship constantly led to the Lord. With the Apostle 
Paul he constantly preached, not himself, but Jesus Christ 
as Lord, and himself the servant — bond slave — of the brethren 
for Jesu3' sake. To me his life and memory are an inspiration
 to faithfulness even unto death in following the Lamb 
whithersoever he goeth, 

I thank God for Pastor Russell in his life, in his service 
and in his death. 

Yours in our Redeemer, W. E. Page. 

SOME THOUGHTS OF PILQRIM WISDOM 
Dkar Brethren in Christ: — 

I feel I should send you a few lines to tell you how 
much — yes, how deeply — I appreciate The Tower of January 
1. My heart overflowed with joy as I read and pondered its 
precious message. How strong is the evidence that God's 
arm is not in any sense shortened! Then the wonderful 
fulfilment of his promises to supply all our needs! Marvelous
 in our eyes is the work of our God! 

The masterful treatise of the world- situation ("Views 
from the Watch Tower"), and the concise, forceful presentation
 of the real conditions as they exist can have but 
one effect upon every truly and fully consecrated heart — to 
cause all such to lift up their heads and rejoice, for surely 
the "day is nigh!" What more convincing evidence could we 
possibly have than is here given of the final crash, the near 
approach of the end, the collapse of all earthly governments 
and the immediate setting up of Christ's kingdom for the 
bringing in of peace and righteousness, blessings for all 
mankind ! Surely all the faithful will soon be with the 
King in Glory ! Certainly such a review Bhould stimulate our 
faith and tend to energize us to renewed activity to press 
along the narrow way of sacrifice to final victory! And this 
spells the crown of life. 

May God continue to bless your every effort to serve him 
acceptably and further the interests of his cause. No, he 
has not deserted his people, even though it seemed good to 
him to remove our beloved earthly leader, "that servant." 
Yes, may God bless his memory to the eternal good of all 
the faithful in Christ. 

I am daily remembering you and all the dear colaborers 
at Headquarters at the throne of grace. To me the blessed 
truth is more precious than ever. Please bear me up in 
your prayers. I feel the special need of them. The toils of 
the way are many and sometimes burdensome, strenuous are 
the times, great is the power of the adversary, and continuous
 are his attempts to "beat our courage down"; but greater 
is he who is for us; for our armor is divine. 

In sincere Christian love to you and all the dear ones at 
the Bethel home, I am 

Your brother by his favor, W. M. Wisdom. 

A MESSAGE FEOM SCOTLAND 
Dear Brethren: — 

At the half-yearly business meetings of the class here it 
has been our custom to formally elect Brother Russell as the 
Pastor of our class; and, as a token of confidence and esteem
, to advise him that such had been done. 

The passing hence of our beloved Brother rendered this 
impossible at our recent business meeting; and instead, we 
unanimously agreed to send you a message of sympathy and 
encouragement. 


The news of the death of our beloved Pastor came to us 
with mixed effect — sorrow, because we had lost a faithful 
servant and guide ; gladness, because we are confident he has 
entered into the presence of the Master he loved so much 
and served so devotedly. He has entered into his rest; 
surely none deserved it more! His life and work on earth, 
his example and devotion, will ever continue to be an inspira* 
tion and encouragement to all of us. 

We desire to let you know that it is our intention as a 
class to follow faithfully our beloved Pastor's teachings. The 
truth we have came to us through him, and we recognized 
him as the one especially appointed of the Lord to feed his 
flock in this harvest time. The rich store he has left behind 
will continue to be respected as the Master's message to all 
who have the hearing ear. We have loved and followed our 
dear Pastor through "evil report and good report these many 
years; and we desire to follow him still, realizing that if we 
follow him, even as he followed Christ, we too shall hear that 
desired "Well done!" 

We pray for heavenly wisdom to guide the dear brethren 
who have been left in charge of the different departments of 
the work. With much love in the Lord, 

Yours in our One Hope, Class at Dundee. — Scot. 

ELECTION AS PASTOR RESCINDED 

The following letter from the Boston Ecclesia, which had 
elected Brother Rutherford Pastor, will be of interest to 
Watch Tower readers: 
Dear Brother Rutherford: — 

Although you had not receive official notice from the 
Boston Ecclesia that you had been elected Pastor, Brother 
Margeson read to the Ecclesia last night your position in 
regard to the matter and I am glad to say that it rejoiced 
our hearts for the stand you have taken. 

Immediately the original motion by which you were elected 
Pastor was rescinded, and availing ourselves of your kind 
opportunity, you were duly elected Counselor of the Boston 
Ecclesia by a unanimous vote. 

We feel that this experience has drawn us closer to 
you than before, and we shall continue to pray God that his 
grRce may be sufficient to keep you humble and faithful as you 
endeavor daily to he pleasing to him in your new duties. With 
Christian love from the Boston Ecclesia, 

Yours in Christ, Alexander Ogston, Secretary. 

"STRONG IN THE LORD" 
Dear Brethren: — 

Resolved, That we convey unto the brethren at Brooklyn 
our heartfelt sympathy, love and fellowship in the spirit, in 
this our mutual loss. 

Wherefore, beloved, we wish to renew our Christian allegiance
 and fellowship to you in whom is reposed, more than 
in others, the continuance of the harvest work and the further
 carrying out of our beloved Pastor's wishes. It is further
 

Resolved, That we encourage you to be "strong in the 
Lord." 

Vermillion Ecclesia. — S. Dak. 
NOBLEST OF GOD'S CREATURES IN THE FLBSH 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

I feel that this is the time to express the deep sympathy 
T have for yourselves and for all the beloved of the Lord 
in every place. We have all lost, in one sense, the dearest 
and noblest of God's creatures that we have known in the 
flesh! He seemed by his life to revive and make keener our 
perceptions of what our dear Lord was like. His life was 
such that it directed us to the "beauty of holiness." 

I thank my God for the truth as it is in Jesus, and for the 
light of his character, as both were revealed to me by his 
spirit through the instrumentality of our noble and beloved 
Pastor Russell! I am but fourteen years in the truth, but 
during that time I have never swerved from the one determination
 to be a follower of the Lord Jesus. I wish ever to 
support, to the best of my ability, with the help of the Lord, 
your efforts to supply our spiritual needs. My prayers shall 
ever ascend for your guidance and blessing. 

We in London have received much comfort and blessing 
from the ministrations of our beloved Brother Paul Johnson. 
His coming has helped us at this time to realize that h» who 
.has guided us thus far will guide us still. I pray I may 
strive to fill my own place and work for which I am called, 
that I may in the age to come, and in the glorious ages to 
follow* show forth the glory of so great a God, and live 
in everlasting praise to the Lamb of God, who gave himself 
a ransom for all. 

Your brother in the Anointed, 

Frank E. Barnett. — London, Eng. 


[6047J 


(62-63) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


MORE DETERMINED TO FOLLOW HIS WISE COUNSEL 
Dear Bbethben: — 

Our heavenly Father, in his infinite wisdom, has called 
our beloved Pastor to a higher station. As "that servant" 
to whom was entrusted the dispensing of "meat in due season 
for the household of faith," he has done his work well. 
Surely we shall miss him! but we would not call him back, 
for we know he is now partaker of the divine nature — jointheir
 with our Lord — even better able now than heretofore — 
associated more closely than ever with our Lord — to assist 
in directing the harvest work. 

Our love for him should make us more determined to 
follow his wise counsel, even as he was a true follower of 
the Master. Our prayer ia that our heavenly Father will 
continually watch over those to whom our dear Brother has 
entrusted the work yet to be done, strengthening them to 
discharge faithfully their responsibility. 

Resolved, That we will render loyal support to the work, 
as in the past, that when the night shall close around us, 
"in which no man can work," we may, like our dear Pastor, 
hear the Master's words : "Well done ! Thou hast been 
faithful over a few things; I will make thee ruler over 
many! . . . Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord!" 

Easton Ecclesia. — Pa. 

COOPERATING WITH THEIR PASTOR'S INSTRUCTIONS 
Dear Brethren: — 

We assure you of our love and sympathy, and also of our 
desire to cooperate with you in any way possible for the 
furtherance of the work. 

The Wichita Ecclesia has been blessed with abundant opportunities
 for service of late. We have had Pilgrim Brethren
, our dear Pastor, and this coming week we are to have 
the Photo-Drama in West Wichita, and the following week 
it is to be repeated on the East Side. Then, too, we are 
busy with the District work. 

It is our great desire to be faithful, and to continue in 
the work as long as we are permitted to do so, as we know 
was our dear Pastor's wish. 

We assure you of our love and sympathy and also of 
our desire to co5perate with you in every way possible for 
the extension of the work. 

With Christian love, Wichita Ecclesia. — Kans, 

CONTINUED LOVE AND LOYALTY 
Dear Friends in the Lord: — 

At our business meeting Sunday, December 3, the Detroit 
Ecclesia, after the reading of the December 1 Watch Tower, 
passed a vote of confidence in all of the arrangements of the 
Society and in those who have been left in charge at the 
Bible House, and we wish to assure you of our continued 
love and loyalty and of our further cooperation. 

With loving Christian greetings, 

Detroit Ecclesia. — Mich. 

HIS "HAND UPON THE LITTLE ONES" 
Dearly Beloved Colahorers: — 

We were for a moment bewildered by the sudden demise 
of our beloved Pastor. We sorrow, knowing his loving watchcare
 over the Lord's flock; yet we rejoice, knowing "whither 
he went." 

We shall feel a vacancy which henceforth cannot be filled. 
But "our will is the will of our God"; we bow in humble 
submission unto it, endeavoring day by day to "gird up the 
loins of our minds [more fully] and hope to the end for 
the grace that is to be brought unto us at the [fuller] revelation
 of Jesus Christ." 

One faithful promise reads, "I will turn mine hand upon 
the little ones." Surely his care is around each one! Therefore
 will not we fear though the earth be removed, and 
though the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea f 

We assure yon of our continued effort to cooperate in the 
harvest work. Believing our beloved Pastor's death has 
had a blessed effect in this community, we trust by divine 
grace to give a better testimony in future to our Father's great 
plan of salvation. We need your prayers and co5peration. 

Our petitions continue to ascend to the throne of heavenly 
grace for the dear friends at Bethel, and for all who labor in 
the vineyard. 

With loving Christian greetings, your servants in the 
Lord, Prince Rupert Ecclesia. — £. C. • 

assurances of full confidence 
Dear Brethren of the Bethel Family: — 

We esteemed it a great privilege to pay our last respects 
co the memory of our dear Brother Russell in the flesh by 
attending the funeral services. A man not in the truth 
said, "The world has lost its brightest star," We miss our 


beloved brother so much! We did not know how much we 
loved him until now. We know that Brother Russell loved 
the colporteurs, for he manifested this in many ways. This 
was a great help and inspiration to us. 

But, dear brethren, if we miss dear Brother Russell, we 
are thinking how much more you of the Bethel family must 
miss him, as you surround the table each day without his 
blessed influence and face in your midst! And also the 
great responsibility that now rests more fully upon you as 
you continue to minister unto the saints, and to herald the 
glad tidings of earth's new King. We believe that one reason
 for Brother Russell's great achievements was that he 
had many loyal supporters, long tried, tested and proved 
faithful under many circumstances and conditions, which 
were the means of sifting out the unfaithful; and that having
 been so thoroughly tried and proven loyal to our dear 
Pastor as the Lord's chosen servant you will continue faithfully
 to carry on the work to its grand completion. We 
have always appreciated your loving and cheerful service in 
our behalf. We wish to assure you of our full confidence. 

No doubt there will be trials and testings, strong delusions, 
etc., to the end, but you shall have our prayers. We shall 
be glad to support you in every way possible. 

Mr. and Mrs. Ray van Hyning and Ruth. 

will hold up the hands 

Dear Brethren: — 

Resolved, That to the dear Bethel family and brethren 
of the Society at Brooklyn we extend our heartfelt sympathy
, our warmest love and earnest prayers for comfort in 
their bereavement, and for guidance in the continuance of 
the harvest work. 

Resolved, That we desire to express our confidence in the 
brethren whom our dear Pastor has left in charge, and to 
assure them that we will earnestly cooperate to the extent 
of our ability in the ■ furtherance of the Lord's work entrusted
 to them, "holding up their hands," until the dark 
night shall close down upon us. 

With sympathizing and loyal hearts, 

Cortland Ecclesia. — N. Y. 

ALL CONFIDENCE IN THE BBETHBEN 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

Enclosed you will find for our free will offering. 

We wish to assure you of our interest in the Society, and 
that we have all confidence in the brethren whom our dear 
Pastor left in cbarge of the work he loved so well. Pray 
for us, as we will continue daily to do for you. 
Yours in his dear name, 

Brother and Sister S. D. Lemley. — Wash. 

HIS NOBILITY OF LIFE AND LOVELINESS OF CHABAOTEB 

Dear Brethren: — 

WJiile we rejoice with our dear Pastor in his privilege 
of being with the Lord, away from all personal suffering and 
trouble, and while we recognize the loss to be as much ours 
as your3, we desire to extend to you our heartfelt sympathy; 
for, coming so often in contact with "that servant" of God 
and having become accustomed to fellowship with his grand 
personality, nobility of life and loveliness of character, the 
loss to you may seem the greater. 

We wish also to say that as the dear Master may be 
pleased to bless and assist us we will by his grace continue 
to do what we can to help to spread the glad tidings of 
truth, and to stand for the principles of righteousness as 
exemplified by the dear Lord himself and by his servant, 
our beloved Brother Russell. 

Praying the Lord's continued blessing and direction for 
you, with increasing supplies of wisdom from above (Jas. 
3:17), we are 

Your Brethren in Christ, 

The Port of Spain Ecclesia. — B. W. I, 

GOOD NEWS FOB COLPORTEURS 

Dear Friends: — 

We wish all the colporteurs could know how convenient 
it is to deliver in the country by Parcel Post, C. O. D.! We 
frequently find people in the rural districts who are interested, 
but who cannot pay cash. We now tell these, "We will take 
your order. What date will suit you? We will 'send the books 
by Parcel Post, C. O. D. You pay the mail-carrier, and 
he will send the money to us. You will have no trouble at 
all, and the money will be perfectly safe." Then on the date 
that suits them we mail the books at a cost of 5c for postage 
and 10c for C. O. B. A full set of Scripture Studies will 
cost no more for C. O. D. charge, and can be sent into the 
second postal zone for a few cents. 

Please let all the colporteurs know of this as soon as 


[6048] 


February 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(63-68) 


possible. It applies to small towns as well as to R. F. D. 
routes. We received several Money Orders one day recently. 
In love and service, J. & L. Hutchinson. — Pa. 

OUE LOVING CHIEF SHEPHERD CALLED HIM 
Dearly Beloved Brethren: — 

We, the members of the Hatfield class, have unanimously 
voted to express hereby our heartfelt sympathy in the bereavement
 that has come to us, but particularly to you, 
through the death of our beloved Pastor. Nevertheless our 
sorrow is not unmingled with joy; for we firmly believe that 
what is our loss is his gain. We are also convinced that our 
loving Chief Shepherd, who has called our under-shepberd 
to his reward, is not only willing but abundantly able to use 
and direct other humble, loyal, willing hearts and heads 
from among our late Pastor's faithful coworkers, who will 
continue the work so grandly outlined by him before his departure
. May the all- surrounding love of our heavenly Father 
and our Elder Brother, with the assurance of their continued 
nearness, so encourage and strengthen your hearts that finally 
you may, like our Pastor, hear his "well done!" 

Yours in the hope of again greeting Brother Russell face 
to face, Hatfield Class. — Jamaica. 


XAST TRIBUTE OF BESPECT 
Dear Friends: — 

In memory and honor of our beloved Pastor Charles T. 
Russell, we wish to pay our last tribute of respect: 

Whereas, It has pleased our heavenly Father to call home 
our faithful and beloved Pastor, we cheerfully submit to him 
who is "too wise to err and too good to be unkind.'* 

We therefore tender our loving testimonial regarding him 
whose life was such a noble example and which was laid down 
in self-sacrifice in the interest of the truth and for us. 

Watertown Church. — N. Y. 
SPURRED TO GREATER EFFORT 

Dear Brethren: — 

The friends gathered here wish to convey to you a vote 
of sympathy. We are sure, that you will especially feel the 
loss of our dear Brother Russell, and we pray that the Lord 
will guide and direct all the efforts you may put forth in 
the harvest work. We trust, also that our dear brother's 
love and zeal may continue to spur us on to greater effort. 

May the Lord be with you! 

B arts olds wick Ecclesia. — England. 

