VOL. XXVI. OCTOBER 15, 1905. No. 20 



CONTENTS. 

The Editor's Western Tour 307 

Papal Attempts at Reformation 308 

"By Myself Have I Sworn" (Poem) 309 

"Bear Ye One Another's Burdens" 310 

"Pay Thy Vows Unto the Lord." 312 

Rebuilding the Temple 313 

Hopes Deferred— Trials Many 314 

"Which Temple Ye Are." 315 

"By My Spirit, Saith the Lord." 316 

Prophets to Both Israels 316 

He Shall Not Fail, nor be Discouraged 317 

A Day of Small Things 318 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 318 

General Convention for the South 320 

page 306 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 



they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 



These are now in stock in large quantity. Every letter you 
send through the mail may be a more or less potent messenger 
of the Truth, even on its outside, by the use of these envelopes. 
They catch the attention not only of those to whom they are 
addressed, but postmen and others have an opportunity, and 
sometimes the curiosity, to read their message of peace— the 
gospel in condensed form. Price, 25c per 100, postpaid. 

VOLUNTEERING BY MAIL. 



Our output of tracts free as Sample Copies is limited. This 
year please follow this plan: Procure wrapping paper of the 
size in which your tracts go to you, write on these the addresses 
of all of your friends and acquaintances of the godly 
sort and mail the bundle to us. Do not this year send us "all 
sorts" of addresses. Do "sharp shooting" rather. You may 
repeat the lists every quarter if you desire, indicating other 
tracts for same, as we would not remember which were previously 
sent. 

ZION'S GLAD SONGS. 



A collection of sixty hymns, with music, for social and 
testimony meetings, and semi-private gatherings. Price, 5c 
each, postpaid. English and German editions. 



R3644 : page 307 

THE EDITOR'S WESTERN TOUR. 



--(CONTINUED FROM LAST ISSUE.)- 

OGDEN, Utah, was our next appointment. By 
this time our company was small, as some came 
no farther than Denver; however, others joined 
us en route for Portland. The Ogden friends met us at 
the depot, and showed abundantly, by words and deeds, 
that they were glad of the one-session Convention. 
They had secured the use of the Mormon Tabernacle 
and had thoroughly advertised our discourse, "To Hell 
and Back. Who are there? Hope for many of them." 
About 600 were present, a very large audience for 
us in a city of Ogden's size. Excellent attention was 
given for nearly two hours, while we endeavored to 
show forth that the real penalty for sin is death, that 
the tomb is the hell of the Bible and that the salvation 
promised as a result of Christ's death and a consequent 
reconciliation with the Father is awakening and resurrection 
—for whomsoever wills. We believe that some 
were helped. 

ON TO PORTLAND, OREGON 

We took train for Portland at 2.30 o'clock in the 
morning— spending nearly two nights and two days on 
the journey. A crowd of dear friends awaited us at the 
depot, though our train was several hours belated. We 
got a good opportunity to wash and rest and visit before 
the opening of the Convention on Friday, 
September 8. 

The Portland gathering had the distinction of being 
the only three-days Convention on this trip, and it 
was a most enjoyable season of refreshment. The local 
friends had made every preparation for the nearly two 
hundred visiting friends who, while chiefly from Oregon, 
Washington and Utah, included representatives from 
British Columbia, Dakota, Minnesota, California, Texas, 
Pennsylvania, and one from Australia. The interspersed 
testimony meetings were rich treats, as always, and 
caused many hearts to "burn" as they recounted their 
experiences and heard of similar mercies of God variously 
manifested toward others. 

We had "Woodmen's Hall" for all the meetings except 
the Baptism service, which was held in the Christian 
Church, and the service specially advertised for the 
public, which was held in the Taylor St. M.E. Church 
on Sunday, Sept. 10th. At the latter our topic was, 
"To Hell and Back," etc., and an audience of about 
900 gave close attention for about two hours and then 
took our free literature with avidity. 

The program was followed throughout. One of 
the Elders opened the Convention with words of greeting 
and welcome, after which Brother A. H. MacMillan 
became the permanent chairman and greeted all present 
in the name of our Society, and then the first testimony 
meeting began. Pilgrim Brother Harrison gave 



an able address in the afternoon, his subject being, 
"The cost to our Lord for the world's redemption." 
The necessity and value of the ransom were shown, as 
well as the Master's great sacrifice in leaving the realms 
of glory and enduring all that our redemption cost. 
"Take heed to the doctrine" of the ransom was the essence 
of his discourse. The evening service, introduced 
by a service of praise, was a Chart Discourse by Pilgrim 
Brother Barton, who made the various features of the 
divine plan very plain and very interesting. 

Saturday morning's opening service was one of 
praise and prayer, after which a question meeting, occupying 
two hours and involving a great variety of topics, 
prepared us all for noon refreshments and rest. 

The entire afternoon was devoted to the consideration 
of Baptism, showing the erroneous views, and, in contrast, 
the true teachings of the Bible on the subject— substantially 
as set forth in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. VI. Following 
the discourse twenty-nine requested and received 
symbolic immersion in water, as illustrating and confessing 
their true baptism into Christ's death. 

Saturday evening Pilgrim Brother Barton addressed 
the Convention on the lessons of the Ninety-first 
Psalm— showing what it is to be safe under the protecting 
shadow of the Almighty, and how these secured 
ones are protected from the various snares and deceptions 

R3644 : page 308 

of this harvest time. About 300 heard very 
attentively. 

Sunday forenoon brought another blessed testimony, 
praise and prayer meeting, after which we spent over 
an hour discussing the spiritual lessons taught by the 
Exposition, which many of you have read through the 
columns of the Pittsburg Dispatch and other Monday 
publications, which now carry extra messages from the 
editor of this journal to so many of the friends weekly. 

The Sunday afternoon discourse we have already 
mentioned. The Convention closed that evening with 
a Love Feast introduced by a short discourse on the 
Twenty-third Psalm. We parted, hoping to meet at 
the great Convention, "The General Assembly of the 
Church of the Firstborn." We left on the night train 
for Everett, Washington, about twenty friends of those 
parts accompanying us. 

EVERETT'S ONE-DAY CONVENTION 

Warm hearts and hands greeted us and entertained 
us at Everett. An afternoon meeting for the interested 

R3645 : page 308 

was attended by seventy-five. We discoursed to them 
for nearly two hours on the terms on which our calling 



and election may be made sure; and the evidences we 
have of the divine favor with us to assist us in overcoming 
the world, and how all things work together for 
good to the faithful. 

The evening service for the public, on "To Hell and 
Back," was held in Everett's Carnegie Hall, whose capacity 
of about three hundred was fully taxed. We had 
excellent attention and were pleased to learn of several 
who were "greatly helped" by the service. After a good 
night's rest we proceeded to Seattle. 

SEATTLE'S ONE-DAY CONVENTION 

As Seattle friends and others accompanied us to 
Everett, so many from Everett, etc., came with us to 
Seattle. The opening was a praise and testimony service, 
followed at 3 p.m. by a discourse on "Fear not, 
little flock, it is your Father's good pleasure to give you 
the Kingdom," in which we emphasized the favor of 
the present age call and the blessings to result to the 
Church and the world in the Kingdom. About 200 
were present and they mostly the interested from various 
parts, adjacent and distant. Our evening address 
on "To Hell and Back" was heard with great attention 
by an audience of about 650, and we trust that 
good fruitage will appear in God's due time. The afternoon 
services were held in Third Avenue M.E. Church 
edifice, the evening service in the Arcade Hall. The 
midnight train speeded us back to Portland, where, on 
the 13th, we took the Pacific steamer for San Francisco, 
our next appointment. 

FROM PORTLAND HOMEWARD. 

The ocean journey from Portland to San Francisco 
was a delightful and restful one. Our party numbered 
six— three on return journey to Los Angeles, one from 
St. Louis and one from Millvale, Pa., besides the Editor. 
Brother MacMillan preceded us to Los Angeles to open 
the Convention there. 

Every morning we had our usual "Heavenly Manna" 
as well as our physical refreshments and in the 
day time we had Scripture question meetings, in which 
all participated, and by which we trust all were profited. 
Thus our journey passed pleasantly, bringing us to 
San Francisco, Cal. on Saturday morning, Sept. 16th. 
At the landing awaiting our arrival were seven of the 
dear brethren and sisters of that vicinity, who gave us 
most hearty greetings, to which we as fervently 
responded. 

Complete arrangements had been made, and we 
were soon comfortably located in the home of one of 
the dear ones, where a question meeting engaged us all 
pleasantly until dinner, after which came the general 
gathering of the friends of that vicinity, so far as it was 
possible for these to be in attendance on the busiest day 



of the week. There were about forty present, to whom 
we spoke on "God's Election"— our opportunity for 
making our calling and election sure, and the mark of 
the prize, perfect love. The service lasted from 2 to 4 
p.m. 

A goodly number accompanied us to the train 
which speeded us to Los Angeles, a distance of over 
400 miles. Many were the hopes expressed that we 
should meet again in the "General Assembly," if not in 
another Convention on earth. Many prayers went up 
for a share in the heavenly Kingdom, even though led 
by the Master in the narrow way and by the way of the 
cross. 

LOS ANGELES CONVENTION 

As per program, this Convention opened Saturday, 
Sept. 16th, with a rally and testimony meeting. 
An unannounced feature, much enjoyed by the friends 
was a Chart Talk by Brother MacMillan. This Convention 
thus happily opened was already under good 
headway and awaiting us Sunday morning, when we 
had a praise and testimony meeting participated in by 
many, including a Methodist minister and an ex-Methodist 
minister and ourself. 

Our afternoon topic was for the public, "To Hell 
and Back. Who are there? Hope for many of them." 
The attendance was estimated at 700. The closest of 
attention was given and we trust some good seeds of 
Truth were planted in honest hearts, and that others 
partly assured were fully convinced respecting our Father's 
character and plan. 

The evening topic, "The Sin Unto Death," many 
of you have already read as reported in the Pittsburg 
Dispatch, and we need not go into details here. 

By general desire the Convention held over Monday, 
Sept. 18. The morning session was a praise and 
testimony meeting, during which we made a trip to 
Santa Monica at the urgent solicitation of one disabled 
from attending the Los Angeles meetings. There we 
had an opportunity for a talk on the Tabernacle Shadows 
of the Better Sacrifices to a little group which included 
a Presbyterian minister of an apparently thoughtful 
cast of mind. 

At the afternoon session of the Convention we 

R3645 : page 309 

spoke on the true and the symbolic baptisms, following 
which twenty were immersed. 

The evening session, which closed the Convention, 
was a question meeting. A number of questions were 
proffered but the first one occupied our entire time until 
9.15 p.m. and the remainder we brought with us, to 
be answered in the WATCH TOWER columns from time 
to time. The topic which was so engaging was respecting 



"The satisfaction of Justice." Many seemed edified 
and we hope at some time to take up the subject again 
in the WATCH TOWER for the benefit of all. 

Bidding Los Angeles adieu, we started (two only) 
on our journey to San Antonio, Texas, an item of 1,430 
miles, mostly through a sandy desert, growing little but 
sage brush— extremely hot and dusty, especially one 
stretch which dips one hundred feet below sea level. 



"BY MYSELF HAVE I SWORN." 

What means the oath that God hath sworn? 
Have Christians from their Bible torn 
The great Jehovah's seal? 
When Christ shall bring the world's reward, 
Will not each tongue confess him Lord- 
Each knee in homage kneel?— Psa. 82:8. 

Will every kindred, every tribe, 

To Him all majesty ascribe, 

And glorify his name? 

Yet while the nations bow so low, 

Will vengeance hurl the bombs of woe, 

To blast with endless shame?— Psa. 86:9. 

Will God his lowly creatures cheat— 
Or call the nations to his feet, 
To feel a tyrant's rage? 
Then will He scorn their prayerful breath- 
Will nothing but a deathless (?) death 
His stern revenge assuage?— Rev. 15:4. 

What being do you worship then? 

What unrelenting foe of men 

Has chained you to his throne? 

What form of error doth supply, 

Your awful views of God Most High 

To sacred truth unknown?— Mai. 1:11; Isa. 26:9. 

Our God is love, of Gospel mould; 

Who sent the Shepherd of the fold 

To seek his sheep astray, 

With yearning still His heart will burn, 

Until the countless lost return, 

To see the "Living Way."— Jno. 12:32; Rom. 8:21. 

The love that brought salvation nigh, 
Will heed the bruised sinner's sigh, 
And soothe away his pain, 
While "whosoever," great or small, 
Upon Jehovah's name shall call, 

Will never call in vain.— Acts 2:17 and 21; Rev. 22:17. 
-G. M. BILLS. 



R3645 : page 309 

PAPAL ATTEMPTS AT REFORMATION. 

"BACK to the Gospels!" comes the cry from the 
Vatican, sounding the knell of Catholicism. 
After centuries of crafty misrepresentation of 
the Scriptural teachings, the Church of Rome has been 
forced to acknowledge the error of its ways, and at last 
a man has been found honest enough and of sufficient 
boldness of heart to say, "We have sinned; let us return 
to the truth." A Reformer in the Vatican! It is a difficult 
role to play. Will Pius X. be able to carry it 
through effectively? 

Five centuries ago John Huss made the first attempt, 
in Germany, to bring about a reformation in the 
Catholic Church, but the time was not yet, and the 
priests were too strong for him. Despite the fact that 
he carried a safe-conduct, under the seal and hand of 
the German Emperor himself, for his journey to Constance, 
he was seized, condemned as a heretic and 
burned at the stake. A century later saw the rise 
of three mighty champions for Truth— Luther, Calvin 
and Zwingli— who successfully drew from the 
otherwise rotten body of the Almighty Church of the 
Middle Ages the only healthy elements therein, wherewith 

R3646 : page 309 

to build up the real Church of Christ. The rich 

priests and tyrannical nobles however, assisted by the 

cunning and unscrupulous Jesuits, tightened their hold 

upon the ignorant masses and wrapped the cloak of ignorance 

more closely around them. These brought a 

rich income to their worthy masters, who repaid them 

with adulterations of Christ's teachings suited to their 

vile purposes. The truths of the Gospels became hidden 

or utterly unrecognizable under the accumulated 

dogmas of centuries of Popery. The Council of Trent 

but added to the venerable collection of fraudulent 

misrepresentations, and even as late as the third quarter 

of last century the dogma of the infallibility of the 

Pope was promulgated afresh by the Council of the 

Vatican. 

Even nature must suit herself to the Catholic dogmas. 
When Galileo discovered the rotation of the earth 
he naturally upset the Popedom, and was informed that 

he was wrong and must admit his mistake or ! Galileo 

was not of the stuff of which martyrs are made, or 
it may be he was wise in his generation. He knew he 
was right, but he preferred a natural death, and he felt 
confident that the time would come when this scientific 
truth would be acknowledged in spite of the Pope and 
all his minions, so he acquiesced in the Papal fallacy. 



Nature, however, eventually triumphed, as Truth is now 
doing, and the Lion of Rome continues to retire beaten 
and cowed before a power too great even for its mighty 
strength. 

From the many official booklets which have been 
published of late, and which have been directly inspired 
by the present Pope, it is easy to see that he, along 
with many of his high-placed followers, has come to the 
conclusion that some measure of reformation has become 
an urgent necessity within the Roman Catholic Church, 
otherwise the mighty edifice may totter to a fall. The 

R3646 : page 310 

direct reforms at which Pius X. aims may be summed 
up as follows:— 

(1) To transform the religious cult into keeping 
with the sense of the true religion of Christ, insisting 
more upon the worship of the Redeemer and less upon 
that of the Virgin Mary, the saints, holy relics, etc. 

(2) Complete reform, i.e., restriction and simplification, 
of the Papal Court. 

(3) Restriction of the numbers of Orders, which 

now runs into hundreds, to about five or six; and purification 
of monastic and convent life, which at present 
teems with abuses. 

(4) Modernization of the teaching of divinity in the 
Roman Catholic Colleges. 

(5) Greater liberty to the Catholic scientist, and the 
prevention of rash condemnation, such as that experienced 
by the Abbe Loisy and others. 

(6) Reform in the Papal diplomacy, and the foundation 
of a sound school of diplomatists. 

(7) Reduction of the 264 Italian dioceses, with an 
equal number of bishops, to a reasonable number. 

(8) Reform of the Congregations, which have not 
been altered since the time of Pope Sextus V. 

(9) Thorough reform of the entire Roman Catholic 
religion, morally and intellectually! 

(10) Formal renouncement of all claim to temporal 
power in Italy; and finally, in fact, a return of Catholicism 
to the Gospels ! 

Reform literature has been particularly in evidence 
throughout Italy of late, and the publication of pamphlets 
goes on continually. Bishop Bonnemelli of Cremona, 
for instance, has published a pastoral letter in 
book form, and with the full permission of the Pope, 
which may be taken as a typical example. Referring 
to the worship of the Virgin Mary, he says: "It shocks 
Christian feeling and common sense to see the Virgin 
Mary and many saints placed upon the same level as 
our Lord Jesus Christ." The Bishop then goes on to 
criticize the superstitious worship of Saint Antonius of 
Padua and the financial exploitation connected therewith. 
"Not only are there people who believe in him," 
he says, "but there are those who turn him to good business 



account, and also others who afford permission for the 
conduct of such transactions." Monsignor Bonomelli 
frankly admits that it is quite comprehensible to him 
that in Italy the educated classes— be they patricians, 
merchants or workers— do not desire any connection 
with the Roman Catholic Church. What an admission 
from a Catholic Bishop! And why is this? Simply because 
that religion represents a pot pourri of absurd 
ceremonies, customs, devotions, etc., which may have 
the effect of subduing the ignorant masses to due reverence 
and respect for their spiritual (?) guides, but 
offends the good sense of the educated and enlightened. 

Since the above article was written, a Rome correspondent 
informs us that Pius X. has appointed a committee 
consisting of several Cardinals and Doctors of 
Catholic Divinity, to consider and decide upon the measures 
of reform to be adopted. The Intransigeants and 
Jesuits, continues the correspondent, are highly indignant 
at the lines of the policy taken up by the Pope, as 
they can see only too well that should the meditated 
reforms be carried out the knell of the priesthood's 
power is sounded, and their hitherto uncurbed license at 
an end. These latter views find strong confirmation in 
the fact that outside of Italy the Catholic priests are 
careful not to breathe a word of the movements, pregnant 
with meaning, which are going on in Papal circles, 
since they fear, and with good cause, that as soon as the 
Vatican announces that the dogmas hitherto propagated 
by them as Gospel truths are entirely wrong and merely 
the results of former abuses on the part of the clergy, 
people will immediately come to the conclusion that 
where so much is false it is useless to look for aught that 
savors of the truth, and will, in their disgust at the manner 
in which they have been misled, turn their thoughts 
towards the true faith and so swell the ranks of the 
Protestant believers.— The Bulwark. 



But, alas! how few they will find of true Protestants 
—holding the Bible as God's inspired Word and 
protesting against the errors of the "dark ages." By 
that time "higher criticism" will have infidelity intrenched 
in pulpit and pew. But, God be praised, some 
are already seeing Present Truth. 



R3646 : page 310 

"BEAR YE ONE ANOTHER'S BURDENS." 

-GALATIANS 6:2.- 

THOSE WHO LOOK upon the Bible as a collection 
of moral precepts designed for the regulation 



of the world in general, are very far from 
the proper estimate of its object and scope; for the Bible 
is not addressed to the world at all. The whole book, 
from beginning to end, is the inheritance of the saints— 
"the sanctified in Christ Jesus." To them, all the 
apostolic epistles are addressed. 

The book of Revelation is also similarly addressed. 
And the Apostle Peter, in referring to the prophecies 
of the Old Testament, says even of the prophets that 
"not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister." 
(1 Pet. 1:12. See also Dan. 12:4,8,9.) And the Apostle 
Paul says that "whatsoever things were written aforetime 
were written for our learning, that we [the sanctified 
in Christ Jesus] through patience and comfort of the 
Scriptures might have hope." (Rom. 15:4.) Consequently, 
all that was written aforetime by Moses and the 
prophets— whether of history or law or prophecy or 
type or precept— was designed specially for us who are in 
Christ, for the instruction and comfort of the children of 
God. And not one iota of it belongs to the unregenerate 

R3646 : page 311 

world. It is a "light which shineth in a dark place" 
to Christians: it is "a lamp to our feet, and a light to 
our path." And whatever light the worldly get from it, 
reaches them indirectly— as reflected from the children 
of God, who "shine as lights in the world." "Ye," 
said our Lord, "are the light of the world."— Phil. 2:15; 
Matt. 5:14. 

The plan of God, once discerned, indirectly inculcates 
every principle of morality and virtue by showing just 
what God designs to have us do; by showing, first, 
how he created us perfect and glorious in his own image 
and designed us for everlasting life in the enjoyment 
of his favors; next, that everything in us which is short 
of that original perfection is due to sin and renders us 
unworthy of life. Then there is the recognition of sin; 
and thus the glorious plan for both our legal and our 
actual deliverance from sin and death is opened up, and 
the final restitution of all things is assured to the loyal 
and obedient sons of God; and all the necessary provisions 
thereto are made manifest. 

As the plan is now clearly outlined we see how 
history and prophecy and type and law all minister to 
the one grand design of the Book of books, in which the 
reverent and careful student finds the highest incentive 
to purity and holiness, and the most perfect delineation 
of that praiseworthy character which he should seek to 
build up, and in contrast with which the deformity of 
every evil is manifest. 

Among the instructions to the children of God is 
the one above cited— "Bear ye one another's burdens, 
and so fulfil the law of Christ." The law of Christ we 
have seen to be the law of love: and Love says, "Bear ye 
one another's burdens." There are times in the experience 



of almost every one when the surges of trouble 

roll high, and the timid, shrinking soul is almost overwhelmed 

by them. And then how soothing is the sympathy 

and counsel of a fellow-member of the body of 

Christ! Worldly-minded friends may sympathize, but 

their counsel is almost sure to be wrong. Hence the 

R3647 : page 311 

necessity of fellowship in the body of Christ, and of disfellowship 
with the world. 

It is not always necessary to tell one's sorrows and 
perplexities to another, and to have their sympathy and 
aid: in most cases they are better untold, except to the 
Lord. But Love's quick discernment is always watchful 
and ready with the word in season, the cordial friendliness 
and the helpful hand if need be, to help bear the 
burden. 

There are various kinds of burdens to be borne: 
there are burdens of bereavement, of financial embarrassment, 
of business and family cares, of physical and 
mental suffering, of sudden disasters and great perplexities 
and anxieties; and there are burdens also of 
conscious sins. In all these, if we are diligently seeking 
to fulfil the law of Christ, we may be able to cheer and 
strengthen fellow-members of the body of Christ with 
sympathy and counsel, and such aid as may be most 
needful and timely. 

But the Apostle calls particular attention to this 
last kind of burdens— burdens of sins— and counsels the 
exercise of this disposition specially in cases of acknowledged 
sin. We are all to remember our own liability to 
sin, and therefore to be patient and considerate with 
others when they are overtaken in a fault. Such patient, 
forbearing love is one of the most beautiful adornments 
of the Christian character. 

In the body of Christ the various members have 
their various inherited weaknesses, against which they 
must wage a lifelong warfare; and these weaknesses are 
sometimes of such a nature as to interfere to some 
extent with the rights and comforts of others as well as 
of themselves. And just here the Apostle offers a word 
of counsel, saying, "We, then, that are strong ought to 
bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves." 
(Rom. 15:1,2.) This does not imply that we 
should not expostulate with such a one and endeavor 
to help him get rid of his infirmity. This we should do, 
in the spirit of meekness and kindness, while we patiently 
endure the trial of our patience, not seeking to please 
ourselves, but rather to help a weaker brother or sister. 
"Let every one of us," as the Apostle counsels, "please 
his neighbor [brother] for his good, to edification"— i.e., 
not by simply ignoring his fault as though you considered 
it all right, but, while kindly urging him to strive 
against it, still humbly and patiently submitting to the 
discomfort it brings to you. 



If this spirit prevails, the Apostle further shows 
(1 Cor. 12:24-26), there need be no schism in the body; 
because the members all have a mutual care and a mutual 
love one for another— a care which seeks to encourage 
and strengthen all that is good and to discourage all that 
is unbecoming, and a love which throws its mantle over 
the deformity and endeavors to conceal a fault, rather 
than to expose the weaker brother to the reproach of 
others. Thus in the true body of Christ, which is knit 
together in love, if one member suffer, all the members 
suffer with him, in proportion as they are more or less 
directly associated with him; or, if one member be 
honored, all the members rejoice with him, and to some 
degree share the honor; just as when in an earthly family 
one member rises to honorable distinction all the members 
partake of the honor and the joy. 

For such self-sacrificing love how necessary is the 
spirit of humility and gentleness and patience and faith! 
How forceful are the Master's words, "Except ye be 
converted [from the spirit of the world to the spirit of 
Christ] and become as little children [in meekness and 
teachableness], ye shall not enter into the kingdom of 
heaven. "-Matt. 18:1-6. 

And again says the Master, "Whoso shall receive 
one such little child [one such humble, teachable child of 
God] in my name receiveth me." Let us, therefore, 
be in haste to receive and to heartily fellowship every 
such one. 

And here he adds a caution which all would do well 
to heed, saying, "But whosoever shall ensnare one of the 
least of these who believe in me, it would be better for 
him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and 
that he were sunk in the depth of the sea." With what 
carefulness, then, should we regard one another. 

Dearly beloved, bear ye one another's burdens, 
and so fulfil the law of Christ— the law of love; and so 
bind up the body of Christ that there be no schism in the 
body, but that it be more and more knit together in 
love. Let this blessed law of Christ rule more fully in 
all who have taken, by consecration, the name of Christ: 
and let its hallowed influence shine out upon the world, 
showing them how it brings peace and harmony and 

R3647 : page 312 

happiness— how it makes more tender and devoted 
wives, more noble and good and kind husbands, more 
loyal and loving children, more kind and good neighbors; 
and how it puts oil upon all the troubled waters of present 
experience and prepares the heart for the enjoyment of 
all the fruits of righteousness. 



R3647 : page 312 



"PAY THY VOWS UNTO THE MOST HIGH." 

THE FIFTIETH PSALM furnishes food for most 
profitable meditation to the consecrated. It 
starts with a precious reminder of the glory 
that is shortly to be revealed in and through the faithful. 
Taking the standpoint of the Church's future completeness 
and glory, it says (verse 1): "The mighty God, 
even Jehovah, speaketh [through the glorified Church, 
the Christ, Head and body], and calleth the earth from 
the rising of the Sun ["the Sun of Righteousness, with 
healing in his wings"— Mai. 4:2] unto the going down 
thereof" [i.e., from the beginning to the close of the 
Millennial day, Jehovah, through his Anointed, will be 
calling the earth to repentance and to righteousness and 
eternal life.] 

Verse 2. "Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty 
[out of the Church exalted and glorified], God shineth 
forth [his glorious character and plan are made known]." 

But verse 3 reminds us that that time is yet future, 
and begins to describe the coming of the Lord, while the 
following verses discourse as to the first work of his 
presence. 

Verse 3. "Our God shall come, and shall not keep 
silence: a fire ["the fire of his jealousy"] shall devour 
before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about 
him." It will be the tempest of the great time of trouble 
so often and so variously and vividly described 
elsewhere. 

Verse 4. "He shall call to the heavens above, and 
to the earth, to judge his people." In this time of the 
Lord's presence and the harvest of the Gospel age, all 
who claim to be his people— i.e., all "Christendom," 
Christ's kingdom, falsely so-called, or "Babylon," as 
named in the Scriptures (Rev. 16:19)— are brought into 
judgment before the assembled hosts of heaven and 
earth— angels and men. Already this judgment of 
"Christendom," "Babylon," is in progress: hence the 
late overhauling and revision of the hitherto accepted 
and unquestioned creeds of its various sects. And hence, 
too, the unsparing criticism of nominal Christianity 
by the world at large, in the secular press, etc., calling 
attention to its traditional errors, and to its untenable 
positions. It is now recognized as a self-contradictory 
mouthpiece of God. 

Verse 5 is the command of the now present Lord of 
the harvest to the reapers, to separate the true wheat 
from the great bundles of tares in Babylon— "Gather 
my saints together unto me: those that have made a 
covenant with me [not merely by the lips, but] by 
[actual] sacrifice"— those who have faithfully carried out 
the solemn covenant of entire devotedness to the Lord. 

Verse 6. "And the heavens shall declare his righteousness; 
for God himself is judge." In that judgment 
which heaven and earth are called upon to witness, and 
which shall closely discriminate between the wheat 



and the tares, and effectually separate them, "the 
heavens [the Kingdom of God which will be established 
as the outcome of this judgment] shall declare his 
[God's] righteousness; for God himself [who cannot err] 
is [the] Judge." 

The following verses of the chapter sum up charges 
brought against God's nominal people, while verses 14,15,22 and 23 
interpose a word of wise counsel for 
those who will receive it. 

Verses 7 and 8. "Hear, O my people [ye who claim 
to be my people by a solemn covenant], and I will 
speak: O Israel [nominal spiritual Israel], and I will 
testify against thee: I am God, even thy God. Not 
because of thy sacrifices will I reprove thee; and thy 
burnt offerings [free-will offerings, such as benevolent 
works, etc.] are continually before me." But such works 
cannot commend them to God in that day of judgment; 
for, said Jesus, "Many will say to me in that day, Lord, 
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy 
name cast out devils? and in thy name done many 
wonderful works? and then will I say unto them, I never 
knew [approved] you: depart from me, ye that work 
iniquity." (Matt. 7:22,23.) These have been "false 
prophets" (Matt. 7:15), "teaching for doctrines the commandments 
of men." (Matt. 15:9.) For their own 
erroneous theories they have claimed divine authority; 
and though in going about to establish their own righteousness 
they have done "many wonderful works," 
those works are not acceptable to God, because they 
have not submitted themselves to his plans and methods. 

Verses 9-13 declare God's independence of their 
works, and intimate his perfect ability to accomplish 
the blessing of the world according to his own plan without 
their assistance. "I will take no bullock out of thy 
house, nor he goats out of thy folds; for every beast of 
the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. 
I know all the fowls of the mountains: and the wild 
beasts of the field are mine. If I were hungry I would 
not tell thee; for the world is mine and the fulness thereof. 

R3648 : page 312 

Will I eat flesh of bulls or drink the blood of goats?"— 
Am I in need of your wisdom or works, or in any way 
dependent upon your gifts? No— "Offer unto God 
thanksgiving; and pay thy vows unto the Most High." 
(Verse 14.) What have any of us to offer unto the Lord 
that we did not first receive from him, and that should 
not, therefore, be thankfully received and used according 
to the directions of his plan? And this is what all 
who have consecrated themselves to God have covenanted 
to do. It is, therefore, obligatory upon all such that 
they pay their vows, fulfil their covenant unto the Most 
High. ' 

True, in the faithful fulfilling of a covenant of entire 
consecration to God there is much to endure in the way 



of reproach and persecution from the world (2 Tim. 3:12); 
but to such the Lord through the Prophet (verse 15) 
says, "Call upon me in the day of trouble: I will 
deliver thee, and thou [by thy testimony and faithfulness] 
shalt glorify me." 

Verses 16,17. "But unto the wicked God saith" 
[The wicked here referred to are not people of the world; 
for, according to verse 7, this testimony is borne against 
those who claim to be the Lord's people, and members 
of the spiritual house of Israel. These "wicked" are the 
covenant-breakers among those who still claim to be 

R3648 : page 313 

faithful people of God.]— unto these God saith, "What 

hast thou to do to declare my statutes [decrees, doctrines] 

or that thou shouldest take my covenant into 

thy mouth? seeing thou hatest instruction and castest 

my words behind thee." The Lord will not hold them 

guiltless who, professing entire consecration to him, 

nevertheless despise instruction and cast his words 

behind them while they cling to their own traditions and 

theories; "For," says the Apostle, "the wrath of God 

is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness 

of men who hold down [Greek katecho— 

hold down or suppress] the truth in unrighteousness." 

(Rom. 1:18.) This is what the various ecclesiastical 

systems of Great Babylon have been guilty of for centuries 

past: they have taught their own false doctrines and 

have claimed for them the divine authority of the Word 

of God. In doing so they have unjustly suppressed the 

truth: they have hated instruction and have cast the 

words of the Lord behind them whenever the latter 

were brought forward to testify against them or their 

plans. 

What right, the Prophet inquires, have such covenant-breakers 
to declare the plan of God? None whatever. 
Such unfaithful and "wicked and slothful" servants 
are hindered by their errors from seeing truths now 
due. Having been unfaithful to the measure of truth 
received, they are not permitted to know, and hence 
cannot declare, the deeper things of God— the breadth 
and scope of his wonderful plan. "Light is sown for 
the righteous" who faithfully and thankfully receive 
and disseminate it, "and gladness [the gladness which 
comes from a realization of the truth] for the upright 
in heart."— Psa. 97:11. 

But the testimony against this class proceeds- 
verse 18— "When thou sawest a thief [one desirous of 
robbing God's children of the truth], then thou consentedst 
with him." All who do not guard the truth and 
the flock of God against the encroachment of error, who 
bid false teachers God-speed, or who commend wolves 
in sheep's clothing to the Lord's little ones, are, according 
to the Prophet's language, wickedly consenting with 
thieves and robbers. And not only so, but he continues— 



"and hast been partaker with adulterers." Such a 
compromise with the spirit of the world is, in the language 
of the Scriptures, defined as adultery. For this 
reason Babylon the Great (Papacy) is termed a harlot, 
and the mother of harlots (of the various similar systems 
that sprang from her); and the principle holds good in 
every case where unfaithful covenant-breakers consent 
to any degree with the thieves and robbers who plot and 
scheme against the truth. 

Verse 19. "Thou givest thy mouth to evil, and thy 
tongue frameth deceit." Such is the course of all who in 
unrighteousness suppress the truth and go about to 
establish their own righteousness and their own plans. 

Verse 20. "Thou sittest and speakest against thy 
brother; thou slanderest thine own mother's son." The 
unfaithful always take the attitude of persecutors, to 
some degree, of the faithful. Such is the attitude of the 
whole nominal church against those faithful servants 
who receive and advocate the truth. 

Verse 21. "These things hast thou done ["Babylon," 
"Christendom," the great nominal church], and I kept 
silence: [up to the present time, the harvest; and because 
I kept silence and permitted this evil to run and prosper] 
thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as 
thyself [that I was consenting with thee to thy evil 
ways]; but [not so; for a purpose I permitted you to run 
your course and to make your real character manifest; 
but now, in this harvest and judgment time] I will reprove 
thee, and set them in order before thine eyes." 
Hence the present investigations and exposures of creeds, 
and the growing unrest in the various sects of 
"Christendom." 

Verses 22,23. "Now consider this [reproof], ye 
that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces [destroy you], 
and there be none to deliver. 

"Whoso offereth thanksgiving [thankfully receives 
the reproof and applies his heart unto instruction] 
glorifieth me [or honors me, as a faithful and consistent 
believer and representative of the truth]; and to him that 
ordereth his course aright [that conforms his life and 
teaching to the light received] will I show the salvation 
of God." 

How solemn and weighty the admonition, and how 
worthy of the most thoughtful and prayerful consideration 
of all who name the name of Christ! The day of 
reckoning is upon the Church— upon all who profess to be 
members of it: "The hour of his judgment is come." 
Who is worthy to stand? Only those who gratefully 
receive the message of divine truth, and who faithfully 
pay their vows to the Most High. 



R3648 : page 313 

REBUILDING THE TEMPLE. 



--EZRA 3:10-4:5.-OCTOBER 22.- 

Golden Text:— "The Temple of God is holy, 
which Temple ye are."— 1 Cor. 3:17. 

LOYALTY to the Lord, and faith in his promises, 

are costly. The Lord has so arranged the matter, 

to the intent that only those who are willing to 

pay the price may enjoy these blessings. Only the faithful 

and the obedient are willing to pay the price. Thus 

the Lord proves his people, separating the merely 

nominal believers from the true, selecting to himself his 

"jewels," his "peculiar people." 

This principle applied to the Jews who returned 
to Jerusalem from Babylon captivity, in response to the 
Lord's provision through the proclamation of King 
Cyrus. Out of the great hosts of that nation carried 
captive— first the ten tribes, and later the two tribes- 
there were only Forty-two Thousand Three Hundred 
Sixty (42,360) of the proper faith in God and the Abrahamic 
promise, and of the proper zeal and courage, etc., 
ready to respond. The remainder of the nation had become 
so comfortably settled in Babylon, socially and 
financially, that their interests in these things outweighed 
their faith in the Abrahamic promise. Thus 
God sifted the nation, and in this motley group from all 
the tribes he had the jewel class— the very best and 
most loyal part of all the seed of Abraham. As the 
Apostle explains in respect to the elect Church in this 
gospel age, so we might say of these Jews returning from 
Babylonian exile, that there were not many of them 

R3648 : page 314 

great, or wise, or learned, or noble, according to the 
course and wisdom of this world. 

HOPES DEFERRED. TRIALS MANY. 

Nor had their trials ceased with the surrender of 
brighter prospects in Babylonia. They left their friends 
in Babylon, full of zeal, and to some extent admired 
by their more worldly-wise compatriots, who preferred 
to remain in the foreign land. The escort granted them 
by the king, the presents of money, and the costly vessels 
of the temple service, were with them, and their 
hopes ran high as they began their journey of nearly 
800 miles, about the distance from Philadelphia to Chicago. 
According to tradition, they must have been about 
four months travelling, whereas an express train in our 
day would make the distance in seventeen hours. 

The toilsome journey ended, they finally rested at 
Jerusalem, only to find still greater discouragements. 
But a very few of them had ever seen the place before, 
and those few had seen through the eyes of childhood, 



for the city had lain desolate, according to the Word of 
the Lord, for seventy years. (2 Chron. 36:21.) The wall 
and the temple had been demolished by Nebuchadnezzar's 
orders, and many of the private residences were 
also left in ruins, and now for seventy years of such 
desolations, "without inhabitant," the place was a 
wilderness. Trees were growing in what formerly were 
streets. Everything was disorder. Any other class than 
those full of faith and zeal, as these were, would have 
been utterly discouraged. We are to remember that the 
Lord thus tries our courage, and faith and zeal, not to 
destroy these qualities, but to deepen and fix them— 
to establish us, to develop us in character. As with the 
typical Israelites there, so it is now with the spiritual 
Israelites— all such trying experiences, under divine 
providence, will work out to our advantage if we will but 
persevere in our faith, and love, and zeal. 

R3649 : page 314 

It required more than a year to put themselves in 
reasonable condition for living, and then their attention 
turned to the rebuilding of the temple. That they should 
have begun so soon to think of the house of the Lord 
speaks well of their spiritual condition. It is at this 
point that our lesson properly begins, describing the 
laying of the foundation of the temple, and the priests 
and the Levites, appropriately robed, making a joyful 
noise before the Lord, as representing the faith and confidence 
of the people in the precious promises associated 
with that temple and with that city. Alas, poor Jews! 
we sympathize with them greatly as we remember that 
as a nation they clung to those Abrahamic promises for 
over 1,600 years, and yet finally rejected the Prince of 
life, and in consequence were left desolate, as a house, or 
nation. The Apostle remarks, concerning their faith in 
the Abrahamic promise, "unto which promise our 
twelve tribes instantly serving God hope to come." 

How glad we are for the poor Jews that although 
Israel hath not obtained the chiefest favor, but only the 
"elect" have obtained it, while the rest were blinded, 
nevertheless God's mercy and favor still have them in 
mind, and assure us that they shall obtain mercy through 
our mercy, shortly— that the blindness that has been on 
Israel, during the selection of Spiritual Israel, will surely 
pass away, furnishing them the chief opportunity for 
reconciliation to God, under the New Covenant provisions 
of the Millennial age.-Heb. 8:10-12. 

A NEW SONG IN MY MOUTH. 

As with the mind's eye we see those poor but faithful 
Israelites, out of all the tribes, praising God as they 
laid the foundation of the Temple, it suggests to us how 
much more the spiritual Israelites who have returned 
from mystic Babylon should shout and sing the praises 



of our King from our higher standpoint of knowledge 
and appreciation of his grace and truth. Speaking of us, 
the spiritual Israelites, the Prophet declares, "Thou hast 
put a new song into my mouth, even the loving-kindness 
of our God." All spiritual Israelites, who are in the 
right attitude of heart toward the Lord, are full of songs 
of gratitude and praise— not always audibly, however, 
for many can best sing and make melody in their hearts 
unto the Lord; and indeed the Psalm of Life, which each 
of the Lord's followers declares in actions and words to 
those about him, is the best testimony, the best praise 
we can raise, more to the glory of our King than any 
others. 

If the Israelites who remained in Babylon, whose 
faith and courage were insufficient, could have witnessed 
the scene at a distance, they doubtless would have 
shouted for joy, that they had not undertaken such a 
pilgrimage and such a work of restoration; but as Paul 
and Silas could sing in the prison, with their backs 
bleeding from the cruel lash, while others enjoying every 
luxury of life in the same city were miserable, so it was 
with those returned Israelites. Full of faith and hope, 
they were also filled with joy as they looked forward in 
prospect for still further favors from the Lord, in harmony 
with his glorious promises. And so it is with the 
Lord's people to-day: our rejoicing is not because of 
temporal favors and advantages and privileges, but on 
account of those joys which are ours through faith and 
hope, inspired by the divine promises— the culmination 
of the same promises for which the natural Israelites 
were aspiring, and which are secured to us through the 
great Jew of the seed of Abraham, our Redeemer, our 
Bridegroom. 

The shouts were discordant— some of joy, some of 
weeping. Those who looked forward in hope shouted for 
joy. Those who looked backward, and pictured before 
their minds Solomon's grand Temple, wept as they 
thought of the insignificance of the present one in comparison. 
And so to-day among spiritual Israelites, there 
are some who weep for the past, when they should be 
rejoicing for the future. The Apostle exhorts us to 
"forget the things which are behind, and to press forward 
to the things which are before." The lessons we 
learn from past experiences, even from adverse experiences, 
while they should be kept in memory, need 
not be mourned over by spiritual Israelites, for they can 
call to mind that the merit of Christ's sacrifice covers all 
of their unwilling blemishes and mistakes. Carrying 
with them their experiences they should press forward 
to fresh victories and fresh joys in the Lord. 

"FIRST PURE, THEN PEACEABLE." 

We are to remember that these 42,000 people, about 
35,000 of whom are supposed to have belonged to the 
tribes of Judah and Benjamin and Levi, and about 1 1,000 



from the other nine tribes, occupied only a small district 
in Palestine, about twenty-five miles square, Jerusalem 
being the center. The remainder of the territory of 
Palestine was more or less settled by immigrants. The 
king of Babylon followed the practice of moving the 

R3649 : page 315 

captives from one nation into the territory of another, 
so that their old associations being broken up they would 
be more dependent upon the Babylonian government and 
lose their own natural traits. These people of various 
nationalities that had settled in Palestine had acquired 
some of the traditions of the land and its religious 
customs, and in our Lord's day, 566 years later, they 
were known as the Samaritans. Of them our Lord said, 
"Ye believe ye know not what; we know what we believe, 
for salvation is of the Jews." Respecting the same 
people, we remember our Lord's commandments as he 
sent forth the twelve apostles and later also the seventy 
disciples to proclaim him, he said, "Go not into the way 
of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans 
enter ye not; but go rather to the lost sheep of the house 
of Israel. "--Matt. 10:5,6. 

These mixed peoples, whom we will for convenience 
call Samaritans, paid little attention to the Jews returned 
from Babylon until they heard of their project of rebuilding 
the Temple on its own site, the consecrated 
site, for it is supposed that Abraham's typical offering 
of Isaac was made upon this very "dome of the rock" 
upon which the Temple was built, a rock that to this 
day is held sacred by Musselmans, Jews and Christians. 
The Samaritans had been unneighborly up to this time, 
but now seemed to catch an inspiration from this Temple 
building as they remembered the ancient glories of the 
nation of this land, whose great king Solomon had built 
the first Temple. Ceasing to act as enemies, the Samaritans 
proffered their assistance in the building of the 
Temple. We cannot doubt that they were sincere in 
this proposition, and that really their religious fervor 
impelled them to make it. 

Many commentators think the Israelites made a 
great mistake in rejecting their aid and declining to 
affiliate with them. But such commentators are evidently 
in error, since our Lord Jesus by his conduct and 
words fully substantiated the thought that the Samaritans 
had nothing whatever to do with the true Temple 
and its building. God had been sifting the true seed of 
Abraham to select from it the faithful few, and now to 
have invited the Samaritans to come in and join them 
in the Temple building and Temple services would have 
been to bring in a semi-heathen mixture, which the 
Lord did not desire. Why the Lord did not desire it can 
be seen only from the one standpoint— not that it was his 
wish to send those Samaritans to eternal torment, nor 
that he wished to destroy them in the Second Death, but 



that he has for future development a great plan of salvation 
which will affect every nation, people, kindred and 
tongue, including these Samaritans. In the interim he 
wished to develop the typical seed of Abraham, and 
subsequently the spiritual seed of Abraham, to be his 
agents and representatives in conferring his blessings 
upon all nations. 

"WHICH TEMPLE YE ARE." 

We find the same thought abroad to-day, troubling 
those who have come out of Babylon, and who are wishing 
to build the true Temple of God referred to in our 
golden text— the holy temple, the antitypical temple, 
"which temple ye are." The foundations of our temple 
were laid at Pentecost, under apparently very unfavorable 
conditions from the world's standpoint— a dead 
leader, and a handful of a few hundred disciples scattered 
and considerably discouraged. Nevertheless, those who 
recognize the Lord's hand in the matter see things 
differently: with the eye of faith they discern in Jesus 
the great rock of our Salvation typified by the "rock of 
the dome," the top of Mt. Zion, on which the altar of 
sacrifice stood. The same eye of faith now discerns that 
the twelve apostles are the foundation stones of divine 
appointment, built upon the rock Christ Jesus; and that 
upon the ministries of those appointed representatives 
of Christ, a glorious church, a glorious temple of the Lord 
is being erected. Those who then had the eye of faith 
shouted for joy, and all who since possess the same 
spiritual vision rejoice in the greater work which the 
Lord is accomplishing, as they see the preparation now 
of the "living stones," which, by and by, in the first 
resurrection, shall be brought together complete as the 
glorious temple of God, in and through which all the 
families of the earth may have intercourse with God to 
their blessing. 

There are numerous "Samaritans" to-day who have 
neither part nor lot in this great temple and its construction. 
These Samaritans are found in churches of nearly 
all denominations, men and women of good character 
and of religious inclinations. Some of them are "good 
Samaritans," ready to relieve the sick, the indigent. 
Worldly wisdom says that these should all be recognized 
as "Israelites indeed," even though they be not fully 
consecrated to the Lord to do his will. Many are inclined 
to upbraid us now, as they upbraided the natural 
Israelites, for refusing the fellowship and cooperation of 
the Samaritans of their day. 

ONLY ONE NARROW WAY. 

There is but one course for the Lord's people to 
follow: they should appreciate whatever is good in these 
their neighbors and friends, they should deal justly and 
kindly with them, but they should remember that as 



R3650 : page 315 

oil and water will not mix, so likewise there cannot be 
any real union between the consecrated and the unconsecrated 
in respect to their religious views and their 
endeavors to cooperate in the divine service. Their 
standpoints are opposite, affiliations are injurious to 
both parties. If the spiritually begotten ones, the 
Israelites indeed, attempt to meet the ideas of the 
Samaritan class, they will be compromising their own 
covenant with the Lord. Likewise, if the Samaritan 
class or the churchianity class of our day be encouraged 
to affiliate with the consecrated, it will injure them in 
that it will deceive them into thinking that they have 
become joint-heirs in the divine promises; whereas none 
can inherit under those promises except through faith 
in the Redeemer, circumcision in the heart, and a full 
consecration unto the death. Such only become regularly 
and legitimately Israelites indeed, probationary members 
of the "very elect" Church. 

When their cooperation in temple building, etc., 
was declined, the Samaritans became the bitter opponents 
of the Jews, whom they, no doubt, described as 
bigoted. Consistently with their views of the subject 
they did all in their power, politically and otherwise, 
to hinder the temple building, and thus the trials and 
difficulties of the servants of God were greatly increased 
and multiplied. 

So it is to-day. Those who are faithful to the Lord, 
"the people who do know their God," are esteemed to 
be religious bigots and fanatics by some of the respectable 

R3650 : page 316 

of churchianity, who, in harmony with their erroneous 
conceptions of the situation, are doing all in 
their power to hinder us in the great work of this Gospel 
age, the preparation of the living stones of this Temple. 
We need to understand the situation properly, otherwise 
we would soon be discouraged, and think of God as being 
against us because he permits such opposition. But with 
the right view of things before our minds we may realize 
that all the oppositions of churchianity are really beneficial 
to us, helpful in that they serve to do the chiseling 
and polishing of our characters, necessary to fit and 
prepare us for honorable stations in the temple of glory 
soon to be completed. One thought not to be lost sight 
of is, that in the Lord's arrangement we are the stones, 
he the master workman— and all the trials and difficulties 
and oppositions and perplexities and disappointments of 
our experience are the chisels and the wheels and the 
emery-sand for our preparation. From this standpoint 
only are we able to follow the Apostle's advice to rejoice 
in tribulations also. 



R3650 : page 316 

"BY MY SPIRIT, SAITH THE LORD." 

--ZECHARIAH 4:1-10.-OCTOBER 29.- 

Golden Text:— "Not by might nor by 
power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord." 

ZECHARIAH prophesied during the period of the 
rebuilding of the Temple. In our last lesson we 
noted the beginning of the work in the laying of 
the foundations, and that this corresponds with the 
establishment of the Gospel Church at Pentecost. The 
joy and zeal associated with the founding of the Temple 
was followed by a period of slackness, the result of the 
opposition of the Samaritan neighbors, who employed 
their every art to discourage the builders and to cause an 
interruption of the work. As a result several years 
elapsed before the structure was finally completed. 

Just so, after the founding of the Church by our 
Lord and the apostles, and the great season of refreshing 
associated therewith, there came a period of fierce 
opposition and persecution from Satan and his blinded 
servants. As a consequence of this opposition very 
little was done for centuries upon the building up of the 
Church— the preparation of the living stones; yet 
finally, with the Lord's assistances and encouragements 
through the Reformation movement, etc., the work of 
collecting the living stones has progressed, and now we 
are in the time when the Temple of the Lord is nearly 
complete— the spiritual Temple which, when completed, 
will receive its top-stones in the sense of being brought 
directly in contact with and under the guidance of the 
glorified Lord, who is the capstone of the spiritual 
pyramid— his Church. 

Haggai's prophecies were delivered to Israel about 
the time of their return from the captivity, and therefore 
at the time of the founding of the Temple, the 
prophet at this time being advanced in years. Zechariah, 
a younger prophet, was raised up by the Lord at this 
time, and other messages were sent to the discouraged 
Israelites to show them that they must not expect great 
national prosperity at the time, but that nevertheless 
the Lord was with them, and that going on faithfully in 
an apparently small, insignificant matter, they would be 
accomplishing his purposes. This corresponds in some 
degree with the messages which have come to the Lord's 
people since the time of Wycliffe, and which have led 
to the Reformation movement in its various aspects, and 
incidentally to the development and preparation of the 
various living stones of the glorious Temple. 

PROPHETS TO BOTH ISRAELS. 



Our lesson treats of these visions given to Zechariah 
and related by him to the people, which served to encourage 
them to proceed with the work. They were not 
spiritual Israelites, neither was the Temple they were 
constructing the true, glorious Temple of the Lord. 
Those were only the types— the better things, the antitypes, 
are ours. Nevertheless they got a blessing in 
connection with the types as we get still greater blessings 
in connection with the antitypes, and the same 
messages which mean so much for us meant a great deal 
to them, though they did not understand them so clearly. 

For instance, this prophecy respecting the Golden 
Candlestick, etc., to natural Israel at that time was 
properly understood to mean that they were to be 
God's light-bearers amongst all the nations of the world, 
and that God himself would see to the supply of light 
which they would shed forth. And all that was true of 
natural Israel for centuries; they were God's light-bearing 
nation, and undoubtedly their influence in the 
world hindered a greater degradation than might otherwise 
have occurred. The nations furthest away from 
them and the light which God placed in them and which 
shone out from them were the nations which became the 
most degraded, while the nations nearest them and their 
light were the nations which went downward least 
rapidly. Assuredly, however, it was not intended that 
they should understand the full meaning of this prophecy, 
and the prophet himself did not understand its full 
meaning. 

The Apostle Peter explains the situation to us when 
he says, "Holy men of old spoke as moved by the holy 
Spirit." And yet he proceeds to say, The things which 
they uttered were not for themselves but for us upon 
whom the ends of the ages have come. (1 Cor. 10:11; 
1 Pet. 1:10-12; 2 Pet. 1:21.) The prophets spoke and 
wrote mechanically, as they were moved by the holy 
Spirit. They saw some meaning, some significance of 
the things they wrote and spoke, but not the true, the 
deep significations, which were not then due to be 
understood. Only since the true Temple began to be 
built at Pentecost, only since the anointing of the holy 
Spirit came upon the spiritual household, the body of 
Christ, has it been possible for any to enter into the real 
spirit, thought, intention of the divine purpose as expressed 
in this and in other prophecies. 

THE GOLDEN LAMPSTAND. 

The Golden Candlestick, or, more properly, lampstand, 
was an important feature in connection with the 
Tabernacle services and subsequently with the Temple 
services. It was the light in the Holy as the Shekinah 
glory was the light in the Most Holy. We may gain an 
accurate conception of the appearance of this golden 



R3650 : page 317 

lampstand from the arch of Titus at Rome. Titus was 
the Roman general whose army destroyed Jerusalem 
A.D. 69. Amongst the spoils of the city which he carried 
away with him was the golden lampstand from the 
Temple. The arch in Rome was built as a memorial to 
that victory. It still stands, though somewhat dilapidated, 
and chiseled in it are representations of Hebrew 
captives bearing the trophies of war. Amongst these 
trophies the golden candlestick is represented. The cut 
herewith produced well represents it. 

The golden candlestick shown to Zechariah in this 
vision differed from the one in the Temple and in the 
Tabernacle in that it had a special bowl as an oil reservoir 
and pipes leading from the bowl to two olive trees, one 
on each side of it, the oil being thus represented as flowing 
from the tree to the lamp and thus perpetually supplying 
a light. We remember that similarly, in his last 
great message to the Church, our Lord pictures seven 
golden candlesticks or lampstands separated from one 
another, and explains that these represented the seven 
stages or epochs of the Church symbolized by the seven 
congregations of Asia. The seven lampstands united in 
one represented, therefore, the Church as a whole from 
first to last, its every member complete, the number 
seven representing completeness. 

We are not to think of this lampstand as representing 
the Church in the future state of glory, giving light 
to the world. No! Thank God! The future glory is 
represented otherwise as the Sun of Righteousness, with 
healing in its beams, and we are particularly told that 
the Church will constitute with her Lord that Sun of 
Righteousness, which shall bless the world and heal its 
sin-sickness.— Matt. 13:43. 

R3651 : page 317 

"LET YOUR LIGHT SHINE." 

In applying this lesson, then, we should recognize 
that it relates to the Church as a whole during this 
Gospel age, during the time when the preparation of the 
living stones for the Temple is in progress. The lesson to 
us is that God is supplying to us the light amidst the 
surrounding darkness of the world— the light of truth, 
the light of the holy Spirit. Nevertheless, God is pleased 
to supply this light through peaceable agencies represented 
by the two olive trees, which we understand to 
symbolize the Old and the New Testaments. From these 
two sources of instruction the Lord's Church is to be 
filled with his spirit and to shine as lights in the world in 
the midst of darkness, in the midst of crooked and 
perverse peoples. From this standpoint they are not to 
expect that their success in the building of the Temple 
will be in the nature of worldly success. They are rather 



to expect that the Lord will furnish them with this supply 
of oil and light because they are his people and because 
they are doing the work, and they are thus to be 
assured of its ultimate accomplishment no matter how 
or what agencies are in opposition. "Greater is he that 
is for us than all they that be against us." 

Zerubbabel was one of the princes amongst the 
people of the line of David, and therefore represented 
the kingdom hopes of the people. His name implies 
alienation from Babylon. He also represented our Lord 
Jesus, the prince of the house of David, whose Kingdom 
is ultimately to be established in the whole earth for the 
blessing and enlightenment of all, but who for a time was 
to be unrecognized by the world. The message given to 
Zerubbabel, therefore, in a general way applies to Jesus 
the Head of the Church and to all the members of his 
body, and particularly to all who are his representatives 
in the Church in the capacity of teachers, elders, etc. 

HE SHALL NOT FAIL NOR BE DISCOURAGED. 

We are reminded here of another statement applicable 
to our Lord, "He shall not fail nor be discouraged 
until he have set judgment in the earth." 
(Isa. 42:4.) The message here to the Zerubbabel class 
is to encourage the work, that the Temple must be built, 
that it shall be built, and that ultimately great blessings 
shall flow to all people through it. The message 
reads: "Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, 
saith the Lord of hosts." The implication is that the 
Lord's Church is not to be established through Crusades, 
nor through mighty organizations combining with worldly 
systems and powers, nor by unions of wealthy sects. 
These all build along different lines. The Temple which 
the Lord is building is to have a beauty, an honor, a 
dignity, not in its construction, nor in the value of its 
stones, but by reason of its completion and of its then 
being filled with the glory of the Lord— in the first 
resurrection. 

The oppositions of the surrounding neighbors and 
the difficulties which they put in the way of the building 
of the Temple must have seemed to the people of that 
time like an impassable mountain before them blocking 
their way. And so throughout the Gospel age the various 
agencies of evil, the civil power and subsequently 
the ecclesiastical and civil powers in combination, have 
seemed to have thoroughly blocked the way for the 
development of the living stones for the Kingdom. 
From the human standpoint, discerning the class which 
the Lord is selecting, all the outward circumstances have 
been unfavorable. The prosperity of Churchianity has 
meant the hindrance of the truth, the hiding of it under 
forms and ceremonies and creeds, until those who fear 
the Lord and who speak often together have wondered 
why the Lord has permitted such great obstacles in the 
way of finding the very elect and building them up in 



the most holy faith. And when the power and strength 
of present institutions are considered we may well ask, 
Where will the Lord's little flock be found? how will they 
ever be glorified? and how can they eventually take 
possession of the Kingdom under the whole heavens? 

ENCOURAGEMENT FOR THE ZERUBBABEL CLASS. 

The message here through the prophet is intended 
to encourage the Zerubbabel class, representative of all 
those who are co-laborers with the Lord in the building 
of his Temple, in the preparation of the stones. The 
assurance is that however great and formidable the 
opposition, the apparent mountains of difficulty shall 
disappear. What we need is faith in the Lord that he is 
carrying out his work and that ultimately all his good 
purposes shall be accomplished. Instead of mountains 
before us shall be a plain, and ultimately God will bring 
forth the headstone, the capstone, to the great complete 
Church, and Head and body together shall be glorified, 
and then will be the shoutings of Grace, grace unto it! 
God's favor upon it! Then the Shekinah glory shall fill 
the Temple, every member, every stone, shall be glorified, 
made partaker of the divine nature, and be fully qualified 
to carry out all the gracious purposes of our God. 

R3651 : page 318 

The message adds that as Zerubbabel laid the foundations 
of the house, he also would complete it, and the 
message to us is that as our Lord Jesus was the Father's 
representative and founded the house of sons at Pentecost, 
so in due time he will complete the work and it 
will be completed along present lines, not by power of 
men nor by the might of men, nor by the riches of the 
world, but by the Lord's spirit, seeking those who are his 
and operating in them through the Word to the chiseling 
and polishing, the shaping and preparing, of them for 
the glorious positions they are to occupy. He who began 
the good work in us is able and willing to complete it 
unto the day of Jesus Christ— Phil. 1:6. 

A DAY OF SMALL THINGS. 

To the Jews returned from Babylon the effort to 
build the house of the Lord and the materials with which 
they worked all seemed insignificant and poor and unlikely 
to result in anything great or glorious or lasting. 
And so with us who now are free from Babylon and who 
are seeking to be built upon the foundation of the apostles 
and prophets, the present time seems a day of small 
things; not many great, not many wise, not many learned 
are to be found amongst the living stones, but the Lord 
knoweth them that are his, and our confidence is to be 
in him. If we despise not these small things we shall 
ultimately rejoice. We are to recognize the plummet in 



the hands of the Lord, squaring, straightening, proving, 
testing, not only our faith but also our characters. We 
are to recognize that only those who will stand the testing 
of the Lord shall ultimately constitute the living 
stones in this glorious Temple. We are to recognize also 
that the eyes of the Lord are upon all his people and upon 
all their interests, to note their tears and their joys, their 
trials and difficulties and their prosperity, to care for all 
their interests. 

In this symbolical picture the eye of the Lord is 
represented as seven or complete all-seeing, everywhere, 
all-knowing. This is our confidence, this is our 
rejoicing. Let us then in our double capacity not only 
be conformed to the plummet line, to all the elements 
of justice and truth and righteousness and love, but let 
us also, as associated with our Lord in the work of upbuilding 
the Church, build one another up in the most 
holy faith. Let us use the plummet with love, with 
kindness, and let us encourage one another with the assurance 
that ultimately the glorious plan of the Lord 
shall be accomplished through the small things, the mean 
things, the insignificant things of the world, the little 
flock whom he is choosing to be his agents and representatives 
in the great and glorious work which is to follow. 
Let us accordingly seek to be more and more filled with 
the spirit. Let us remember that we are the golden 
candlestick of the Lord, to shed the light abroad in the 
present time, whether men will heed or whether they 
will forbear. 

Indeed we have the Lord's assurance that the darkness 
hateth the light, and that therefore the world will 
not love or appreciate the efforts, even though they may 
recognize them as being in many respects good and proper. 
It is ours not to please the world but to please the 
Lord, and in order to please him we must let our lights 
shine out. "Let your light so shine before men that they 
may see your good works and glorify your Father who 
is in heaven." But we cannot as the Lord's Church in 
the world let our lights shine out unless we have the oil, 
unless we have his spirit, and we cannot have the oil, the 
spirit of the Lord, except as we receive it from his appointed 
channels or agencies; and we are to recognize 
that not the wisdom or learning of men is our supply, 
and not our own wisdom, not the wisdom of this world, 
but the wisdom from above, which is supplied to us 
through the two olive trees— the Old Testament, with 
its glorious prophecies and symbols and instructions and 
types— the New Testament, with its explanations and 
assistances and encouragements and exhortations and 
promises. 

"A voice once still and small 

Rose sweetly on the ear; 
With love so clear and full, that all 

In heaven and earth might hear. 



"It spoke of peace, it spoke of love, 
It spoke as angels speak above; 

And God himself was heard. 

For oh, it was the Father's voice 

That bade his trembling world rejoice. 



page 318 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Every day, and day by day, we have increasing 
reason for rejoicing that by God's abounding grace we— even 
we— are in the Light. In reading over "Encouraging Words 
From Faithful Workers," I am forcibly struck with what 
seems to be a common source of wonder, to wit: That this 
astonishing favor is bestowed upon me— "even me!" It 
is well that we realize our personal unworthiness, but how 
often, oh, how often, do I have to hold up before the Adversary, 
when he would overwhelm me with this thought 
with respect to myself, the assurance of our great Apostle 
in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, 1st chapter, 26-29 
verses. 

It would require many pages on which to jot down the 
particular items of advantage which those who are in the 
light of Present Truth possess in reading God's Word. Let 
me refer to one— the understanding of terms, or perhaps 
'twere better to say expressions used by the inspired writers. 
How often we find the expression "That Day;" "In that 
Day;" and in former times we remember how vague and 
undefined was our understanding of the "Day" referred to. 
But now we know its full meaning and we know that we have 
at last really entered that heretofore mystic period; we are 
now living— actually living in "That Day," the "great and 
notable day of the Lord." A day of rejoicing to the Church; 
of sorrow and anguish to the careless and indifferent world. 
How more and more we realize the blessedness of those who 
hunger for Truth. It was the eagle eye and appetite (See 
Vol. VI., p.6 10) that led us to the feast, and it is that that 
enables us to instantly detect the "tid bits" which are here 
and there dropped for our sustenance along the "solitary 
way."-Psa. 107:4. 

For the edification of all who have been firmly placed 
upon the rock of God's eternal Truth, through the MILLENNIAL 
DAWNS, by a clear understanding of His Wonderful 
Plan of the Ages, I refer to one morsel at which I almost 
held my breath when I noted it, because I could almost 
fancy I could hear the voice of our Lord quickly whispering 
the message to me. Without doubt it is slipped in parenthetically, 
like some verses in Daniel's prophecy, meant not 
for the careless or indifferent reader, who really would not 
understand it, but for the eye which God knew would detect 



page 319 



it, appreciate it and pass it around. I refer to Proverbs 22:17-21. 
All the chapter up to the 17th verse is proverbs 
pure and simple, and from the 21st to close of chapter 
the same; but in these verses there is not the sign of a 
proverb. 
In joy, love and consecration, I am, 

Your brother, EMORY A. SADDLER,-0. 



DEAR SIRS: 

Kindly mail to above address a sample copy of ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER, and a list of the MILLENNIAL DAWN publications. 
I have one copy, "The Divine Plan of the Ages," 
which came to my hand accidentally, to all appearances, 
but I shall always look upon it as being sent to me from God. 
I was wandering in a sea of doubt— feeling that I MUST have 
something more to satisfy me than I heard in the sermons 
from Sabbath to Sabbath. The book was in my home for 
some time before I paid any attention to it beyond merely 
glancing in it and deciding it was not interesting. My 

brother, the Rev. W ., B.A., B.D. (at present in Yale University 

—recent winner of a scholarship and elected Fellow of Yale 
College for the year), picked up the book, and after glancing 
at it asked where I got it. I said my husband bought it from 
a traveling agent. "Well," he remarked, "I wouldn't advise 
you to read it." This aroused my curiosity and I decided to 
read it at once— which I did. I have since read it many, 
many times finding new beauties, and fresh comfort in every 
reading. My brother is an advanced theologian, and would 
no doubt think I was a mild lunatic if he knew how thoroughly 
I agree with the views taken by Mr. Russell. 

Yours sincerely, , Canada. 



MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

I have no doubt but that a report of the following 
experience will interest you. I have come to this city to 
attend the N.O.A. meeting, and came in advance to 
build up a clinic. In order to accomplish this I sent a 
letter to all the ministers of the city, inviting them to send 
any member of their congregation who might wish to have 
the advantages of this treatment, as no charges were made 
for it. 

I received an invitation to attend the meeting of the 
ministers' alliance. There were present seven ministers. 
Three of them were amongst the best-known and most prominent 
of the city. We were invited into the study, where a 
large center table had been placed in the middle of the 
room, and the ministers all were invited to sit around the 
table. I took a seat back in one corner. 

In addition to the ministers three women were present. 
They were invited in, and one of them seated at the head 
of the table. When all were seated the rector of the church 



made a speech, the gist of which was that the Christian 
Scientists were proselyting from the various churches all over 
this country, especially in Denver, and in order to combat 
this influence the time had come when the ministry were 
compelled to do something in self-defense. And the most 
rational thing for them to do, in his opinion, was to investigate 
these things and accept that which could be supported by 
demonstrated facts. Personally, he thought the healing appealed 
to the people, and every minister of the Gospel should 
be able to do this. He wound up by saying that the 
woman at the head of the table was a graduate from Mrs. 
Eddy's school and was there prepared to give them facts. 
The "facts" (?) were a few extracts from Mrs. Eddy's teachings 
showing upon what her methods or "science" (?) were 
based. These were interspersed with something from Hudson, 
on mental suggestion. Afterward the ministers present were 
called upon to give an expression of their views and their 
opinion as to the advisability of starting a class under this 
woman as instructor. They were all in favor of it. There 
was one stranger present besides myself, with a MS. of a 
book written to show that all these occult methods of healing 
belong properly within the churches. During his 
remarks he made the statement that all these various methods 
of healing were opposed to Christ and denied the 
atonement. 

Before closing they asked me as a physician to make some 
remarks. I told them I realized that there was considerable 
efficacy in mental suggestion, but had always avoided such 
things because they were used of the Adversary and invariably 
led men into spiritualism and away from Christ. That 
as ministers of the Gospel, I could not see how they could 
justify their action in becoming interested in bringing into 
the Church anything which one of the members had stated, 
and all felt, denied the atonement sacrifice of our Lord; and 
that as a follower of our Lord I wanted nothing to do with it. 

As soon as I sat down one of the most prominent ministers 
of the gathering arose and said he was heartily in favor 
of what I had said; that it was true that these things were 
opposed to Christ. Consequently the only safe thing to do 
was to keep the two separate, or not to confound their religion 
with their method of healing, as they were separate 
and distinct anyway, but by all means they must do something 
to save their flocks! So the class was started. 

Thus the Devil is using Christian Science to whip the 
ministry into line, to a finish. 

Praying the Lord's blessing to continue with you, I am, 
Your loving brother in Christ, 

, Colo. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

These Monday issues of the Dispatch are certainly accomplishing 
a good work. I know of at least two who were 

formerly very much opposed to the Truth and the TOWER publications, 
to whom I have regularly sent the Dispatch, and who 



are now reading the fourth Vol. of DAWN, having read I., II. 
and III. already and are now inquiring along the line of Truth, 
and are no longer bitter toward it, and acknowledge the 
reasonableness of many of the presentations and the scripturalness 
of many others. If persons continue to read them, we 
have a ground for hope, and I have noticed that occasionally 
such ones, all unconsciously to themselves, come to accept 
portions of the Truth; therefore we will, with the dear Lord's 
assistance, continue to send out the "glad tidings," hoping and 
praying that it may find all those who have "ears to hear." 

I desire to do all I can to assist in this work, because I believe 
it is all being accomplished under the direction of the great 
Chief Reaper, and the time in which we may do this harvesting 
work will very soon be past— the summer will be ended. 

It is a great privilege— co-operating with those already 
beyond the vail, in the harvest work. May the dear Lord bless 
his own work, and all those earnest loyal ones, everywhere, 
who are trying thus to assist, is my prayer. Sincerely, 
Your Brother in his Service, 

R. H. BARBER.-N.Y. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Am led to write you to say that last winter some one 
left a tract at our door entitled, "Christ's Death Secured One 
Probation, or Trial for Life Everlasting to Every Man." After 
reading it, we decided that it was the Word of God. We 
then sent to the WATCH TOWER for more and they sent us a 
good supply, which was a great feast of truth to us. Then 
we subscribed for the WATCH TOWER and a little later on for 
the Plan of the Ages. 

We have been separated from all Creeds and Sects for a 
good many years, and being willing sacrifices unto God until 
death, we are striving daily to become more and more conformed 
to the Image of our Living Head, and whereunto we 
have attained we stand fast. Looking for that blessed hope 
and the glorious appearing of the Great God, and our Savior 
Jesus Christ, 

Your brother in Christ, 

CHARLES W. MANDEVILLE,-Pa. 



page 321 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 