Kingdom News No. 36
The New Millennium—What Does the Future Hold for You?
The New Millennium—Dawn of a New Age?
AT MIDNIGHT on December 31, 1999, the 20th century ended.a It was a century that saw much turmoil. But it also saw the dawning of new technologies, dramatic medical advances, an information explosion, and a rapidly growing global economy. The new millennium has therefore been welcomed by many as a symbol of hope and change. Will it perhaps see the end of war, poverty, environmental pollution, and disease?
Many hope so. But how likely is it that the new millennium will produce changes that benefit you—changes that will make life safe and secure for you and your family? Consider the immense scope of just a few of the problems we face.
Pollution
Industrialized lands are “causing environmental damage on a global scale and widespread pollution and disruption of ecosystems.” If present trends continue, “the natural environment will be increasingly stressed.”—“Global Environment Outlook—2000,” United Nations Environment Programme.
Sickness
“By the year 2020, noncommunicable diseases are expected to account for seven out of every ten deaths in the developing regions, compared with less than half today.”—“The Global Burden of Disease,” Harvard University Press, 1996.
Some experts claim that “by 2010, 66 million fewer people [will be alive] in the 23 countries with the most severe [AIDS] epidemics.”—“Confronting AIDS: Evidence From the Developing World,” a report of the European Commission and the World Bank.
Poverty
“Nearly 1.3 billion people live on less than a dollar a day, and close to 1 billion cannot meet their basic consumption requirements.”—“Human Development Report 1999,” United Nations Development Programme.
War
“Violence within [various lands] could reach unprecedented levels. Generated by ethnic, tribal, and religious [divisions], . . . such violence will form . . . the most common type of conflict in the next quarter century . . . , killing hundreds of thousands of people each year.”—“New World Coming: American Security in the 21st Century,” U.S. Commission on National Security/21st Century.
The fanfare and excitement because of the new millennium therefore masks the fact that pollution, sickness, poverty, and war loom larger than ever. At the root of these problems are greed, distrust, and selfishness—traits that cannot be eliminated simply by scientific research, technology, or politics.
The Millennium That Will Bless Mankind
An ancient writer once observed: “To earthling man his way does not belong. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.” (Jeremiah 10:23) Man lacks not only the ability but also the right to rule the earth. Our Maker, Jehovah God, alone has the right and the know-how to solve mankind’s problems.—Romans 11:33-36; Revelation 4:11.
But when? How? The evidence that we are near the end of “the last days” is overwhelming. Open your Bible, please, and read 2 Timothy 3:1-5. It vividly describes the personality traits that people would display during these “critical times.” Matthew 24:3-14 and Luke 21:10, 11 also describe “the last days.” There the focus is on physical events that have taken place since 1914, such as global war, pestilences, and widespread food shortages.
Soon “the last days” will end. Says Daniel 2:44: “The God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. . . . It will crush and put an end to all these [earthly] kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.” Thus it was foretold that God would establish a Kingdom, or government, to rule the earth. According to Revelation 20:4, this government rules for a thousand years—a millennium! Consider just some of the ways that living conditions will improve for all mankind during this glorious Millennium:
Economics. “They will certainly build houses and have occupancy; and they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. They will not build and someone else have occupancy; they will not plant and someone else do the eating.”—Isaiah 65:21, 22.
Health. “At that time the eyes of the blind ones will be opened, and the very ears of the deaf ones will be unstopped. At that time the lame one will climb up just as a stag does, and the tongue of the speechless one will cry out in gladness.” “And no resident will say: ‘I am sick.’”—Isaiah 33:24; 35:5, 6.
Environment. God will “bring to ruin those ruining the earth.”—Revelation 11:18.
Human Relations. “They will not do any harm or cause any ruin in all my holy mountain; because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah.”—Isaiah 11:9.
Millions have faith in these Bible promises and have thus gained an optimistic, positive view of the future. As a result, they are better able to cope with life’s pressures and problems. How can the Bible become a guiding force in your life?
Knowledge That Leads to Life!
Science and technology can sometimes be dazzling! Still, human knowledge has not made life secure and happy for most people. The only knowledge that can accomplish this is described in the Bible at John 17:3, which says: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.”
Such knowledge is found within the pages of the Bible. Although many express strong opinions regarding that sacred book, few have ever examined it for themselves. What about you? Granted, reading the Bible takes considerable effort. But it is worth it. The Bible is the only book that is “inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness.”—2 Timothy 3:16.
How, then, can you begin to acquaint yourself with the Bible? Why not accept the help of Jehovah’s Witnesses? They provide instruction to millions of people in their own homes, free of charge. To assist you in this regard, they use various Bible-based publications, such as the brochure What Does God Require of Us? It gives concise answers to many of the questions you may have regarding the Bible, such as: Who is God? What is God’s purpose for the earth? What is the Kingdom of God? How can the Bible improve your family life?
If you would like one of Jehovah’s Witnesses to call at your home, please fill out the coupon below. They will be happy to give you more information about the glorious Millennial Reign of God’s Kingdom!
□ I would like to receive the brochure What Does God Require of Us? Indicate language preference
□ Please contact me concerning a free home Bible study
[Footnote]
We refer here to popular Western views regarding the new millennium. Technically, the new millennium starts on January 1, 2001.

