ABADDON
(A·badʹdon).
At Revelation 9:11 this Hebrew word is transliterated into the English text. There we read concerning the symbolic plague of locusts that they have “a king, the angel of the abyss. In Hebrew his name is Abaddon, but in Greek he has the name Apollyon.”
In Hebrew the word ʼavad·dohnʹ means “destruction.” It appears in the original Hebrew text a total of six times, and in five of the occurrences it is used to parallel “the burial place,” “Sheol” and “death.” (Ps 88:11; Job 26:6; 28:22; Prov. 15:11; 27:20) Thus Psalm 88:11 says: “Will your loving-kindness be declared in the burial place itself, your faithfulness in the place of destruction [ʼavad·dohnʹ]?” The usage of the word in these texts shows that it here refers to the destructive processes that ensue with human death, and serves to describe the place where such decay takes place, namely, Sheol or the common grave of all mankind. At Job 31:12, speaking of his avoidance of loose conduct and immorality, Job uses ʼavad·dohnʹ to describe the damaging effect of such a course by saying: “For that is a fire that would eat clear to destruction [ʼavad·dohnʹ], and among all my produce it would take root.”—Compare Proverbs 6:26-28, 32; 7:26, 27.
At Revelation 9:11, however, the word “Abaddon” is used as the name of “the angel of the abyss.” The corresponding Greek name “Apollyon” means “Destroyer.” In the past century there were efforts made to show that this text prophetically applied to individuals such as Emperor Vespasian, Mohammed, and even Napoleon, and the angel was generally regarded as “satanic.” It should be noted, however, that at Revelation 20:1-3 the angel having “the key of the abyss” is shown to be God’s representative from heaven and, rather than being “satanic,” he binds and hurls Satan into the abyss. Commenting on Revelation 9:11, The Interpreter’s Bible (Vol. 12, p. 434) says: “Abaddon, however, is an angel not of Satan but of God, performing his work of destruction at God’s bidding.”
In the Hebrew scriptures, just considered, it is evident that ʼavad·dohnʹ is paralleled with “Sheol” and “death.” At Revelation 1:18 we find Christ Jesus stating: “I am living forever and ever, and I have the keys of death and of Hades.” His power with regard to the abyss is shown at Luke 8:31. That he has destroying power including the power of destruction over Satan, is evident from Hebrews 2:14, which says that Jesus partook of blood and flesh in order that “through his death he might bring to nothing the one having the means to cause death, that is, the Devil.” At Revelation 19:11-16 he is clearly represented as God’s appointed Destroyer or Executioner.—See APOLLYON.

