ARCHER
The use of the bow and arrow after the Flood enabled man to kill animals that were too fast and dangerous to be taken otherwise, for food, clothing and shelter. With the rise of Nimrod, archers likely were pressed into his service
In the twentieth century B.C.E., Abraham’s firstborn son Ishmael “became an archer” to sustain himself in the wilderness. (Gen. 21:20) Similarly, Esau, the grandson of Abraham, could handle the bow with skill. (Gen. 27:3) Monuments testify that from the earliest times Egypt’s principal offensive warriors were archers, and there are also Babylonian sculptures of archers. In the days of Joshua (Josh. 24:12) and David (1 Chron. 12:1, 2), and thereafter, archers were an important part of Israel’s army. (2 Chron. 14:8; 26:14) Archers of the Philistines, Syrians and Egyptians shot Kings Saul, Ahab and Josiah respectively.—1 Sam. 31:1-3; 1 Ki. 22:34, 35; 2 Chron. 35:20, 23.
Reliefs in Nineveh illustrate Assyrian archers in chariots carrying two bows, one long, one short. When shooting one arrow they held extras in the hand, thus increasing the rapidity of their fire. The Assyrian plan of attack seemed to be to overwhelm the enemy under a flood of arrows, and then use the sword and spear in pursuit.
The Persians have been called the most expert archers in the world. Reliefs from Persepolis and Susa show Median and Persian soldiers equipped with bows and quivers. From the age of five until twenty Persian boys were taught archery and riding; their cavalry were experts even when shooting backward. Mobility and freedom of movement of the archers was the basic plan of Persian strategy in storming the foe under a hail of arrows.
The Western empires of Greece and Rome did not esteem the bow and arrow as highly as the Eastern nations, though at times archers played a significant role in their victories. This may have been due to the Greek method of drawing the bow to the body, a less effective style, instead of drawing to the cheek or eye as did the Egyptians and Persians. Mercenary Cretans and Asiatics seemed to have supplied the skilled bowmen, while the Greeks and Romans relied on the sword and spear.
See ARMS, ARMOR.
[Picture on page 114]
Egyptian archer standing in a chariot, as depicted in painting found in tomb of Thebes

