ASHKELON
(Ashʹke·lon) [perhaps, weighing place or market].
A seaport on the Mediterranean and one of the five principal Philistine cities. (Josh. 13:3) Located about twelve miles (19 kilometers) N of Gaza, the city was situated in a naturally formed rocky amphitheater, the concave part facing toward the Mediterranean. The countryside is fertile, producing apples, figs, and the small onion known as the “scallion,” which apparently derives its name from that of the Philistine city.
Ashkelon was assigned to the tribe of Judah and was captured by them, but it apparently did not remain subject to them for long. (Judg. 1:18, 19) It was a Philistine city in the time of Samson and of Samuel. (Judg. 14:19; 1 Sam. 6:17) David mentions it in his lament over the death of Saul and Jonathan. (2 Sam. 1:20) In King Uzziah’s conquest of Philistine cities, Ashkelon is not listed as among those taken.—2 Chron. 26:6.
In the prophecy of Amos (about 803 B.C.E.) prediction was made of defeat for the ruler of Ashkelon. (Amos 1:8) Secular history shows that in the succeeding century Tiglath-pileser III of Assyria made Asqalluna (Ashkelon) a vassal city. Jeremiah (after 647 B.C.E.) uttered two prophecies involving Ashkelon. While Jeremiah 47:2-7 could have seen some fulfillment when Nebuchadnezzar sacked the city early in his reign (c. 624 B.C.E.), yet the prophecy at Jeremiah 25:17-20, 28, 29 clearly indicates a fulfillment subsequent to the fall of Jerusalem in 607 B.C.E. Zephaniah’s prophecy (written before 648 B.C.E.) also foretold a coming desolation for Ashkelon, along with other Philistine cities, after which the remnant of Judah would eventually occupy the “houses of Ashkelon.” (Zeph. 2:4-7) Finally, about 518 B.C.E., Zechariah proclaimed doom for Ashkelon in connection with the time of Tyre’s desolation (332 B.C.E.).—Zech. 9:3-5.
Ashkelon was a center of false worship of the goddess Derceto, represented as having the body of a fish. Traditionally, it was the birthplace of Herod the Great and the residence of his sister Salome. Today it is only a desolate site.

