BASIN
The Scriptures do not provide a detailed description of basins used in ancient times, though such vessels were commonly earthenware, or were made of wood or metal. Some basins served a domestic purpose, like those that were among the provisions brought to David and the people with him when they fled from Absalom. (2 Sam. 17:27-29) The Hebrew word saph is used for a basin of this kind. It is also employed for the basin into which the Israelites in Egypt put the blood of the passover victim (Ex. 12:22) and for the temple basins that Nebuchadnezzar took to Babylon. (2 Ki. 25:15; Jer. 52:19) This word may also be rendered “bowl,” and thus Jehovah is represented as saying prophetically: “Here I am making Jerusalem a bowl [saph] causing reeling to all the peoples round about.” (Zech. 12:1, 2) Among the larger basins used at meals was the banquet bowl (Heb., tsal·laʹhhath).—Prov. 26:15.
SANCTUARY USE
Basins were also used for sacred purposes in connection with Jehovah’s worship at the tabernacle and the later temples. As Jehovah instructed Moses, the tabernacle articles included a large basin that was to be filled with water. It was made of copper, rested on a copper stand, and was placed between the tent of meeting and the altar to provide the high priest and the other priests with water for washing their hands and feet either before entering the tent of meeting or before ministering at the altar. (Ex. 30:17-21; 31:9; 40:30, 31) This basin, called a laver in some translations (AS; AT; AV; RS), was made “by the use of the mirrors of the women servants who did organized service at the entrance of the tent of meeting.”—Ex. 38:8.
The thought has been advanced that the priests did not actually wash in the tabernacle basin itself, for this would have made the water unclean and defiled. So it has been suggested that the basin had taps through which streams of water would flow and that the priests washed by holding their hands and feet under the flowing water. But this is not specifically stated in the Scriptures.
According to the Masoretic text, there is no specific instruction given on the transporting of the tabernacle basin. However, the Septuagint Version (which agrees with the ancient Samaritan Pentateuch) adds to Numbers 4:14 the words: “And they will take a purple cloth and cover the basin and its stand and put it in a blue skin covering and put it upon poles.”
The Hebrew words ki·yohrʹ and ki·yorʹ, which evidently designate something round, are used for the tabernacle basin and for the ten basins Solomon had made for temple use. Things having to do with the burnt offering were rinsed in the latter.—2 Chron. 4:6, 14.
Each of the ten copper basins (lavers, AT; RS) Hiram made for temple use could hold “forty bath measures,” or about 232 gallons (U.S.A.; about 878 liters) of water. If these basins were hemispherical in shape this would mean that they had a diameter of about six feet (1.8 meters). Of course, if they bulged and tapered somewhat toward the top, the measurements would be different, and it must be observed that the Bible does not provide detailed information on their form, though it says “each basin was four cubits.” Each basin was placed on a four-wheeled carriage skillfully made with ornamental work and engravings, five being placed on the right and five on the left side of the house.—1 Ki. 7:27-39.
Another basin of great size was the large ornamented molten sea that stood upon twelve fashioned bulls and was “placed at the right side, to the east, toward the south” of the house. Stored therein was water the priests used. It was circular, ten cubits (c. 14.6 feet or 4.4 meters) from brim to brim and five cubits (c. 7.3 feet or 2.2 meters) high.—2 Chron. 4:2-6, 10.

