BRACELET
A decorative circlet worn on the wrist or upper arm, sometimes forming a complete circle, though in other instances having an opening or clasp. The term “armlet” can be applied to such a band for the upper arm, but this can also be called a bracelet. In ancient times bracelets were worn by both men and women, sometimes on just one arm, but occasionally on both. Bracelets of antiquity were made of bronze, glass, iron, silver and gold and were often highly ornamented, sometimes being studded with jewels.
Enameled bracelets of various colors were among those used in ancient Egypt. On the arms of the mummy of Egyptian pharaoh Tutankhamen there were thirteen bracelets made of gold, glass beads and semiprecious stones, eight of these ornaments being amulets. (See AMULET.) Assyrian monarchs wore armlets and bracelets, and bracelets were also common among other peoples, such as the Medes, Persians, Greeks and Romans. In Rome it was customary for women of high station to wear them for adornment and as amulets. Bracelets were sometimes given to Roman soldiers for acts of valor. The Hebrews wore bracelets and they were in general use from early times in Palestine, where archaeologists have found a number of them, made of various materials, particularly bronze.
Abraham’s servant gave Rebekah a gold nose ring and also two bracelets having a weight of ten shekels of gold. (Gen. 24:22, 30, 47) Among the items taken as war booty from the Midianites were bracelets, which were among the valuable articles the Israelites presented to God.—Num. 31:50.
Through Ezekiel, God represented himself as decking Jerusalem with bracelets and other ornaments. But since she had used such beautiful articles idolatrously and had prostituted herself, Jehovah foretold that he would punish her and would have these things taken from her.—Ezek. 16:11, 17, 38, 39.
Armlets or bracelets for the upper arm (ornaments usually decked with jewels) have been worn by monarchs as one of their insignia of regal authority or sovereign power. The bracelet King Saul of Israel wore upon his arm may have had such significance.—2 Sam. 1:10; see ORNAMENTS.
[Picture on page 256]
Bracelets found in Israelite tombs

