CAESAR
(Caeʹsar).
A Roman family name that became a title. In 46 B.C.E., Gaius Julius Caesar became dictator of Rome, though not quelling all opposition till 44 B.C.E. Caesar was the name of his family (Gaius being his personal name and Julius that of his clan or house). The family name passed to his adopted son and ultimate successor Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus (Octavian). Octavian established his rulership over the realm in 31 B.C.E. and in 27 B.C.E. was accorded the title of Augustus by the Roman Senate, becoming known as Caesar Augustus.—Luke 2:1-7.
Thereafter, the next four Roman emperors (Tiberius, Gaius [Caligula], Claudius, and Nero) laid claim to the name either on the basis of actual relationship or of adoption. The family name thus became so closely associated with the position of Sovereign ruler that, even after the end of the Caesarean dynasty, the name was retained as a regal title equivalent to that of Emperor, producing the later forms Kaiser (German) and Czar (Russian).
The Caesars ruling during the period covered by the Christian Greek Scriptures, along with their reigns and the major events of the Bible taking place during these, are listed on the accompanying chart. Of these, only three are mentioned by name in the Bible itself: Augustus, Tiberius and Claudius. For fuller discussion, see articles under their names.
GOD AND CAESAR
Jesus’ only recorded reference to Caesar is when laying down the principle: “Pay back, therefore, Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to God.” (Matt. 22:17-21; Mark 12:14-17; Luke 20:22-25) The question evoking this statement was with regard to the payment of “head tax” by Jews to the Roman state. It therefore dealt with an established law or regular practice and hence neither the question nor the answer was evidently intended to be restricted to Tiberius, then ruling. (Compare Matthew 17:25.) “Caesar” meant or symbolized the civil authority, the state, represented by its duly appointed representatives, called the “superior authorities” by Paul and expressed by Peter as “the king” and his “governors.”—Rom. 13:1-7; Titus 3:1; 1 Pet. 2:13-17; see SUPERIOR AUTHORITIES.
Caesar’s “things” were therefore the payment due for services rendered by the secular government and for which services the government levied taxes or tribute. Despite its imperialistic nature, the Roman state provided numerous services for its subject peoples, including the construction of highways, and a form of mail service, as well as the maintenance of civil order and protection from criminal elements. The people paid for these services by taxes. This is underscored by Jesus’ reference to Caesar’s coin, called the “head tax coin.”—Matt. 22:19.
That “Caesar’s” authority to exact payment even from Christians could not be allowed to infringe upon the Christian’s service to God was shown by Jesus’ statement that ‘God’s things should be paid back to God.’ (Matt. 22:21) Jesus’ apostles showed that they understood that their duty toward human authorities was limited (relative) and not absolute, for when later brought before the Jewish high court they firmly declared: “We must obey God as ruler rather than men,” that is, when human laws or requirements clashed with those of God.—Acts 5:29.
JESUS’ TRIAL
When Jesus was brought to trial before the Roman governor Pontius Pilate, he was charged by the religious leaders with grave offenses: “subverting [the Jewish] nation and forbidding the paying of taxes to Caesar and saying he himself is Christ a king.” (Luke 23:1, 2) This three-pronged charge actually meant they were accusing Jesus of high treason or, as the Romans expressed it, crimen laesae majestatis (today called “lese majesty”). Pilate recognized this when later saying, “You brought this man to me as one inciting the people to revolt.” (Luke 23:13, 14) In 48 B.C.E., the statute called Lex Julia Majestatis had made it an offense to engage in any activity against the sovereign power or the Commonwealth of Rome. This law was given broad application so that, by Jesus’ time, virtually any insult to Caesar or any activity giving an outward appearance of sedition could be the basis for the charge of treason. Tiberius, the Caesar then reigning, was particularly sensitive to criticism or opposition, and his rule was noted for the encouragement of “informers” who would bring accusations against supposed traitors.
Throughout the Roman Empire no king could rule without Caesar’s consent and appointment. Thus, Pilate, in questioning Jesus, apparently concentrated his interrogation on the issue of Jesus’ kingship. (Matt. 27:11; Mark 15:2; Luke 23:3; John 18:33-37) Pilate endeavored to free Jesus as guiltless but the Jewish leaders cried out: “If you release this man, you are not a friend of Caesar. Every man making himself a king speaks against Caesar.” (John 19:12) The term “friend of Caesar” was a title of honor often bestowed on provincial governors; but the Jewish leaders here evidently used it in a general way, implying that Pilate was laying himself open to the charge of condoning high treason. Fear of a jealous emperor was a factor influencing Pilate in pronouncing the death sentence on an innocent man. Meanwhile the priests loudly proclaimed their loyalty to the imperial throne, saying, “We have no king but Caesar,” thereby rejecting any theocratic rule. (John 19:13-16; compare Isaiah 9:6, 7; 33:22.) They objected in vain to the title of “King of the Jews” that Pilate had placed on Jesus’ stake. (John 19:19-22) The Romans customarily posted a sign identifying the crime for which a criminal was condemned.
PAUL’S APPEAL AND IMPRISONMENT
When the Jewish religious leaders of Thessalonica formed a mob to try to stop the preaching of Paul and Silas, they also trumped up a similar charge of treason against the imperial throne. (Acts 17:1-9) By now Claudius (41-54 C.E.) was ruling as Caesar, having succeeded Caligula (Gaius), Tiberius’ successor, in 41 C.E.—Acts 11:28.
The remainder of the Biblical references to Caesar apply to Nero, who ruled from 54 to 68 C.E. He was the fifth and last emperor who could lay claim to blood descent in the Caesar family. Through the maneuvering of his mother, Agrippina, Nero was adopted by Emperor Claudius in 50 C.E. Claudius is believed to have been poisoned in 54 C.E., and Nero, in his seventeenth year, took the throne, even over Claudius’ own son, Britannicus. Britannicus was murdered the following year. For five years Nero submitted to guidance by Seneca the philosopher, Burrus, the head of the Praetorian Guard, and Agrippina, his ambitious mother. Then his passionate and savage disposition broke loose; he had his mother murdered and thereafter devoted himself to an egotistical career in the arts and to debauchery. Due to his fear of plots against him, a series of murders and executions were carried out at his order. Condemned by the Senate in a period of revolt, Nero committed suicide in 68 C.E., at about the age of 31.
It was to Nero that Paul referred when on trial in Caesarea before Festus, evidently about 58 C.E. Paul denied any guilt due to acts against Caesar and refused to submit to a trial in Jerusalem, saying: “I am standing before the judgment seat of Caesar, where I ought to be judged. . . . I appeal to Caesar!” (Acts 25:1, 6-11) Paul was here exercising his rights as a Roman citizen. Such appeal to Caesar could be made not only after the pronouncement of judgment but at any earlier point in the trial. Since Festus gave evidence of not wanting to decide the matter himself, and since a trial in Jerusalem held virtually no hope of justice, Paul made this formal petition to be judged by the highest court of the empire. It appears that in some cases the appeal could be denied, as, for example, in the case of a thief, pirate or seditionist caught in the act. Likely for this reason Festus conferred first with “the assembly of counselors” before admitting the appeal. The subsequent hearing before visiting King Agrippa was in order that Festus might have clearer information to submit in transmitting Paul’s case to “the August One,” Nero. (Acts 25:12-27; 26:32; 28:19) Paul’s appeal served a further purpose, that of taking him to Rome, fulfilling an intention expressed earlier. (Acts 19:21; Rom. 15:22-28) Jesus’ prophetic promise and the angelic message later received both show divine direction in the matter.—Acts 23:11; 27:23, 24.
It was apparently during Paul’s first imprisonment in Rome or about 60-61 C.E. that he wrote his letter to the Philippians. At the letter’s close, Paul includes the greetings of the brothers in Rome and “especially those of the household of Caesar.” (Phil. 4:21, 22) The term “household of Caesar” does not necessarily refer to the immediate family of Nero, then reigning, but may apply to those in government service, Caesar’s slaves and minor officials. Whether these Christians from Caesar’s household were products of Paul’s preaching is not stated. If his prison quarters were at all connected with the Praetorian Guard (Phil. 1:13), this would place him, and the preaching he there did, in the proximity of Nero’s palace, hence near many of the “household of Caesar.” (Acts 28:16, 30, 31) Whatever the manner of his meeting these Christians of Caesar’s household, they apparently had special interest in the brothers of Philippi. Since Philippi was a Roman colony with many retired soldiers and government servants, it may be that a number of the Christians there were related to or were friends of those on whose behalf Paul conveyed greetings.
A great fire ravaged Rome in 64 C.E., destroying about a fourth of the city. The rumor circulated that Nero was responsible and, according to Roman historian Tacitus, Nero tried to protect himself by placing the blame on “a class hated for their abominations, called Christians by the populace.” (Tacitus’ Annals XV, 44) Mass arrests followed and Christians, or suspected Christians, were put to death in large numbers, among other tortures some being burned alive in public. This appears to have marked the start of a great wave of persecution, not from religious opposers, but from political sources bent on exterminating the Christian congregation. Likely Paul, who evidently was freed after two years’ imprisonment in Rome (c. 59-61 C.E.), now experienced his second imprisonment (c. 64 or 65 C.E.). It is generally held that he thereafter was put to death at Nero’s order.—Compare 2 Timothy 1:16, 17; 4:6-8.
The Jewish revolt began in 66 C.E., two years before Nero’s death, but was not suppressed until 70 C.E. in the reign of Vespasian (69-79 C.E.). The apostle John is thought to have been exiled to the island of Patmos during the rule of Domitian (81-96 C.E.), a harsh opponent of Christianity.—Rev. 1:9.
[Chart on page 272]
NAME       YEARS OF RULE      MAJOR BIBLICAL EVENTS DURING REIGN
Augustus   31 B.C.E.-14 C.E.  Birth of John (the Baptist); decree (Octavian)                    of registration, and birth of                              Jesus at Bethlehem (Luke 2:1);                              death of Herod the Great.
Tiberius   14 C.E.-37 C.E.    Ministries of both John and Jesus                              (Luke 3:1); also their deaths.                              Pentecost of 33 C.E. and initial                              activity of newly established                              Christian congregation. Probably                              the conversion of Saul (Paul)
Gaius      37 C.E.-41 C.E.(Caligula)
Claudius   41 C.E.-54 C.E.    Paul’s first two missionary tours                              and part of third. A major                              famine; Jews banished from Rome                              (Acts 11:28; 18:2)
Nero       54 C.E.-68 C.E.    Paul’s first trial in Rome. Start                              of strong official persecution                              against Christians following the                              great fire in Rome; likely also                              Paul’s second trial and execution.                              Beginning of Jewish revolt                              (66 C.E.) (Acts 25:21; 26:32)
Galba      68 C.E.-69 C.E.
Otho       69 C.E.
Vitellius  69 C.E.
Vespasian  69 C.E.-79 C.E.    Destruction of Jerusalem (70 C.E.)
Titus      79 C.E.-81 C.E.
Domitian   81 C.E.-96 C.E.    Exile of apostle John to Patmos                              (Rev 1:9)
Nerva      96 C.E.-98 C.E.
Trajan     98 C.E.-117 C.E.   Bible canon likely completed                              during first year of his reign

