CHIEFTAIN
[Heb., na·siʼʹ].
A man in a ruling position, such as the hereditary head of a tribe or a paternal house. The Hebrew word is variously translated in Bible versions as “prince,” “leader,” “ruler,” “chieftain.” The heads of the twelve paternal houses or tribes of Israel were termed “chieftains.” (Num. 1:16; Josh. 22:14) The term is also applied to the heads of the twelve clans springing from Ishmael. (Gen. 17:20; 25:16) The title was used regarding Kings Solomon and Zedekiah as rulers. (1 Ki. 11:34; Ezek. 21:25) The high standing that Abraham the family head had with God is indicated in his being called a “chieftain of God,” by the Hittites.—Gen. 23:6.
In the days of Moses, the chieftains acted as representatives of the people before Moses, the priests and Jehovah, taking a lead in worship. Moses selected a chieftain from each of the tribes (except the tribe of Levi) to spy out the Promised Land. The bad report of the ten unfaithful spies had a great influence upon the people. (Num. 13:2-16, 25-33) Two hundred and fifty chieftains of the sons of Israel were in the rebellion led by Korah to take over the priesthood from Aaron’s house. (Num. 16:2, 10, 17, 35) The chieftains had a share in making a covenant for Israel with the Gibeonites. (Josh. 9:15, 18) After Joshua had led Israel into Canaan, and had defeated the nations there, the chieftains played a prominent role in dividing up the land. (Num. 34:18; Josh. 14:1) Eleazar, the son of Aaron, was appointed as chieftain over the heads of the paternal houses of the tribe of Levi, making him a “chieftain of the chieftains.” (Num. 3:32) King Solomon called all the chieftains of the tribes together to Jerusalem at the time that he had the ark of the covenant brought into the newly built temple. (1 Ki. 8:1) Ezekiel speaks prophetically of a chieftain, at Ezekiel, chapter 46.
The people were to give a chieftain proper respect, never subjecting him to verbal abuse. (Ex. 22:28) When the apostle Paul was on trial before the Sanhedrin the high priest Ananias ordered those standing by Paul to strike him on the mouth. Then Paul said to him: “God is going to strike you, you whitewashed wall,” not knowing that it was the high priest to whom he was speaking. When this was called to his attention, he said: “Brothers, I did not know he was high priest. For it is written, ‘You must not speak injuriously of a ruler of your people.”’—Acts 23:1-5.
Although chieftains were to be respected, they were not above obedience to the law of God. When they sinned against the Law, they were required to meet its regulations regarding such sins. Because of their responsible position and the effect their conduct would have on others due to their example and influence, a distinction was made in the individual sin offerings made by them for unintentionally violating a command of God. The high priest was required to offer a young bull, a chieftain was to offer a male goat, and anyone of the rest of the people, either a female goat or a female lamb.—Lev. 4:3, 22, 23, 27, 28, 32; see LEADER, NOBLE, PRINCE.

