COMMUNICATION
Information and ideas were transmitted from person to person in a variety of ways in Bible lands of antiquity. To a great extent, ordinary local and foreign news was communicated by word of mouth. (2 Sam. 3:17, 19; Job 37:20) Travelers, who often journeyed with caravans, related news from distant places when they stopped for food, water and other provisions at cities or points along the caravan routes. In its unique position with relation to Asia, Africa and Europe, the land of Palestine was traversed by caravans traveling to and from distant points. So its residents could readily acquire information regarding significant events in foreign lands. News, both national and foreign, could often be obtained in the city marketplace.—See MARKET PLACE.
Short-range communication was sometimes achieved through the use of audible or visual signals or by word of mouth. (Josh. 8:18, 19; 1 Sam. 20:20-22, 35-39) After Israel departed from Egypt, Moses was instructed to make two silver trumpets for communication purposes. Blasts on these trumpets by the Aaronic priests signaled such things as the convening of the assembly, or the gathering of chieftains, the orderly breaking up of camp and a call for war against an enemy. (Num. 10:1-10) The blowing of a horn by Gideon served as a signal to his men to begin the victorious battle against Midian.—Judg. 7:18-22; see HORN; TRUMPET.
Oral or written messages sent out by officials would frequently be carried by runners. (2 Sam. 18:19-32) Runners carrying letters from King Hezekiah went throughout Israel and Judah summoning the people to Jerusalem for a Passover celebration. (2 Chron. 30:6-12) Couriers in the service of Persian King Ahasuerus rode speedy post horses and in that way circulated the royal counterdecree that foiled Haman’s scheme to annihilate the Jews in the Persian Empire. (Esther 8:10-17) Written letters and documents were used by most governments of antiquity for effective administration. Depending upon time and place, these were usually written on such materials as clay tablets, papyrus and animal skins. Archaeologists have found many ancient governmental communications or business documents. Royal decrees were proclaimed by heralds. (Dan. 3:4-6) Of course, messengers were also used by persons other than rulers.—See COURIER; HERALD; MESSENGER.
Communication within a country or over some greater distance came to depend greatly on roads or highways. There were good roads in early Israel and Judah and they were kept in serviceable condition. Later, the Romans constructed fine roads leading from Rome to all parts of the Empire, these facilitating official communication and the movement of troops. When Jesus Christ was on earth, people traveled over such roads in great numbers. Christians, especially Paul and his fellow missionaries, enjoyed their use when journeying to Asia Minor and Europe to establish and revisit Christian congregations.
Official communications, along with general news, were also carried by ships that sailed the Mediterranean Sea, putting in at various ports. The Roman government used ships on some occasions (usually in summer) to carry official messages, but it seems that the bulk of such communication was transmitted on the overland routes. These were more dependable.
An official postal service was developed by the Romans, but it was used only for governmental communications. The people in general had to depend upon acquaintances to deliver their letters. When the circumcision issue was resolved by the governing body in Jerusalem and a letter was sent out as a means of communication, it was delivered in a direct personal way. (Acts 15:22-31) That was also the case with such inspired letters as the one Paul sent to Christians in Colossae, it being carried by Tychicus and Onesimus.—Col. 4:7-9; see LETTERS.
Jehovah is a communicative God and has recognized the need for his people to have written communication. He himself was responsible for the composition of the Ten Commandments on stone tablets. (Ex. 31:18) By means of divine inspiration a number of faithful Hebrew men (commencing with Moses in 1513 B.C.E.) were moved to write down Jehovah’s communications. Of course, included in the resulting Holy Scriptures are the various inspired letters that supplemented oral communications provided to help establish proper Christian views as to doctrine and deportment.

