CYPRUS
(Cyʹprus) [Gr., Kyʹpros].
An island in the NE corner of the Mediterranean Sea, situated about forty-five miles (72.4 kilometers) from the coast of Cilicia in Asia Minor and about half again that far from the Syrian coast. Cyprus is the third largest island of the Mediterranean, coming after Sicily and Sardinia. The main body of Cyprus is about one hundred miles (c. 161 kilometers) long, but a narrow arm of land extends out at the NE corner for another forty-five miles (72.4 kilometers) or so. The island is sixty miles (96.5 kilometers) across at its broadest point. The NW section is mountainous, with one peak (Mount Troodos or Olympus) rising to 6,403 feet (c. 1,952 meters). Another mountain range runs along the northern coast, and between these two ranges lies the central plain. Winter caps the mountain peaks with snow, while summer brings hot, dry weather to the plains. From ancient times the island was famous for its rich copper resources, and the name of the island became synonymous with this metal. (The English word “copper” is derived from the Greek Kyʹpros.)
Historical evidence points principally to Cyprus as the “Kittim” of the Hebrew Scriptures. (Isa. 23:1, 12; Dan. 11:30) The island was renowned not only for its copper but also for its fine timber, particularly cypress wood, such as was exported to Tyre on the Phoenician coast for use in shipbuilding.—Ezek. 27:2, 6.
Because of its associations with the Biblical Kittim, it is to be expected that the original population of Cyprus would show some connection with Greece. (See Genesis 10:4; Javan is the progenitor of the Ionians or early Greeks.) And, as is shown in the article on KITTIM, this connection did exist. Little is known of the original language of the native inhabitants of Cyprus; although ancient tablets have been found there, believed to date from the middle of the second millennium B.C.E. onward, they are as yet undeciphered and the language on them remains unknown. In later times the script was apparently adapted for use in writing Greek. Archaeological discoveries demonstrate continued strong Greek influence, particularly Mycenaean, in Cyprus, either through trade or by colonization.
HISTORY
Thutmose III of Egypt claimed conquest of Cyprus, perhaps the first reference to the island in secular history. Centuries later, during the early part of the first millennium B.C.E., the Phoenicians appear to have settled colonies there, though the population continued to show a major affinity with Greece. Assyrian Emperors Sargon II, Sennacherib and Esar-haddon (contemporaries of Kings Hezekiah and Manasseh) all boast of their domination of the island. Following the collapse of the Assyrian Empire, Egypt reasserted its control. When Cyrus the Great advanced against the Babylonian Empire, Cyprus is reported to have lent support, thereby gaining the privilege of having its own kings during Persian rule. Such Cypriot assistance in the conquest of the Assyro-Babylonian region might have some connection with the prophecy at Numbers 24:24. (See, however, the article on KITTIM for another possible explanation.) Cyprus was included in a Persian satrapy, along with Syria and Phoenicia, and is listed as supplying one hundred and fifty manned ships to the Persian imperial navy during the reign of Xerxes.
The kings of the city-states of Cyprus came under Greek rule following Alexander the Great’s victory at the Battle of Issus in 333 B.C.E. After Alexander’s death, the Ptolemaic dynasty of Egypt took control and Cyprus remained within the Egyptian realm until 58 B.C.E., when it was annexed by Rome. Though not specifically listed, it is likely that Jews from Cyprus were present in Jerusalem at the feast of Pentecost in 33 C.E. The Levite Joseph, better known as Barnabas, was born in Cyprus.—Acts 4:36.
CHRISTIANITY
The persecution of Christians that followed the martyrdom of Stephen and their subsequent dispersion resulted in some disciples going to Cyprus, where they witnessed to the resident Jews. Certain Cypriot Christians went to the city of Antioch opposite Cyprus on the Syrian coast, and preached with much success among people who, like themselves, were Greek-speaking. (Acts 11:19, 20) When Paul and Barnabas, accompanied by John Mark, were sent out from Antioch on their first missionary tour (47-48 C.E.), their initial territory was in Barnabas’ home island, Cyprus. Arriving at the important commercial city of Salamis, on the E coast of Cyprus, they found more than one synagogue, indicating a Jewish population of some size. After publishing God’s Word here they traveled across the entire island to Paphos on the W coast, then the Roman provincial capital. Here the encounter with the interested proconsul, Sergius Paulus, and the opposing sorcerer, Elymas (Bar-Jesus), took place.—Acts 13:1–12.
Historian Luke’s reference to Sergius Paulus as a proconsul has been shown to be accurate. Cyprus had been transferred to the Roman Senate in 22 B.C.E. and hence the appointed governor of the island thereafter bore, not the title of legate, but that of proconsul, a deputy governor acting as the Senate’s representative. Archaeological evidence for Sergius Paulus’ proconsulship is presented in the article under his name, which see.
From the port of Paphos, Paul and his companions sailed to Pamphylia on the Asia Minor coast. (Acts 13:13) About two years later Barnabas returned to his homeland with John Mark to do further discipling work, while Paul set out on his second missionary journey through Asia Minor (c. 49 C.E.). (Acts 15:36-41) At the close of Paul’s third tour (c. 56 C.E.), when sailing from Patara on the SW coast of Asia Minor en route to Phoenicia, the apostle passed within sight of Cyprus but “left it behind on the left side,” evidently passing the SW end of the island as the ship headed for Tyre. (Acts 21:1-3) Not long thereafter, on arriving in Jerusalem, Paul was entertained at the home of Mnason, who, like Barnabas, was a native of Cyprus. (Acts 21:15, 16) On Paul’s voyage to Rome his ship sailed “under the shelter of Cyprus, because the winds were contrary.” Since the prevailing winds at that time of year are from the W and NW, this would work against crossing the open sea and evidently caused the ship to sail around the E end of Cyprus and then along the coast of Asia Minor, where land breezes would help it along on its westward course.—Acts 27:4, 5, 9, 12.
[Map on page 407]
CILICIA
SYRIA
Antioch
CYPRUS
Salamis
Paphos
GREAT SEA

