DEBIR
(Deʹbir) [innermost room or inner sanctuary].
1. The king of Eglon, one of four petty kingdoms allied with the king of Jerusalem to attack the city of Gibeon for making peace with Joshua. (Josh. 10:1-5) Gibeon’s surrender to Joshua caused fear since it likely weakened any united front against Israel (Josh. 9:1, 2), and at the same time apparently gave Joshua greater mobility between northern and southern Palestine, allowing for conquest of the land section by section. Gibeon’s siege brought Joshua’s army to its rescue and, aided by miracles, Joshua routed the Canaanite military, forcing Debir and the other kings to take refuge in a cave. Here they were trapped until later executed.—Josh. 10:6-27.
2. A royal Canaanite city (Josh. 10:38, 39), also known as Kiriath-sepher and Kiriath-sannah. (Josh. 15:15, 49; Judg. 1:11) It was in the inheritance of Judah but became a Levitical city of the Kohathites.—Josh. 21:9, 15; 1 Chron. 6:54, 58.
There are apparently two accounts of Israel’s first conquest of Debir as part of Joshua’s military operations. The first account simply states the annihilating of Debir’s population. (Josh. 10:38, 39) The second, Joshua 11:21-23, is likely a recapitulation of the same conquest (since verse 18 refers to the ‘many days when Joshua waged war with all these kings’), while supplying the additional information that Joshua “cut off the Anakim . . . from Debir” and other cities. This supplementary material may have been added to show that even the tall Anakim, who had stricken such fear in the hearts of Israel’s spies more than forty years earlier (Num. 13:28, 31-33; Deut. 9:2), had not proved invulnerable.
Nevertheless, it appears that the Anakim reestablished themselves in the city of Debir, perhaps coming in from the Philistine coast (Josh. 11:22) while Israel was temporarily at its Gilgal camp or while warring in the N. (Josh. 10:43–11:15) Though Joshua’s initial campaigns had served to subdue the unified resistance of enemy forces in the land of Canaan, rapidly demolishing all major strongholds, apparently this type of warfare did not allow for the establishing of garrisons to hold the sites of all the destroyed cities. So, a second conquest or “mopping up” operation was effected at Debir by Othniel, who, because of distinguishing himself in the city’s conquest, was given Achsah, the daughter of veteran warrior Caleb, as a wife.—Josh. 15:13-19; Judg. 1:11-15.
It cannot be ascertained precisely when in Israel’s history this second conquest occurred. The book of Judges opens with the phrase “after the death of Joshua” and the account of Caleb’s taking Debir follows thereafter (1:11-15). This, according to some, would make Judah’s conquest of Debir subsequent to Joshua’s death and would mean that the similar account found at Joshua 15:13-19 was a later addition to the book bearing Joshua’s name. However, others view Judges 1:1 as only a formal introduction to connect it with the book of Joshua, arguing that Caleb would hardly wait for years until Joshua died before driving the Anakim from his promised possession. Hence, they consider the Judges account to be a restatement of that in Joshua.
LOCATION OF DEBIR
Though various suggestions have been put forth by Biblical scholars as to the exact geographical location of Debir in the mountainous region of Judah, most authorities accept it to be Tell Beit Mirsim, somewhat less than thirteen miles (20.9 kilometers) W-SW of Hebron. Some archaeologists claim to see among the ten partially excavated strata at this site signs of a flourishing Canaanite culture, which was so thoroughly burned at the assumed period of the Israelite invasion as to leave layers of ashes three feet (.9 meter) deep in places. This pre-Israelite city of about seven and a half acres (three hectares) is said to have had a population of between 2,000 and 3,000 persons, who enjoyed such advances as a drainage system and various forms of developed native art.
Some scholars, understanding the “Upper Gulloth and Lower Gulloth” of Joshua 15:19 and Judges 1:15 to mean the “upper springs and the lower springs” (as in many translations), believe these springs to have been in the vicinity of Debir, and on this basis object to Debir’s identification with Tell Beit Mirsim, since this site lacks such springs. Those favoring the identification with Tell Beit Mirsim suggest that ancient wells or “underground basins” discovered a mile (1.6 kilometers) below and two miles (3.2 kilometers) above the site might satisfy the requirements of such association. The Biblical record itself does not specifically locate Upper and Lower Gulloth in relation to Debir.
SIGNIFICANCE OF NAME
The Biblical name “Debir” may indicate the strong religious nature of the city, as the Hebrew word from which the name is drawn is translated “innermost room” (NW) or “inner sanctuary” (RS) (as when later referring to the Most Holy in Solomon’s temple) (1 Ki. 6:5), and its ancient name, Kiriath-sepher (Josh. 15:15; Judg. 1:11), may mean “scribe town.” This has led some to conjecture that Debir was the center of Canaanite religious and legal learning and a place where public registers were kept. Harmonizing with this view is the fact that the Septuagint translators rendered both Kiriath-sepher and the other ancient name of Debir, Kiriath-sannah (Josh. 15:49), to mean “the city of letters.” If this latter name, Kiriath-sannah, is a Phoenician equivalent to the Arabic sunna, meaning “precept,” it would correspond well with the above meaning of Kiriath-sepher, although other scholars consider Kiriath-sannah to mean “city of palms [that is, palm trees]” or to be a scribal error for Kiriath-sepher. While the archaeological finds at Canaanite Tell Beit Mirsim sketch out the picture of a somewhat advanced materialistic culture, there are, by contrast, indications of a depraved character in morals and religion.
OTHER CONQUESTS AND RUIN
There are evidences that this site again suffered at least partial ruin about the time King Sennacherib invaded Judah from the SW, during the reign of King Hezekiah. (2 Ki. 18:13, 14; 19:8) Finally, when Nebuchadnezzar ravaged Judah in 607 B.C.E. (Jer. 25:8-11), Tell Beit Mirsim was so totally destroyed that the site was never reoccupied.
3. A site “at the low plain of Achor” appearing in Judah’s boundary list. (Josh. 15:7) Though its exact location is not now known, some geographers believe the name has survived in Thogheret ed-Debr, the “pass of Debir,” SW of Jericho.
4. A location on the boundary of Gad in Gilead. (Josh. 13:26) This Debir is usually associated with Lo-debar, where the home of Machir (who hosted Mephibosheth and, later, David) was located. (2 Sam. 9:4-6; 17:27-29) Some tentatively identify Debir in Gad with Umm ed-Debar, ten miles (16.1 kilometers) S of the Sea of Galilee.—See LO-DEBAR.

