ELATH
(Elʹlath), Eloth (Eʹloth [plural]) [perhaps, grove of lofty trees].
A site first mentioned in Moses’ recapitulation of the Israelites’ forty-year trek through the wilderness. (Deut. 2:8) Elath is mentioned along with Ezion-geber and lay on “the shore of the Red Sea in the land of Edom.” (1 Ki. 9:26) This points to a location on the NE arm or branch of the Red Sea known as the Gulf of Aqabah. Modern geographers basically agree with Jerome, of the fourth and fifth centuries C.E., who identified Elath with the city then known as Aila, associated with the Nabataeans. This would place Elath at or near the present-day Arabic city of Aqabah situated at the NE corner of the gulf (the modern Jewish city called Elath being at the NW corner).
The head of the Gulf of Aqabah is less than four miles (6.4 kilometers) wide, with high barren mountains rising sharply on either side. Luxuriant palm groves in the area of the suggested site of Elath, commented on by Strabo near the start of the Common Era, are associated by some with the “lofty trees” suggested by the name. Others would link the name with that of the Edomite sheik Elah. (Gen. 36:41) At any rate, Elath was part of the Edomite domain when the Israelites passed through the region on their way to Canaan. Seals bearing the Edomite name of “Qos ‘anal, servant of the king,” dated by archaeologists as from the seventh century B.C.E. have been found in the Elath area.
Evidently as a result of David’s conquest of Edom, Elath and neighboring Ezion-geber came under Judean control (2 Sam. 8:13, 14), and are mentioned in connection with Solomon’s shipbuilding activities. (1 Ki. 9:26; 2 Chron. 8:17) The feet that Ezion-geber is referred to as “by Eloth” may indicate that Elath (Eloth) was the more prominent of the two sites, at least at that time.
Control of Elath evidently reverted back to Edom during the reign of Jehoram of Judah. (2 Ki. 8:20-22) In the following century the city was restored to Judah and rebuilt by King Uzziah (Azariah). (2 Ki. 14:21, 22; 2 Chron. 26:1, 2) Then, during the rule of Ahaz (761-745 B.C.E.), it was wrested from Judah by the Syrians and was reoccupied by the Edomites, thereafter never returning to the Judeans. (2 Ki. 16:6) The Masoretic text here reads “Syrians” or “Arameans” (from the Hebrew ʼaroh·mimʹ) instead of “Edomites” (ʼadhoh·mimʹ). Most current authorities, however, accept the latter reading, in the margin, believing that a scribal error confused the Hebrew letter daʹleth (ד) with the similar-shaped letter rehsh (ר).
Essentially an oasis, Elath was a stopping point on the caravan route leading from south Arabia to Egypt, Canaan or Damascus. Along with Ezion-geber, it was also located at the gateway for the “ships of Tarshish” that plied the waters to and from Arabia, East Africa and possibly India. (1 Ki. 10:22; 9:26, 27) Aramaic writings, such as wine receipts from the period of the Persian Empire, have been found in the area, also remnants of high-quality pottery of Grecian style, perhaps intended for transshipment to Arabia.
Some scholars suggest that El-paran mentioned at Genesis 14:6 is another name for Elath. This view is based primarily on the somewhat similar meaning of the names, El-paran meaning “big tree of Paran.” The Scriptural indications as to El-paran’s location are not sufficient, however, to make a conclusive identification.

