ELIHU
(E·liʹhu) [God is he].
1. “The son of Barachel the Buzite of the family of Ram.” As a descendant of Buz, Elihu was evidently a distant relative of Abraham. (Job 32:1, 2, 6; Gen. 22:20, 21) Likely Elihu listened carefully to the entire debate between Job and his three would-be comforters. But, out of due respect for their age, he remained silent until all had finished speaking. Though modern critics have labeled Elihu as loquacious, saying that his speeches were long-winded, the statements of Elihu were not those of an impertinent young man. He fully appreciated that wisdom was not the exclusive possession of those advanced in years, but that God’s spirit made one truly wise. Elihu, therefore, leaned heavily on God’s spirit and was thus able to discern correctly that Job had failed to appreciate that the vindication of Jehovah God is far more important than the vindication of any man, and that Job’s three friends had actually pronounced God wicked.—Job 32:2-9, 18.
Elihu was impartial, not bestowing a flattering title on anyone. He recognized that he, like Job, was made of clay, and that the Almighty was his Creator. Elihu had no intention of terrifying Job but spoke to him as a true friend, addressing Job by name, something that was not done by Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar.—Job 32:21, 22; 33:6.
In every respect Elihu exalted the position of the true God: The Almighty is just, rewarding the individual according to his conduct. He judges without partiality and is fully aware of the course taken by men. God hears the outcry of the afflicted. He is a Teacher who makes men wiser than the lower animal creation. Only untruth does God not hear, and so Elihu encouraged Job to wait for Him. Furthermore, Elihu assured Job that God was with him and that He would not preserve the wicked alive, but that those serving Him “will finish their days in what is good.” (Job 36:11) Job was then admonished to magnify the activity of God, the great Provider, who gives food in abundance. Elihu called Job’s attention to the great things done by God and His control of natural forces, encouraging Job to show himself “attentive to the wonderful works of God.” (37:14) Elihu concluded on a lofty plane, saying concerning the Almighty: “He is exalted in power, and justice and abundance of righteousness he will not belittle. Therefore let men fear him.”—37:23, 24; chaps. 34-37.
Only by God’s spirit was it possible for Elihu to evaluate matters correctly and to speak the words having a fulfillment upon Job when he was restored: “Let him off from going down into the pit! I have found a ransom! Let his flesh become fresher than in youth; let him return to the days of his youthful vigor.”—Job 33:24, 25.
2. An ancestor of the prophet Samuel; the son of Tohu. (1 Sam. 1:1) Elihu is evidently also called Eliab and Eliel.—1 Chron. 6:27, 34.
3. Thought to be King David’s oldest brother who became the prince of the tribe of Judah. He is otherwise called Eliab.—1 Chron. 27:18, 22; compare 1 Samuel 16:6; see ELIAB No. 4.
4. One of the seven heads of the thousands that belonged to Manasseh and who deserted to David at Ziklag.—1 Chron. 12:20.
5. A Korahite of the family of Obed-edom who was a gatekeeper at the house of God, appointed during David’s reign.—1 Chron. 26:1, 4, 7, 8.

