FRANKINCENSE
[Heb., levoh·nahʹ; levo·nahʹ; Gr. liʹba·nos].
This is a product of incense trees of the genus Boswellia, which are related to the turpentine or terebinth tree and also to trees producing balsam and myrrh. The trees are large, the leaves glossy with serrated edges, the flowers white or green tipped with rose, star-shaped. They are native to India, Arabia, parts of Africa and the East Indies. The Song of Solomon mentions “the hill of frankincense,” apparently in a figurative way, but may indicate the cultivation of incense trees in Solomon’s royal parks.—Song of Sol. 4:6, 12-16; Eccl. 2:5.
Frankincense was a principal item carried by the caravans of Oriental traders who traveled the spice routes out of S Arabia up to Gaza near the Mediterranean and to Damascus. Scriptural references indicated it was imported in this way into Palestine from Sheba.—Isa. 60:6; Jer. 6:20.
Frankincense is obtained by making successive incisions in the bark or by peeling off the bark at intervals, causing a white juice (after several incisions it is spotted with yellow or red) to flow and form into tears of about one inch (2.5 centimeters) in length. When gathered, the frankincense consists of a fragrant gum resin in small chunks or beads, having a bitter taste and producing an aromatic odor when burned.—Song of Sol. 3:6.
Aside from the references in The Song of Solomon, frankincense is regularly mentioned in the Hebrew Scriptures in connection with worship. (Compare 2 Corinthians 2:14-16.) It was an ingredient of the holy incense used at the sanctuary (Ex. 30:34-38), was used on grain offerings (Lev. 2:1, 2, 15, 16; 6:15; Jer. 17:26; 41:4, 5), and on each row of the showbread of the sanctuary (Lev. 24:7). But it was not to be included on sin offerings (Lev. 5:11) or on the “grain offering of jealousy.” (Num. 5:15) This was doubtless because the latter offerings had to do with sin or error, and were not offered up as a sacrifice of praise or thanksgiving to Jehovah.
Frankincense is mentioned as being stored in the rebuilt temple buildings, following the return from Babylonian exile. (1 Chron. 9:29; Neh. 13:5, 9) The Oriental astrologers who visited the child Jesus brought frankincense with them (Matt. 2:11), and it is mentioned as one of the items of commerce sold to Babylon the Great before her destruction. (Rev. 18:8-13) The Greek term for the heavenly incense vessel, at Revelation 8:3, 5, is li·ba·no·tosʹ and is derived from the Hebrew word for “frankincense.”
The prophet Isaiah records Jehovah’s displeasure and disapproval of gifts and the use of frankincense when offered by those who reject his Word.—Isa. 66:3.
[Picture on page 608]
A small branch of “Boswellia thurifera,” one of the trees from which frankincense is taken

