GAZELLE
[Heb., tseviʹ; Gr., dor·kasʹ; Arabic, ghazah (from which the English word “gazelle” is derived); the names Zibia, Zibiah and Tabitha or Dorcas, all mean “gazelle” (2 Ki. 12:1; 1 Chron. 8:9; Acts 9:36)]. Any of a variety of swift and graceful small antelopes. The Gazella Dorcas, encountered in Arabia, Egypt, Palestine and Syria, likely was familiar to the ancient Hebrews. This animal is about three and a half feet (c. 1 meter) long and stands approximately two feet (c. .6 meter) high at the shoulder. Both male and female have lyre-shaped, ringed horns that may measure as much as a foot (c. .3 meter) in length. The general coloration of this gazelle is pale fawn, with dark and light stripes on the face and white underparts and hindquarters. The hair is short and smooth. Another variety of gazelle with which the Israelites may have been acquainted is the somewhat larger, darker fawn-colored Gazella arabica.
The speed of the gazelle, which ranks among the fastest of mammals, is alluded to in Scripture. (Song of Sol. 2:17; 8:14) The swiftness of Joab’s brother Asahel and of certain Gadites was likened to that of the gazelle. (2 Sam. 2:18; 1 Chron. 12:8) Babylon’s fall was foretold to cause her foreign supporters and hangers-on to flee like a gazelle to their respective lands. (Isa. 13:14) This creature is also cited as an example of acting quickly so as to avoid being ensnared.—Prov. 6:5.
Probably with reference to its beauty and gracefulness, the gazelle figures in certain vivid descriptions contained in The Song of Solomon. (2:9; 4:5; 7:3) The gazelle is also mentioned in the oath under which the Shulammite placed the daughters of Jerusalem, in effect obligating them by all that is beautiful and graceful.—Song of Sol. 2:7; 3:5.
By the terms of the Law given through Moses, the gazelle could be used for food. (Deut. 12:15, 22; 14:4, 5; 15:22) It constituted one of the regularly provided meats for Solomon’s sumptuous table.—1 Ki. 4:22, 23.
[Picture on page 630]
This species of gazelle stands about two feet high

