GENERATION
[Heb., dohr, period, age; men living at a particular time; Aram., dar (Dan. 4:3, 34); Gr., ge·ne·aʹ, that which has been begotten, a family; or the successive members of a genealogy; or the whole multitude of men living at the same time]. The English definition of “generation” agrees with the definitions of the Hebrew and Greek terms. A consideration of the context in which the term appears in the Bible reveals the sense in which it is used.
VARIOUS USES
At Genesis 6:9, “generations” is employed as meaning “contemporaries.” There it is stated concerning Noah: “He proved himself faultless among his contemporaries [literally, ‘generations’].” (NW, 1953 ed., ftn.) “Generation” is used for the span of time between the birth of parents and the birth of their children, at Job 42:16.
The generations of mankind descended from the sinner Adam have been transitory, as contrasted with the earth, which abides forever. (Eccl. 1:4; Ps. 104:5) But the expressions “unnumbered generations” and “a thousand generations” refer to that which is to time indefinite. (1 Chron. 16:15; Isa. 51:8) The command to the Jews that the celebration of the Passover was to be observed “throughout your generations” denoted continual performance to a time then indefinite. (Ex. 12:14) God stated to Moses that Jehovah was his name as a memorial “to time indefinite,” “to generation after generation,” which implies forever. (Ex. 3:15) The apostle Paul tells us that God is to be given glory “to all generations,” and adds, “forever and ever.”—Eph. 3:21.
A generation may mean a class of persons, that is, those characterized by certain qualities or conditions. The Bible speaks of “the generation of the righteous one” (Ps. 14:5; 24:6; 112:2) and “a generation crooked and twisted,” “a generation of perverseness.” (Deut. 32:5, 20) Jesus Christ, when on earth, spoke similarly of the people of the Jewish nation of that day, and the apostle Paul applied such terms to the world of his day in general, alienated from God.—Matt. 12:39; 16:4; 17:17; Mark 8:38; Phil. 2:14, 15.
Another Hebrew word, toh·le·dhohthʹ, is occasionally rendered “generations” or “genealogy” (Num. 3:1; Ruth 4:18), also “descendants” or “families” (1 Chron. 5:7; 7:2, 4, 9), and “history” or “origins.”—Gen. 2:4; 5:1; 6:9; compare AS, AT, AV, Dy, NW, RS and other translations.
LENGTH
When the term “generation” is used with reference to the people living at a particular time, the exact length of that time cannot be stated, except that the time would fall within reasonable limits. These limits would be determined by the life expectancy of the people of that time or of that population. The life-span of the ten generations from Adam to Noah averaged more than 850 years each. (Gen. 5:5-31; 9:29) But after Noah, man’s life-span dropped off sharply. Abraham, for example, lived only 175 years. (Gen. 25:7) Today, much as it was in the time of Moses, people living under favorable conditions may reach seventy or eighty years of age. Moses wrote: “In themselves the days of our years are seventy years; and if because of special mightiness they are eighty years, yet their insistence is on trouble and hurtful things; for it must quickly pass by, and away we fly.” (Ps. 90:10) However, some few may live longer, but Moses stated the general rule. Moses himself, who lived 120 years, was an exception, as was his brother Aaron (123 years), Joshua (110 years), and some others whose strength and vitality were unusual.—Deut. 34:7; Num. 33:39; Josh. 24:29.
“THIS GENERATION” OF CHRIST’S PROPHECIES
When Bible prophecy speaks of “this generation,” it is necessary to consider the context to determine what generation is meant. Jesus Christ, when denouncing the Jewish religious leaders, concluded by saying: “Truly I say to you, All these things will come upon this generation.” History recounts that about thirty-seven years later (in 70 C.E.) that contemporary generation personally experienced the destruction of Jerusalem, as foretold.—Matt. 23:36.
Later that same day, Jesus again used practically the same words, saying “Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things occur.” (Matt. 24:34) In this instance, however, Jesus was not speaking only of the things that would befall natural Israel. He was answering a question as to what “sign” would mark his “presence” and “the conclusion of the system of things.” Therefore, he outlined things that would befall the Jewish nation during the execution of Jehovah’s judgment upon Jerusalem at the hands of the Roman general Titus. (Dan. 9:26) But his words also were evidently to have a later and larger fulfillment upon the system of things that would be in existence during his second presence, when he would come “in his glory.” (Matt. 25:31-33; Rev. 1:7) In both instances Jesus was using the word “generation” in a literal sense, not in a symbolic or figurative sense, for the events Jesus described in the context were literal.—Matt. chap. 24.
The people of this twentieth-century generation living since 1914 have experienced these many terrifying events concurrently and in concentrated measure—international wars, great earthquakes, terrible pestilences, widespread famine, persecution of Christians, and other conditions that Jesus outlined in Matthew chapter 24, Mark chapter 13 and Luke chapter 21.

