GENTLENESS
This word is closely related to humility, meekness, mildness and reasonableness. “Humility” is associated with one’s estimate of oneself, “meekness” with one’s attitude toward the dealings of God and man with respect to oneself, and “gentleness” with one’s treatment of others. Gentleness is mildness of disposition or manner. To “gentle” is to mollify, appease or placate, or to calm whatever one is doing such as speaking, playing music, acting on a matter and so forth.
Gentleness is the opposite of roughness or harshness. The gentle person is not loud, noisy or immoderate. The Greek word neʹpi·oi (plural of neʹpi·os) appears in the Westcott and Hort Greek text at 1 Thessalonians 2:7, and is translated “gentle” (NW). It is elsewhere rendered “babes,” as at Matthew 21:16. The word eʹpi·oi appears at 1 Thessalonians 2:7 in other Greek texts. This latter word is similar to neʹpi·os, containing the idea of mildness, affableness. It may also be translated “gentle.” (2 Tim. 2:24) Vine’s Expository Dictionary of New Testament Words says that the word “was frequently used by Greek writers as characterizing a nurse with trying children or a teacher with refractory scholars, or of parents toward their children.”
NOT WEAKNESS
Gentleness does not denote weakness. It requires strength of character to be gentle with others, and to mollify or to spare their feelings, especially when one is under provocation. David, a man of war, because of fatherly love, commanded Joab to deal gently with his rebellious son Absalom. (2 Sam. 18:5; here the Hebrew word ‘at, having reference to a going softly or gentle motion, is used.) The apostle Paul described himself and his companions in ministering to the newly converted ones at Thessalonica as neʹpi·oi, “babes,” or, as becoming “gentle in the midst of you, as when a nursing mother cherishes her own children.” This was because of real affection, and with concern not to injure their spiritual growth. (1 Thess. 2:7, 8) Paul was no weakling, as testified to by his ability to speak very strongly when the need arose, as when he wrote his first and second canonical letters to the Christian congregation in Corinth. Paul also pointed out that gentleness was a requisite for a servant of God, particularly one in a responsible position of oversight.—2 Tim. 2:24.
A UNIFYING FORCE
How pleasant and how conducive to peace is one who speaks and acts with gentleness! Such one is approachable, not forbidding, and his manner tends toward the spiritual upbuilding of others. Harshness, roughness, boisterousness and vulgarity are divisive and drive others away. But gentleness attracts and unifies. Jehovah is spoken of as collecting together his lambs and of carrying them in his bosom (referring to the voluminous folds of the upper part of the garment, in which lambs were sometimes carried by shepherds). (Isa. 40:11) His Son Jesus Christ said to Jerusalem: “How often I wanted to gather your children together, the way a hen gathers her chicks together under her wings!” “But,” he added, “you people did not want it.” (Matt. 23:37) Therefore they received harsh treatment at the hands of the Roman army when their city was desolated in 70 C.E.
FALSE GENTLENESS
Gentleness in tone or manner, for example, being soft-spoken, does not always prove true gentleness. It is a quality that, to be thoroughly genuine, must come from the heart, just as babes (as the word neʹpi·oi is usually translated) are genuine in their gentleness. While the ancient servant of God, Job, was suffering at the hands of Satan in a test of his integrity to God, he was verbally attacked by three companions. They charged Job with secret sin, wickedness and stubbornness, intimating also that he was apostate and that his sons had met death at God’s hands because of their wickedness. Yet one of the three, Eliphaz, said to Job: “Are the consolations of God not enough for you, or a word spoken gently with you?” (Job 15:11) Thus, some of their speech at least may have been in a soft tone, yet it was harsh in content, hence not truly gentle.

