GODLY DEVOTION
Reverence, worship and service to God, with loyalty to his universal sovereignty. The Scriptures use the Greek word eu·seʹbei·a and related adjective, adverb and verb forms. The noun as used in the Bible may be translated literally as “well-reverencing,” and applies to reverence or devotion toward that which is genuinely holy and righteous The antonym of “godly devotion” is “ungodliness” or “irreverence” (Gr., a·seʹbei·a). Vine’s Expository Dictionary of New Testament Words makes a comparison of a·no·miʹa, “lawlessness” (2 Cor. 6:14; here contrasted with righteousness) and a·seʹbei·a, “ungodliness” (Titus 2:12; here contrasted with godly devotion). The comment is made that a·no·miʹa means disregard for or defiance of God’s laws, while a·seʹbei·a denotes the same attitude toward God’s person. From this we see that the Bible’s use of the expression “godly devotion” refers to devotion to Jehovah God personally. Indeed, the apostle Peter assures us that in the accurate knowledge of God reside the things concerning godly devotion.—2 Pet. 1:3.
The verb form eu·se·beinʹ is used at 1 Timothy 5:4 with regard to the conduct of children or grandchildren toward their widowed mothers or grandmothers. A Greek and English Lexicon, by Edward Robinson, states that eu·seʹbei·a can have the meaning of being pious toward anyone. For this reason some translations of this passage read: “They are to learn first of all to do their duty to their own families.” (JB; compare The New English Bible and The Bible in Basic English.) But God is the Establisher of the family arrangement (Eph. 3:14, 15) and the Bible likens the household of God to the family unit. Therefore, reverence or godly devotion in family relationships in the Christian household would actually be reverence to God and obedience to God’s commands regarding the family and proper conduct of its members. The rendering of this text: “If any widow has children or grandchildren, let these learn first to practice godly devotion in their own household” (NW), is in harmony with this understanding.
THE ‘SACRED SECRET OF GODLY DEVOTION’
The prime example of godly devotion is Jesus Christ. The apostle Paul wrote to Timothy: “Indeed, the sacred secret of this godly devotion is admittedly great: ‘He was made manifest in flesh, was declared righteous in spirit, appeared to angels, was preached about among nations, was believed upon in the world, was received up in glory.”’ (1 Tim. 3:16) Adam, the perfect man, had not set the perfect example of godly devotion. None of his children, born imperfect, could do so. Who would be able to do this? The coming of God’s Son to earth and his integrity-keeping course gave the answer, revealing the solution to the sacred secret.
Jesus Christ was the one man to manifest godly devotion perfectly, in every sense, proving that man in the flesh can maintain such devotion. Jesus was, at the end of his earthly course under severe trials, “loyal, guileless, undefiled, separated from the sinners.” (Heb. 7:26) No flaw could be found in his integrity, to accuse him before God. He said, before his death: “I have conquered the world,” also, “The ruler of the world is coming. And he has no hold on me.” (John 16:33; 14:30) No unrighteousness could be found in him. He could rightly say to his enemies: “Who of you convicts me of sin?” (John 8:46) The solution to “the sacred secret of this godly devotion” is so great and means so much to mankind that it is to be proclaimed world wide. It is the basis upon which Christian godly devotion and conduct in the congregation is patterned.
TRAINING, WITH CONTENTMENT, ESSENTIAL
Strenuous training is necessary on the part of the Christian in order to achieve full godly devotion. It entails the enduring of opposition and persecution. (2 Tim. 3:12) One’s aim or objective in training himself is not to achieve selfish materialistic gain. But there is gain to the one who is content with his lot, who continues in godly devotion along with self-sufficiency. “It holds promise of the life now,” namely, spiritual health, satisfaction, happiness and a purpose in living. It also holds promise of the life that “is to come.”—1 Tim. 4:7, 8; 6:6-8; compare Proverbs 3:7, 8; 4:20-22.
Though persecution and hardship may come upon the one having godly devotion, he need not fear, for “Jehovah knows how to deliver people of godly devotion out of trial.” (2 Pet. 2:9) The apostle Peter counsels Christians to add to their endurance godly devotion. (2 Pet. 1:5, 6) He admonishes them to be persons of “holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion” in order to survive the judgment of Jehovah’s day.—2 Pet. 3:7, 10, 11; 1 Pet. 4:18.
THE POWER OF GODLY DEVOTION
One professing godly devotion must recognize its power to change his personality and must be true and genuine in following godliness. (1 Tim. 6:11; Eph. 4:20-24) He must recognize that God’s Word is His expression of the way of godly devotion and so he must conform to its precepts. (Titus 1:1; 2 Pet. 1:3) Since godly devotion is toward God personally, his Word and spirit will bring one to know Jehovah personally, intimately, and to become more like Him—to be an imitator or copier of him. (Eph. 5:1) Such one will reflect more and more the fine qualities of Jehovah God.—2 Cor. 3:18.
If one fails to guard carefully his godly devotion he will become mentally diseased. (1 Tim. 6:3, 4) The apostle Paul warned his younger fellow-minister Timothy about ungodly ones who professed devotion to God. He cautioned Timothy to handle the Word of the truth aright, shunning empty speeches that violate what is holy, that Timothy might not be turned from the way of godly devotion. He then pointed out that there would be those who would practice all sorts of wickedness, hypocritically having a form of godly devotion, but proving false to its power. (2 Tim. 2:15, 16; 3:1-5) Jude likewise shows that such ones would have no genuine reverence for or devotion to God, no respect or appreciation for his undeserved kindness. They would be persons using godliness for materialistic or sensual gain. Their hypocrisy is revealed in their practice of loose conduct.—Jude 4.
THE ‘MYSTERY OF LAWLESSNESS’
Herein lies another mystery, diametrically opposed to Jehovah’s “sacred secret.” This is “the mystery of this lawlessness.” It was a mystery because its wickedness would be practiced under the guise and in the name of godly devotion. In fact, it would be an apostasy from true godly devotion and would turn against God. Paul said that the “man of lawlessness” was in operation in his day and would soon be exposed. Finally, this one would be done away with by Jesus Christ at the manifestation of his presence. This apostate, Satan-operated “man” would lift himself up “over everyone who is called ‘god’ or an object of reverence” (Gr., seʹba·sma). Thus this great opposer of God as a Satanic instrument would be extremely deceptive and would bring destruction to those following its practices. The effectiveness of the “man of lawlessness” would lie in the fact that his wickedness would be cloaked in a hypocritical godly devotion.—2 Thess. 2:3-12; compare Matthew 7:15, 21-23.

