GOMER
(Goʹmer) [completion].
1. Grandson of Noah and first-named son of Japheth, born after the Flood. (Gen. 10:1, 2; 1 Chron. 1:4, 5) He and his sons, Ashkenaz, Riphath and Togarmah, are listed among “the families of the sons of Noah according to their family descents” from whom the nations were spread about after the Deluge.—Gen. 10:3, 32.
The nation that descended from Gomer is historically associated with the ancient Cimmerians, an Aryan race called Gimirrai in the Assyrian inscriptions and who settled in the region N of the Black Sea. The Crimea (the peninsula of the southern Ukraine extending into the northern portion of the Black Sea) evidently derives its name from this basically nomadic people. In the eighth century B.C.E., during the reign of Assyrian King Sargon, they came through the Caucasus (the mountainous region between the Black and Caspian Seas), attacking the kingdoms of Urartu (Ararat) and Tabal (Tubal). Perhaps pressured by the Scythians or else subsequently reinforced by them, they penetrated eastern Asia Minor, where the Armenian name for Cappadocia, Gamir, doubtless reflects their invasion. Faced with a strong Assyrian Empire to the E, the Cimmerians pushed westward and warred against the Phrygians of central and NW Asia Minor. Esar-haddon claims to have defeated the Cimmerians, and Ashurbanipal later mentions their invasion of the kingdom of Lydia. They were finally expelled from Lydia by Lydian King Alyattes (predecessor of Croesus).
In Ezekiel’s prophecy concerning the assault by “Gog of the land of Magog” against the regathered people of Jehovah (the writing of which was evidently completed by 591 B.C.E.), “Gomer and all its bands” are listed among Gog’s forces along with Togarmah “of the remotest parts of the north, and all its bands.”—Ezek. 38:2-8; See GOG No. 2; MAGOG; TOGARMAH.
While mention in secular history of the Cimmerians (by that name) ends about the sixth century B.C.E., they are associated by many scholars with the Celtic (or, Gallic) peoples of Europe, thus indicating a movement in early times of the Gimirrai (or, Gomerians) westward into Europe proper. The Jewish historian Josephus connected the descendants of Gomer with the Gauls (called Galatians by the Greeks), a number of whom invaded Asia Minor during the third century B.C.E., giving their name to the later province of Galatia. Other ancient historians viewed the Galatians and the Cimmerians as the same race.—See GALATIA.
Traces of the name of Gomer (via that of the Cimmerians) are found in other Celtic tribes of northern Europe such as the Cimbri. The Cimbri at one time occupied the whole of the British Isles until finally driven into the districts where presently are found the Gael in Ireland and Scotland and the Cymry in Wales. Thus, The Anchor Bible in its commentary on Genesis (1964, p. 66) says concerning Gomer: “a name still in use apparently for the Welsh (Cymry).” Hence, if these historical relationships are accurate, it would seem likely that Gomer was the progenitor not only of the early Cimmerians but also of the later Celtic peoples as a whole.
In the opposite direction to such a westward migration, in the Chinese province of Sinkiang the tribe called the Tokhari are referred to as “linguistic cousins” of the Celts of western Europe.
Whatever is the actual connection of these various tribes and peoples with Gomer, the evidence presented clearly supports the Bible description of the dispersion and spread of the various families and nations from one central area in the Middle East.
2. The daughter of Diblaim who became the wife of Hosea in accord with Jehovah’s instructions to that prophet. (Hos. 1:2, 3) Gomer thereafter gave birth to three children, whose significant names were used by God to foretell the disastrous results of Israel’s spiritual adultery in the form of idolatry. In relating the birth of the first child, a son named Jezreel, the account states that Gomer “bore to him [Hosea] a son.” In connection with the births of the next two children, however, no reference is made to the prophet as the father, and this has been the basis for considering them as probably illegitimate. (1:3-9) Chapter 3, verses 1-3, appears to describe Gomer’s being brought back from an adulterous course to the prophet, being purchased as though a slave, thus illustrating Israel’s being received back by God on the basis of their repentance.

