GOOD WILL
[Heb., ra·tsohnʹ, delight, acceptance; Gr., eu·do·kiʹa, well thinking].
Both the Hebrew and Greek nouns and related forms of these words have reference to that which pleases or to one’s being pleased, and are translated “delight,” “pleasure,” “pleased,” “good pleasure,” “liking,” “approval,” “good will,” and so forth.
GOD’S GOOD WILL
In the Bible these terms are used with regard to the pleasure, approval or good will of God. (Ps. 51:18; 106:4; Eph. 1:5, 9) God sets forth clearly what is required to please him, and he determines whom he will accept as his friends, as recipients of his good will. Those rejecting his Word or rebelling against him do not receive his good will, but, rather, experience his displeasure.—Ps. 2:5; Heb. 3:16-19.
MAN’S GOOD WILL
The same words are also used with reference to the approval of men, or of good will on their part. (2 Chron. 10:7; Esther 1:8; Rom. 15:25, 26) The apostle Paul spoke of some who preached the Christ through good will. (Phil. 1:15) These sincere Christians were expressing good will toward God. Such ones would accordingly experience the good will of God. (Prov. 8:35; 10:32; 11:27) An example of the good will of man toward others is the apostle Paul’s expression concerning his fleshly brothers, the Jews: “Brothers, the good will of my heart and my supplication to God for them are, indeed, for their salvation.”—Rom. 10:1.
“MEN OF GOOD WILL”
When an angel announced the birth of Jesus, he appeared, not before the religious leaders of the Jews, who were God’s enemies, but before humble shepherds. After he told the shepherds of the birth of the Messiah, an angelic host proclaimed: “Glory in the heights above to God, and upon earth peace among men of good will.” (Luke 2:14) The angels were not proclaiming peace to God’s enemies, who were not at peace with him. “‘There is no peace,’ my God has said, ‘for the wicked ones.’” (Isa. 57:21) The Authorized Version renders Luke 2:14: “Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.” But God was not here expressing good will toward men in general; neither did he mean that his peace was extended to those inclined toward him merely in a friendly and indulgent way. Rather, God had reference to those who would please him by genuine faith in him, and who would become followers of his Son.
Modern translations harmonize with this view, making the matter clear. The Revised Standard Version reads: “peace among men with whom he is pleased!” The New English Bible translates the phrase: “his peace for men on whom his favour rests.” Dr. James Moffatt’s translation renders it: “peace on earth for men whom he favours!” and An American Translation reads: “Peace to the men he favors!” Other modern versions read similarly.

