HADES
(Haʹdes).
This is the common transliteration into English of the corresponding Greek word haiʹdes. It literally means “the unseen place.” In all, the word Hades occurs ten times in the earliest manuscripts of the Christian Greek Scriptures.—Matt. 11:23; 16:18; Luke 10:15; 16:23; Acts 2:27, 31; Rev. 1:18; 6:8; 20:13, 14.
The Authorized Version translates haiʹdes as “hell” in these texts but the Revised Standard Version renders it “Hades,” with the exception of Matthew 16:18, where “powers of death” is used, though the footnote reads “gates of Hades.” “Hades” rather than “hell” is used in many modern translations.
The translators of the Greek Septuagint translation of the Hebrew Scriptures (from Genesis to Malachi) used the word “Hades” seventy-three times, employing it sixty times to translate the Hebrew word sheʼohlʹ, commonly rendered “Sheol.” Luke, the divinely inspired writer of Acts, definitely showed Hades to be the Greek equivalent of Sheol when he translated Peter’s quotation from Psalm 16:10. (Acts 2:27) Inversely, nine modern Hebrew translations of the Christian Greek Scriptures use the word “Sheol” to translate Hades at Revelation 20:13, 14; and the Syriac translation uses the related word Shiul.
In every case in which the word Hades is used in the Christian Greek Scriptures it is related with death, either in the verse itself or in the immediate context in all except the two instances cited in the following paragraph. Hades does not refer to a single grave (Gr., taʹphos), or a single tomb (Gr., mneʹma), or a single memorial tomb (Gr., mne·meiʹon), but to the common grave of all mankind, where the dead and buried ones are unseen. It thus signifies the same as the corresponding word Sheol, and an examination of its use in all its ten occurrences bears out this fact.
In its first occurrence at Matthew 11:23, Jesus Christ, in chiding Capernaum for its disbelief, uses Hades to represent the depth of debasement to which Capernaum would come down, in contrast with the height of heaven to which she assumed to exalt herself. A corresponding text is found at Luke 10:15. Note the similar way in which Sheol is used at Job 11:7, 8.
JESUS AND CONGREGATION DELIVERED
At Matthew 16:18 Jesus said concerning the Christian congregation that the “gates of Hades [“powers of death,” RS] will not overpower it.” Similarly, King Hezekiah, when on the verge of death, said: “In the midst of my days I will go into the gates of Sheol.” (Isa. 38:10) It, therefore, becomes apparent that Jesus’ promise of victory over Hades means that its “gates” will open to release them by means of a resurrection, even as was the case with Christ Jesus himself.
Since Hades refers to the common grave of all mankind, a place rather than a condition, Jesus entered within the “gates of Hades” when buried by Joseph of Arimathea. On Pentecost of 33 C.E. Peter said of Christ: “Neither was he forsaken in Hades nor did his flesh see corruption. This Jesus God resurrected, of which fact we are all witnesses.” (Acts 2:25-27, 29-32; Ps. 16:10) Whereas the “gates of Hades” (Matt. 16:18) were still holding David within their domain in Peter’s day (Acts 2:29), they had swung open for Christ Jesus when his Father resurrected him out of Hades. Thereafter, through the power of the resurrection given him (John 5:21-30), Jesus is the Holder of “the keys of death and of Hades.”—Rev. 1:17, 18.
Manifestly, the Bible Hades is not the imagined place that the ancient non-Christian Greeks described in their mythologies as a “dark, sunless region within the earth,” for there was no resurrection from such mythological underworld.
ILLUSTRATIVE USE
At Revelation 6:8 Hades is figuratively pictured as closely following after the rider of the pale horse, personalized Death, to receive the victims of the death-dealing agencies of war, famine, plagues and wild beasts.
The sea (which at times serves as a watery grave for some) is mentioned in addition to Hades, as the common earthen grave, for the purpose of stressing the inclusiveness of all the dead when Revelation 20:13, 14 says that the sea, death and Hades are to give up or be emptied of the dead in them. Thereafter, death and Hades (but not the sea) are cast into “the lake of fire,” “the second death.” They thereby figuratively ‘die out’ of existence and this signifies the end of Hades (Sheol), the common grave of mankind, as well as of death inherited through Adam.
The remaining text in which Hades is used is found at Luke 16:22-26 in the account of the “rich man” and “Lazarus.” The language throughout the account is plainly parabolic and cannot be construed literally in view of all the preceding texts. Note, however, that the “rich man” of the parable is spoken of as being “buried” in Hades, giving further evidence that Hades means the common grave of mankind.—See GEHENNA; GRAVE; SHEOL; TARTARUS.

