HIRED LABORER
In contrast with a slave, a hired laborer received a wage for his work, the Law requiring that he be paid at the end of the workday. (Lev. 19:13; Deut. 24:14, 15) At least by the first century C.E., it appears that the wages were agreed upon before the laborers ever began their work, that the workday was twelve hours long, from about 6 a.m. to 6 p.m., and that the customary day’s wage for vineyard workers was evidently a denarius (c. 16c). (Matt. 20:1-13) The Scriptural reference to “years of a hired laborer” seems to indicate that the duration of the work agreement (or, contract) was also fixed.—Isa. 16:14; 21:16.
Evidently in Israel many of the hired laborers were uncircumcised, for the Law prescribed that they not partake of the passover, although circumcised slaves could do so, being viewed as members of an Israelite family. Likewise, while the hired laborers of a priest could not eat of the holy things, no such prohibition rested on circumcised slaves, as these were so actually members of the priest’s household.—Ex. 12:43-45; Lev. 22:10, 11.
An Israelite who, because of financial reverses, had to sell himself into slavery to a fellow Israelite, or to an alien resident, a settler, or a member of the alien resident’s family, was to be treated, not tyrannically, but with due consideration like a hired laborer. Then, if in his case it had not been possible to take advantage of the right of repurchase, he was to be set free from servitude either in the seventh year of his servitude or in the Jubilee year, depending upon which came first.—Ex. 21:2; Lev. 25:39, 40, 47-49, 53; Deut. 15:12.
The hired laborer generally was anxious to see the close of the workday and to receive his wages. (Job 7:1, 2) He often did not properly have the interests of his employer fully at heart, as is evident from Jesus Christ’s statement that, unlike the hired man who flees in the case of danger, he, as the Fine Shepherd, would surrender his soul in behalf of the sheep. (John 10:11-15; see also Jeremiah 46:21.) Jacob, however, was one who protected the Interests of his employer Laban, even though Laban did not always deal fairly with him. (Gen. 31:38-41) The hired laborer could find a certain “pleasure” in having completed his task and then receiving his wages and being able to rest at the end of the day. It appears that Job’s desire was to be like a man granted the relative rest of a hired worker, one reconciled to his lot in life and free from special afflictions and difficulties.—Job 14:6.
At times hired laborers were subjected to abuses from their employers. Through his prophet Malachi, Jehovah warned that He would become a speedy witness against those acting fraudulently with the wages of a wage worker. (Mal. 3:5; see also James 5:4.) God-fearing Jews, however, were not guilty of defrauding their hired men. In Jesus’ illustration the hired laborers of the prodigal son’s father had plenty of food. Hence, the prodigal, realizing how much better off they were than he was and no longer feeling worthy of being considered a son, requested that his father constitute him as one of his hired men.—Luke 15:17-21; see HIRE, WAGES; SLAVE.

