IMMORTALITY
[Gr., a·tha·na·siʹa].
The Greek word is formed by the negative prefix a followed by a form of the word for “death” (thaʹna·tos). Thus, the basic meaning is deathlessness.
The expressions “immortal” or “immortality” do not occur in the Hebrew Scriptures. They do show, however, that Jehovah God, as the Source of all life, is not subject to death, hence, is immortal. (Ps. 36:7, 9; 90:1, 2; Hab. 1:12) This fact is also emphatically stated by the Christian apostle Paul in referring to God as “the King of eternity, incorruptible.”—1 Tim. 1:17.
As the article on SOUL shows, the Hebrew Scriptures also make plain that man is not inherently immortal. References to the human soul (Heb., neʹphesh) as dying, heading for the grave and being destroyed are numerous. (Gen. 17:14; Josh. 10:32; Job 33:22; Ps. 22:29; 78:50; Ezek. 18:4, 20) The Christian Greek Scriptures, of course, are in harmony and likewise contain references to the death of the soul (Gr., psy·kheʹ). (Matt. 26:38; Mark 3:4; Acts 3:23; Jas. 5:20; Rev. 8:9; 16:3) Therefore the Christian Greek Scriptures do not controvert or alter the inspired teaching of the Hebrew Scriptures that man, the human soul, is mortal, subject to death. The Christian Greek Scriptures, however, do contain the revelation of God’s purpose to grant immortality to certain of his servants.
CHRIST’S IMMORTALITY
The first one described in the Bible as rewarded with the gift of immortality is Jesus Christ. That he did not possess immortality previous to his resurrection by God is seen from the inspired apostle’s words at Romans 6:9: “Christ, now that he has been raised up from the dead, dies no more; death is master over him no more.” (Compare Revelation 1:17, 18.) For this reason, when describing him as “the King of those who rule as kings and Lord of those who rule as lords,” 1 Timothy 6:15, 16 shows that Jesus is distinct from all such other kings and lords in that he is “the one alone having immortality.” The other kings and lords, due to being mortal, die, even as did also the high priests of Israel. The glorified Jesus, God’s appointed High Priest after the order of Melchizedek, however, has an “indestructible life.”—Heb. 7:15-17, 23-25.
The word “indestructible” here translates the Greek term a·ka·taʹly·tos, meaning, basically, “indissoluble.” The word is a compound of the negative prefix a joined to other words relating to a “loosening down,” as in Jesus’ statement regarding the loosening down or throwing down of the stones of the Temple at Jerusalem. (Matt. 24:1, 2) Also, in Paul’s reference to the loosening down of the earthly “tent” of Christians, that is, the dissolving of their earthly life in human bodies. (2 Cor. 5:1) Thus, the immortal life granted Jesus upon his resurrection is not merely endless but is beyond deterioration or dissolution and beyond destruction.
KINGDOM HEIRS GRANTED IMMORTALITY
For the anointed Christians called to reign with Christ in the heavens (1 Pet. 1:3, 4), the promise is that they share with Christ in the likeness of his resurrection. (Rom. 6:5) Thus, as in the case of their Lord and Head, the anointed members of the Christian congregation who die faithful receive a resurrection to immortal spirit life, so that “this which is mortal puts on immortality.” (1 Cor. 15:50-54) As with Jesus, immortality in their case does not mean simply everlasting life, or mere freedom from death. That they, too, are granted the “power of an indestructible life” as fellow heirs with Christ, is seen from the apostle Paul’s association of incorruptibility with the immortality they attain. (1 Cor. 15:42-49) Over them “the second death has no authority.”—Rev. 20:6; see INCORRUPTION.
This grant of immortality to the Kingdom heirs is all the more transcendental and remarkable, in view of the fact that even God’s angels are shown to be mortal, despite their possessing spirit, not carnal, bodies. Angelic mortality is evident in view of the judgment of death entered against the spirit son who became God’s adversary, or Satan, and also against those other angels who followed that Satanic course and “did not keep their original position but forsook their own proper dwelling place.” (Jude 6; Matt. 25:41; Rev. 20:10, 14) So the grant of “indestructible life” (Heb. 7:16) or “indissoluble life” to those Christians who gain the privilege of reigning with God’s Son in the heavenly kingdom marvelously demonstrates God’s confidence in them.—See ANGEL; HEAVEN (The way to heavenly life); LIFE.

