JEHOSHAPHAT
(Je·hoshʹa·phat) [Jehovah is Judge].
1. Son of Ahilud serving as recorder during the reigns of David and Solomon.—2 Sam. 8:16; 20:24; 1 Ki. 4:3; 1 Chron. 18:15.
2. One of King Solomon’s twelve deputies. For a month each year this “son of Paruah” supplied the food for the king and his household from the territory of Issachar.—1 Ki. 4:7, 17.
3. Son of Judean King Asa by Azubah the daughter of Shilhi. At the age of thrity-five Jehoshaphat succeeded his father to the throne and ruled for twenty-five years (936-911 B.C.E.). (1 Ki. 22:42; 2 Chron. 20:31) His good reign was contemporaneous with that of Israelite Kings Ahab, Ahaziah and Jehoram. (1 Ki. 22:41, 51; 2 Ki. 3:1, 2; 2 Chron. 17:3, 4) It was marked by stability, prosperity, glory and relative peace with neighboring lands. Jehoshaphat received presents from his subjects and tribute from the Philistines and Arabs.—2 Chron. 17:5, 10, 11.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
This Judean king strengthened his position by putting military forces in Judah’s fortified cities, and garrisons both in the land of Judah and in Israelite territory captured by his father Asa. At Jerusalem a large body of valiant warriors served the royal interests, and in Judah fortified places and storage cities were built.—2 Chron. 17:1, 2, 12-19.
Unlike the Israelite kings of the northern kingdom, Jehoshaphat manifested great concern for true worship. (2 Chron. 17:4) He commissioned certain princes, Levites and priests to teach Jehovah’s law in the cities of Judah. (2 Chron. 17:7-9) Jehoshaphat also sanctified holy offerings (2 Ki. 12:18) and personally traveled throughout his realm, directing his subjects to return to Jehovah in faithfulness. (2 Chron. 19:4) Courageously Jehoshaphat continued the campaign against idolatry started by Asa, and high places, sacred poles and the remaining male temple prostitutes began to disappear from Judah. (1 Ki. 22:46; 2 Chron. 17:6) But improper worship at high places was so entrenched among the Israelites that Jehoshaphat’s efforts did not completely and permanently eradicate it.—1 Ki. 22:43; 2 Chron. 20:33.
Jehoshaphat’s reign also witnessed the institution of a better judicial system. The king himself impressed upon the judges the importance of being impartial and free from bribery, since they were judging, not for man, but for Jehovah.—2 Chron. 19:5-11.
Jehoshaphat proved himself to be a king who relied fully on Jehovah. When Judah was threatened by the combined forces of Ammon, Moab and the mountainous region of Seir, he humbly acknowledged the nation’s weakness in the face of this danger and prayed to Jehovah for help. Thereafter Jehovah fought for Judah by striking confusion into the ranks of the enemy so that they slaughtered one another. Consequently the surrounding nations became fearful and Judah continued to enjoy peace.—2 Chron. 20:1-30.
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE TEN-TRIBE KINGDOM
Jehoshaphat maintained peace with the northern kingdom and formed a marriage alliance with Ahab. (1 Ki. 22:44; 2 Chron. 18:1) For this reason on several occasions he was drawn into other alliances with the kingdom of Israel.
During a visit in the northern kingdom sometime after the marriage of Ahab’s daughter Athaliah to his firstborn Jehoram, Jehoshaphat agreed to accompany King Ahab in a military venture to recover Ramoth-gilead from the Syrians. However, before actually starting out, Jehoshaphat requested that Ahab inquire of Jehovah. Four hundred prophets assured Ahab of success. But Jehovah’s true prophet Micaiah, hated by Ahab but called at Jehoshaphat’s insistence, foretold certain defeat. Nevertheless, Jehoshaphat, perhaps so as not to go back on his original promise to accompany Ahab, went into battle dressed in his royal garments. Since Ahab had taken the precaution to disguise himself, the Syrians mistakenly concluded that Jehoshaphat was Israel’s king and therefore subjected him to the heaviest attack. Jehoshaphat barely escaped with his life, and Ahab, despite the disguise, was mortally wounded. (1 Ki. 22:2-37; 2 Chron. chap. 18) Upon returning to Jerusalem, Jehoshaphat was censured for unwisely allying himself with wicked Ahab, the visionary Jehu saying to him: “Is it to the wicked that help is to be given, and is it for those hating Jehovah that you should have love? And for this there is indignation against you from the person of Jehovah.”—2 Chron. 19:2.
Later, Jehoshaphat became partner to King Ahaziah, Ahab’s successor, in a shipbuilding enterprise at Ezion-geber on the Gulf of Aqabah. But Jehovah disapproved of this maritime alliance with wicked Ahaziah. Therefore, in fulfillment of prophecy, the ships were wrecked.—1 Ki. 22:48, 49; 2 Chron. 20:35-37; see AHAZIAH No. 1.
Sometime after this Jehoshaphat joined Ahaziah’s successor to the throne, Jehoram, and the king of Edom in a military offensive to put down Moabite King Mesha’s revolt against the ten-tribe kingdom. But the armies of the alliance became entrapped in a waterless wilderness. Jehoshaphat therefore called for a prophet of Jehovah. Only out of regard for Jehoshaphat did the prophet Elisha seek divine inspiration, and his subsequent advice saved the three kings and their armies from disaster.—2 Ki. 3:4-25.
JEHORAM BECOMES KING
While Jehoshaphat was still alive he gave the kingship to his firstborn Jehoram, but to his other sons he gave precious gifts and fortified cities in Judah. (2 Ki. 8:16; 2 Chron. 21:3) Particularly after Jehoshaphat’s death and burial in the city of David did the marriage alliance with the house of Ahab prove to be disastrous for the kingdom of Judah. Under the influence of Athaliah, Jehoram abandoned the right course of his father and revived idolatrous practices.—1 Ki. 22:50; 2 Chron. 21:1-7, 11.
4. Father of Israelite King Jehu.—2 Ki. 9:2, 14.

