JORDAN
(Jorʹdan) [the descender].
The main river of the Promised Land, forming a natural border between most of E and W Palestine. (Josh. 22:25) The four streams that unite to form the Jordan arise near Mount Hermon and are fed by its melting snows. From a large cave at the base of Mount Hermon issues the Nahr Banias. The Nahr el-Leddan bursts forth from two springs at Tell el-Qadi (Dan) and, after flowing for about four miles (c. 6 kilometers), merges with the Nahr Banias. Through the valley between Mt. Hermon and Mt. Lebanon run the Nahr Bareighit and the Nahr Hasbani. Shortly after these two streams unite they join the combined waters of the Nahr Banias and the Nahr el-Leddan to become the Jordan. The Yarmuk and the Jabbok, its main tributaries, enter the Jordan from the E. Today most of the Jordan is a very muddy stream, and among the fish found in its waters are barbel and bream.
About seven miles (c. 11 kilometers) N of Lake Huleh (now mostly drained) the Jordan proper begins its course. The swamps in the Huleh Basin that have not been drained abound in reeds, rushes, papyrus plants and tall grass.
Upon emerging from the Huleh Basin the Jordan flows somewhat peacefully for about two miles (c. 3 kilometers) but then rushes through basaltic gorges on its way to the Sea of Galilee. From the southern end of the Sea of Galilee the Jordan snakes its way to the Dead Sea for some two hundred miles (c. 320 kilometers), although the airline distance is only about sixty-five miles (c. 105 kilometers).
The Jordan is indeed a descender. Within a distance of some ten and a half miles (17 kilometers) between the Huleh Basin and the Sea of Galilee, it falls over nine hundred feet (c. 274 meters). As it continues its course from the Sea of Galilee to the Dead Sea, the Jordan forms twenty-seven cascading rapids and drops an approximate six hundred feet (c. 180 meters) more.
Below the Sea of Galilee the Jordan flows through a valley measuring some four to eight miles (6 to 13 kilometers) across. But at Jericho this valley has a width of about fourteen miles (23 kilometers). It is through the valley’s lower level (the Zor), with a width of from a quarter to two miles (.4 to 3 kilometers), that the Jordan turns and twists through dense thickets of thorns and thistles, vines and bushes, oleanders, tamarisks, willows and poplars. Anciently, lions roamed in the “proud thickets along the Jordan.” (Jer. 49:19; 50:44; Zech. 11:3) Wolves and jackals can still be found there. The summers are extremely hot and humid in this jungle, with temperatures climbing well above 100 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Centigrade). And in the spring, as the snow melts on Mount Hermon, the Jordan floods the Zor.
The upper level of the valley (the Ghor) lies as much as 150 feet (46 meters) above the Jordan’s jungle and is separated from it by bare and eroded grayish marl hills. The portion of the Ghor extending some twenty-five miles (40 kilometers) S of the Sea of Galilee contains cultivated land and pastures. Aside from this, most of the Ghor is uncultivated. However, in the time of Abraham and Lot, before the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, apparently much more of it was productive, especially in the vicinity of the Dead Sea.—Gen. 13:10, 11.
The Jordan’s shallow waters and its numerous rapids and whirlpools render it unnavigable. Reportedly, there are at least sixty places where it is possible to wade across the river when not at flood stage. In ancient times control of the river’s fords was militarily advantageous, as they were the main means for crossing the Jordan.—Judg. 3:28; 12:5, 6.
Usually the portion of the Jordan below the Sea of Galilee averages from three to ten feet (.9 to 3 meters) in depth and is between approximately ninety and one hundred feet (27 to 30 meters) wide. But in the spring the Jordan overflows its banks and is then much wider and deeper. (Josh. 3:15) At flood stage it would not have been safe for the Israelite nation of men, women and children to cross the Jordan, especially not near Jericho. The current there is so swift that in more recent times bathers have actually been swept away. However, Jehovah miraculously dammed up the Jordan, making it possible for the Israelites to cross on dry land. (Josh. 3:14-17) Centuries later a like miracle occurred once for Elijah while in the company of Elisha, and once for Elisha alone.—2 Ki. 2:7, 8, 13, 14.
The Jordan also figured in the miraculous healing of Naaman. Helped to the right viewpoint by his servant, Naaman, who regarded the rivers of Damascus as better than all the waters of Israel, obediently bathed seven times in the Jordan. After the seventh time he was completely healed of his leprous condition.—2 Ki. 5:10-14.
In the first century C.E. John the Baptist immersed many repentant Jews in the waters of the Jordan. He also had the privilege of baptizing Jesus, the perfect Son of God, there.—Matt. 3:1, 5, 6, 13-17.

