KESIL CONSTELLATION
(Heb., Kesilʹ, meaning stupid; also [religiously], insolent).
Though this word is used many times in its basic sense of “stupid” (compare Psalm 49:10, 92:6; Proverbs 1:22), yet the context in four places (Job 9:9; 38:31; Amos 5:8; and Isa. 13:10 [here in the plural]) indicates its use to designate a stellar body or group.
The term is generally considered as applying to Orion, also called “the hunter,” a very prominent southern constellation containing the giant stars Betelgeuse and Rigel. The Latin Vulgate translated kesilʹ as “Orion” and most translations follow suit. The ancient Targum and Syriac versions read “giant,” and this corresponds with the Arabic name for the Orion constellation, al gebbar or “the strong one” (Hebrew equivalent, gib·bohrʹ).
The International Standard Bible Encyclopaedia (Vol. I, p. 312) cites a tradition that Nimrod’s courtiers gave his name to “this most brilliant of all the constellations, one that by its form somewhat suggests a gigantic warrior armed for the fight.” Due to the repeated association of the Hebrew word gib·bohrʹ (“mighty”) with Nimrod, and because his name is considered by some to mean “rebel” (hence, insolent), the above reference work suggests this as the reason for the use of the word kesilʹ in these texts. Job was the first to employ the term (Job 9:9), and Jehovah then referred to it again (Job 38:31), which could mean simply his use of a name understandable to men at that time, although God himself has his own names for all his celestial creations. (Ps. 147:4) If, as the above-mentioned Encyclopaedia indicates, the pagans endeavored to exalt Nimrod by associating him as “the mighty one” with this constellation, then it would not be strange for Job to employ the name kesilʹ, the “insolently stupid one,” to designate the same constellation.
The term is used at Amos 5:8 in connection with the reproval of Israel for failing to search for the true God Jehovah, the Maker of the heavenly constellations. At Isaiah 13:9, 10, where the plural kesi·leh·hemʹ (constellations of Kesil) is used, the description is of the “day of Jehovah,” in which proud and haughty tyrants will be abased and the celestial bodies will cease to give their light. While these associations would all allow for some connection with Nimrod, it cannot be stated definitely that this is the actual case, and the identification of the Kesilʹ constellation must still be viewed as not definite.

