LAMECH
(Laʹmech) [perhaps, a strong youth].
1. The son of Methushael and a descendant of Cain. (Gen. 4:17, 18) His lifetime was overlapped by that of Adam. Lamech is the first polygamist of Bible record, having two wives at the same time, Adah and Zillah. (Gen. 4:19) By Adah he had sons named Jabal, “the founder of those who dwell in tents and have livestock,” and Jubal, “the founder of all those who handle the harp and the pipe.” (Gen. 4:20, 21) By Zillah, Lamech became the father of Tubal-cain, “the forger of every sort of tool of copper and iron,” and a daughter named Naamah.—Gen. 4:22.
The poem that Lamech composed for his wives (Gen. 4:23, 24) reflects the violent spirit of that day. Lamech’s poem ran:
“Hear my voice, you wives of Lamech;
Give ear to my saying:
A man I have killed for wounding me,
Yes, a young man for giving me a blow.
If seven times Cain is to be avenged,
Then Lamech seventy times and seven.”
Evidently Lamech was presenting a case of self-defense, pleading that his act was not one of deliberate murder, like that of Cain. Lamech claimed that, in defending himself, he had killed the man who struck and wounded him. Therefore, his poem stood as a plea for immunity against anyone desiring to get revenge against him for killing his attacker.
It appears that none of Cain’s descendants, which would include Lamech’s offspring, survived the Flood.
2. A descendant of Seth; son of Methuselah and father of Noah. (Gen. 5:25, 28, 29; 1 Chron. 1:1-4) This Lamech’s lifetime was likewise overlapped by that of Adam. Lamech had faith in God and, after calling his son’s name Noah (which means “rest; consolation”), he uttered the words: “This one will bring us comfort from our work and from the pain of our hands resulting from the ground which Jehovah has cursed.” (Gen. 5:29) These words found fulfillment when the curse on the ground was lifted during Noah’s lifetime. (Gen. 8:21) Lamech had other sons and daughters. He lived 777 years, dying about five years before the Flood. (Gen. 5:30, 31) His name is listed in the genealogy of Jesus Christ at Luke 3:36.

