LAUNDRYMAN
One who in Bible times washed used clothing and also processed new cloth by bleaching and shrinking it and removing the oils in preparation for dyeing. In Hebrew the term is from a word meaning “to trample,” that is, to wash by stamping with the feet to loosen the dirt. In Greek, the word used means one who dresses new cloth or washes and scours soiled garments.
Clothes cleaners of ancient times were likely able to whiten their clothing considerably by cleaning and bleaching. Yet, when describing the extreme whiteness of Jesus’ garments at the transfiguration scene, Mark says: “His outer garments became glistening, far whiter than any clothes cleaner on earth could whiten them.”—Mark 9:3.
ALKALI
In Hebrew the word for alkali is neʹther, a carbonate of soda, also called “natron.” It is called “mineral alkali,” to distinguish it from “vegetable alkali.” Natron was a native grade of the chemical, commercial grades of which are known as soda ash and sal soda. Its effervescence when mixed with a weak acid is alluded to at Proverbs 25:20. Though in some translations it is called “niter,” it should not be confused with modern niter (nitre), also called “saltpeter,” which may be either potassium or sodium nitrate.
By itself or as a soap builder this alkali is a very effective cleaner. This fact adds force to Jehovah’s words as to the depth of Israel’s sinfulness: “Though you should do the washing with alkali and take to yourself large quantities of lye, your error would certainly be a stain before me.”—Jer. 2:22.
The ancient world obtained this alkali from several sources of supply—from lakes or deposits in Syria, India, Egypt and along the southeastern shores of the Dead Sea. It is reported that, in addition to using it as a detergent, the Egyptians and others substituted it for yeast in breadmaking, employed it as a tenderizer when boiling meat, mixed it with vinegar for a toothache cure, and used it in embalming.
LYE
The Hebrew word bo·rithʹ, translated “lye” (in some translations, “soap”), refers to a “vegetable alkali” as distinguished from neʹther, the so-called “mineral alkali.” The distinction was not one of chemical composition, but, rather, was based on the difference in the source of supply. At Jeremiah 2:22 both words occur in the same verse. Chemically the lye of Bible times was sodium carbonate or potassium carbonate, depending on whether the ashes from which it was obtained were of vegetation grown near the sea on saline soil, or grown inland. The chemicals in the ashes were separated by leaching or filtering with water. This lye is different from the modern-day chemical called “lye,” the very caustic potassium hydroxide. The ancient laundryman’s lye was used not only for clothes cleaning (Mal. 3:2), but also for the reduction of such metals as lead and silver.—Isa. 1:25.
POTASH
The Hebrew word za·khakhʹ, having the thought of “making pure” or “clean,” is translated “potash” (NW), “soap” (Yg), “lye” (AT), at Job 9:30. There it is spoken of as being used for cleansing the hands. This cleanser is thought to be either potassium carbonate or sodium carbonate. The way it was made gives it the name “potash”: wood ashes were first leached, then the solution was boiled down in pots.

