LIBYA
(Libʹy·a), Libyans (Libʹy·ans).
Ancient Libya occupied an area of northern Africa W of Egypt. Its inhabitants are generally thought to have been designated by the Hebrew term Lu·vimʹ. (2 Chron. 12:3; “Libyans,” LXX, NW, RS) If Lu·vimʹ is a variant of Leha·vimʹ (Lehabim), this may indicate that at least some of the Libyans descended from Ham through Mizraim. (Gen. 10:13) The traditional Jewish view found in the writings of Josephus (Antiquities of the Jews, Book I, chap. II, par. 2) makes the Libyans descendants of Ham through Put. (Gen. 10:6) Also, the Greek Septuagint and the Latin Vulgate read “Libya” or “Libyans” four times where the Hebrew text says “Put.” (Jer. 46:9; Ezek. 27:10; 30:5; 38:5) It is possible, of course, that descendants of both Put and Mizraim settled in the geographical region of northern Africa that came to be called Libya. This would mean that the designation “Libyans” is more comprehensive than the Hebrew term Lu·vimʹ.
Since the Septuagint Version employs “Libyans” instead of “Chub” (Kuv) at Ezekiel 30:5, some scholars link Kuv with Libya and regard the term as a spelling error for Luv.
An ancient Egyptian wall painting depicts a number of light-skinned men believed to be Libyans. The Berbers, a people thought to have descended from the Libyans, are basically “white” and generally have dark hair and eyes. Whether the Libyans were originally a dark-complexioned race cannot now be determined. Intermarriage with fair-skinned peoples could, of course, have altered their features.
Egypt’s King Shishak, regarded as the founder of the “Libyan dynasty,” captured numerous cities when be invaded Judah in the fifth year of King Rehoboam (993/992 B.C.E.). His powerful force of chariots and horsemen included Libyans. Although Jerusalem itself was spared, Shishak stripped the city of its treasures. (1 Ki. 14:25, 26; 2 Chron. 12:2-9) About twenty-six years later (967/966 B.C.E.) the Libyans were again represented among the troops of Zerah the Ethiopian, which penetrated Judah but suffered humiliating defeat. (2 Chron. 14:9-13; 16:8) In the seventh century B.C.E., the assistance of the Libyans and others was seemingly of no avail in saving the Egyptian city of No-amon from calamity at the hands of the Assyrians. (Nah. 3:7-10) The Libyans and Ethiopians were foretold to be at the “steps” of the “king of the north,” implying that these former supporters of Egypt would come under his control.—Dan. 11:43.
In the year 33 C.E., among the Jews and proselytes at Jerusalem for the festival of Pentecost were persons from “the parts of Libya, which is toward Cyrene,” that is, the western part of Libya. Likely some of these were baptized in response to Peter’s discourse and later carried the message of Christianity back to the land of their residence.—Acts 2:10.

