LOINS
[Heb., hhala·tsaʹyim; Gr., o·sphysʹ].
The Bible uses these words similarly to the Hebrew word math·naʹyim, which is also translated “loins” or “hips.” O·sphysʹ applies in the ordinary sense in describing John the Baptist as clothed about the loins with a leather girdle.—Matt. 3:4; see the use of math·naʹyim in this way at 2 Kings 4:29; 9:1, and hhala·tsaʹyim at Isaiah 5:27; 32:11.
The section of the body designated by the word “loins” contains the reproductive organs; therefore offspring are said to ‘come out of the loins.’ (Gen. 35:11; 1 Ki. 8:19; Acts 2:30) Paul uses this fact when showing that Jesus’ priesthood according to the manner of Melchizedek is superior to Aaron’s, in that Levi, Aaron’s forefather, was in the loins of Abraham, and in that sense paid tithes to Melchizedek. (Heb. 7:5-10; Gen. 14:18-20) Paul also argued similarly at Romans 7:9, saying: “I [Paul the Jew, in his forefathers’ loins before the Law was given] was once alive apart from law; but when the commandment arrived, sin came to life again, but I died.”
To “gird up the loins” meant to gather up the ends of the robes into the sash to facilitate physical activity, and came to be used as an expression denoting the gathering of strength or preparing for vigorous mental or spiritual activity.—Luke 12:35; compare 1 Peter 1:13, “Brace up your minds [literally, ‘Gird up the loins of your mind’] for activity.”
At Ephesians 6:14, Christians are told to have their “loins girded about with truth,” that is, strengthened with God’s Word of truth as an essential support, just as a tight girding of the physical loins protects them against damage due to extreme stress.
Jehovah foretold the pain and distress of Jerusalem by the figure “every able-bodied man with his hands upon his loins like a female that is giving birth.”—Jer. 30:6.
The Hebrew word keʹsel, “loins,” appears several times at Leviticus 3:4-15, referring to communion sacrifices. It is also used at Job 15:27 and Psalm 38:7. It is translated “flanks” and “loins” in the Authorized Version.

