LUZ
[almond tree or almond wood].
1. The earlier name of the town of Bethel, evidently given to it by the Canaanite inhabitants. Jacob applied the name “Bethel” (house of God) to the site where he received a dream containing a divine revelation; a place where Abraham had previously camped. (Gen. 28:16-19; 35:6) Originally the site of Bethel was distinct from the town of Luz, being situated to the E of Bethel in the direction of Ai. (Gen. 12:8) It appears that the name “Bethel” eventually superseded that of Luz, at the latest by the time of the Israelite conquest of Canaan. (Judg. 1:22) Due to the rendering of Joshua 16:2 in the Authorized Version and the Revised Standard Version describing Ephraim’s boundary as running “from Beth-el to Luz,” some have assumed that these sites continued to be distinct as separate towns. However, other modern translations here read “Beth-el-luz” (JP), “Bethel-luz” (JB), “Bethel (that is, Luz)” (AT), or “Bethel belonging to Luz” (NW). After chapter one of the book of Judges the name “Luz” is no longer used.
The Hebrew word (luz) corresponding to the name of the town is also used at Genesis 30:37 with reference to the almond-tree staffs used by Jacob.—See BETHEL No. 1.
2. The name of a city built in “the land of the Hittites” by a man of Bethel (Luz) who cooperated with Israelite fighters of the house of Joseph in bringing about the fall of Bethel. Like Rahab and her family, he and his family were allowed to go unharmed. But, different from Rahab and perhaps indicating that the basis for his services rendered was not a genuine fear and appreciation of Jehovah, the God of Israel, the man did not seek to associate himself with Israel, preferring to go to Hittite country and there build his city, which he named Luz, doubtless in memory of his hometown. The Bible does not dignify him by naming him as it does Rahab. (Judg. 1:23-26) Some consider it likely that the name of the city at least is reflected in the ruins of Luweizeh, located about twelve miles (19 kilometers) SE of Sidon.

