NEGLECT
This English word (from Latin, neg, “not,” and legere, “to pick up, gather”) has the meaning of paying no attention to; disregarding; being remiss in care for or treatment of (someone or something); failure to carry out or perform (orders, duties, and so forth). The word can carry the connotation of willfulness or deliberateness in such failure, or merely of oversight through indifference or carelessness.
The Greek word a·me·leʹo (from a, “not” and meʹlo, “to care for”) contains more definitely the idea of unconcern, not caring, and not so much the thought of unintentional oversight or overlooking of something. The writer of the book of Hebrews describes the severe punishment for disobedience to the Mosaic law, and then says: “How shall we escape if we have neglected [Gr., a·me·leʹsan·tes, “having been unconcerned (for)”] a salvation of such greatness in that it began to be spoken through our Lord . . . while God joined in bearing witness?” Here he indicates that it is not the matter of oversight, but lack of concern, ‘drifting away’ (vs. 1), disobedience to the word of God spoken through his only-begotten Son.—Heb. 2:1-4, Kingdom Interlinear Translation.
Matthew used a form of this Greek word in relating Jesus’ illustration of the marriage feast. Those invited by the king to his son’s wedding feast did not come. Why? Not through oversight, but, “unconcerned they went off, one to his own field, another to his commercial business.” For this lack of concern they were counted as unworthy.—Matt. 22:5, 8.
The young man Timothy was given a heavy responsibility as an overseer in Ephesus. Paul admonished him: “Do not be neglecting [or, being careless of] the gift in you that was given you through a prediction and when the body of older men laid their hands upon you.” It took much energetic action on Timothy’s part to avoid being neglectful. He had to be absorbed in his reading, proper teaching, conduct, exhortation and example, showing concern by constant, undeviating attention. Otherwise he could lose out by negligence, by lack of real concern for God’s favor bestowed upon him.—1 Tim. 4:11-16, Kingdom Interlinear Translation.
The writer of the book of Hebrews quotes Jehovah’s words concerning Israel wherein He spoke of the Law covenant, saying, “which covenant of mine they themselves broke, although I myself had husbandly ownership of them.” (Jer. 31:32) In place of “had husbandly ownership of them,” the Septuagint reads: “had no concern for them.” This doubtless explains why the quotation, at Hebrews 8:9, reads: “Because they did not continue in my covenant, so that I stopped caring [“showed no concern”] for them.” (Kingdom Interlinear Translation) Jehovah was certainly not negligent in the sense of carelessness or oversight; rather, he showed great concern for his covenant people until they disregarded his word and rebelled against him. Only then and on that basis was it that he “stopped caring [Gr., e·meʹle·sa] for them.”

