NISAN
(Niʹsan).
The postexilic name of the first Jewish lunar month of the sacred calendar, corresponding to part of March and part of April. (Neh. 2:1; Esther 3:7) This month, first called “Abib,” was originally considered the seventh month and is evidently the month referred to at Genesis 8:4. At the time of the exodus from Egypt, Jehovah assigned this month to be the “first of the months of the year.” (Ex. 12:2; 13:4; Num. 33:3) From then on, the distinction existed of a sacred calendar instituted by Jehovah as compared to the previous secular calendar. The name “Nisan” is believed to mean “start” or “beginning.”—See CALENDAR; ABIB.
The weather was often quite cool during this spring month and, in Jerusalem, fires were lit at night to provide warmth. (John 18:18) Snow has even fallen in Jerusalem as late as April 6, as it did in 1949. Nisan came at the close of the rainy season, and the latter or spring rains were counted on to bring the grain to fullness prior to the harvest. (Deut. 11:14; Hos. 6:3; Jer. 5:24) At this time of the year the Jordan River was normally at flood stage. (Josh. 3:15; 1 Chron. 12:15) The barley harvest began along the coastal plains, and down in the subtropical Jordan Valley the wheat was reaching maturity. (Ruth 1:22; 2:23) Harvested flax on Rahab’s rooftop in Jericho provided a place for the Israelite spies to hide about this time.—Josh. 2:6; 4:19.
ADJUSTING THE LUNAR CALENDAR
God’s command required that the Israelites offer up a sheaf of the firstfruits of their harvest on the sixteenth day of Nisan (or Abib) and that, fifty days later, they offer up a second grain offering. These offerings corresponded naturally with the barley and wheat harvests, respectively. This precept made essential an adjustment in the calendar of lunar months used by the Israelites. There was need to compensate for the difference of 111⁄4 days between the full solar year and the shorter lunar year. Otherwise, within the space of three years, the month of Nisan would arrive some thirty-three days earlier in the season and far ahead of the barley harvest. The Bible record does not specify what method was originally used by the Israelites to accomplish such coordination, but the evidence indicates that a thirteenth month was added every two or three years to restore the seasons to their proper position in the calendar year. It seems likely that this was determined by simple observation, relating the new moon to the vernal or spring equinox of the sun, which comes about March 21 of each year. If the new moon that would ordinarily mark the start of the month of Nisan (Abib) was too distant from the time of the spring equinox, then the month was counted as a thirteenth or intercalary month, and Nisan began with the following new moon. It was not until the fourth century C.E. that a definitely standardized calendar was adopted by the Jews.
The first of Nisan’s festivals was the Passover, originally celebrated in Egypt, and it came on the fourteenth of the month and included the sacrifice of the paschal lamb. (Ex. 12:2-14; Lev. 23:5; Deut. 16:1) The following day was the beginning of the week-long festival of unfermented cakes, running from the fifteenth to the twenty-first of the month. On the sixteenth of Nisan came the offering of the first-fruits of the barley harvest.—Ex. 12:15-20; 23:15; 34:18; Lev. 23:6-11.
LORD’S EVENING MEAL INSTITUTED
In the second year of the exodus, on the first day of Nisan, the tabernacle was set up in the wilderness. (Ex. 40:2, 17) Over fifteen centuries after the exodus, on Nisan 14 of the year 33 C.E., Jesus gathered with his twelve apostles in Jerusalem to celebrate the last valid Passover, and then, having dismissed the traitorous Judas, he proceeded to institute the memorial of his death by means of the Lord’s supper or evening meal. (Matt. 26:17-30; 1 Cor. 11:23-25) Before Nisan 14 passed, he died as the Lamb of God. On Nisan 16, the day the priest at the temple waved the firstfruits of the barley harvest, Jesus, as the first-fruits of the resurrection, was raised up to life again.—Luke 23:54–24:7; 1 Cor. 15:20.
In obedience to Christ’s instructions, “Keep doing this in remembrance of me,” the fourteenth day of Nisan continues to be observed by his followers till this day as the time for memorializing Christ’s death.—Luke 22:19, 20; see LORD’S EVENING MEAL.

