PHILIPPIANS, LETTER TO THE
A book of the Christian Greek Scriptures written by the apostle Paul to the congregation in the city of Philippi in the province of Macedonia, a congregation that Paul had established about 50 C.E., in the course of his second missionary tour.
WHEN AND WHERE WRITTEN
The letter’s internal evidence indicates it was written during Paul’s first imprisonment in Rome. In it he speaks of “all the praetorian guard” as knowing the reason for his being in bonds, and sends greetings from “those of the household of Caesar.” (Phil. 1:13; 4:22) Paul’s first imprisonment in Rome is generally considered to have taken place about 59-61 C.E. Several events occurred between Paul’s arrival in Rome and his decision to write to the Philippians. Epaphroditus had made the trip from Philippi, had worked to assist Paul and had fallen very sick. The Philippians, some 600 miles (1,000 kilometers) distant, had received news of his sickness. Now Epaphroditus had recovered and Paul was sending him back with the letter. So the letter was written about 60 or 61 C.E.
BACKGROUND AND REASONS FOR WRITING
The Philippian congregation had shown great love and regard for Paul. Shortly after his visit to them the congregation had generously sent him material provisions during his three-week stay in nearby Thessalonica. (Phil. 4:15, 16) Later, when the brothers in Jerusalem entered into a period of intense persecution and were in need of material help, the Christians in Philippi, themselves very poor and undergoing a great test of affliction, had nevertheless demonstrated a readiness to contribute even beyond their ability. Paul so much appreciated their fine attitude that he cited them as an example to the other congregations. (2 Cor. 8:1-6) They were also very active and busy in preaching the good news, so apparently had not been so closely in touch with Paul for a time. But now, in his need in prison bonds, they not only sent material gifts so that Paul had an abundance, but also dispatched their personal envoy Epaphroditus, a man valuable to them. This zealous brother courageously gave assistance to Paul, even endangering his own life. Consequently, Paul commends him highly to the congregation.—Phil. 2:25-30; 4:18.
Paul expresses confidence that, in harmony with their prayers, he will be released from this imprisonment and will be able to visit them again. (Phil. 1:19; 2:24) He knows that for him to continue to live is to be useful to them, though he looks longingly forward to the time when Christ will receive him home to himself. (Phil. 1:21-25; compare John 14:3.) In the meantime, he will send Timothy, who, more than anyone else available, will genuinely have their interests at heart.—Phil. 2:19-23.
The letter breathes love. Paul never withheld commendation where due, nor did he shrink back from giving necessary reproof, but in this case encouragement was the thing needed. The congregation had their opponents, “workers of injury,” who wanted to boast in fleshly connections and in circumcision of the flesh, but it appears that the brothers were not seriously affected, or upset. So Paul did not have to present strong argument and reproof as, for example, in his letters to the congregations in Galatia and Corinth. The only hint of correction was his exhortation to unity on the part of Euodia and Syntyche. Throughout the letter he encourages the Philippian congregation to continue in their fine course, seeking greater discernment and getting a sure grip on the word of life and a stronger faith and hope in the prize to come.
There are many fine principles expressed in the letter that provide guidance and encouragement to all Christians. Some of them are:
 Chapter                    Principle and verse
1:9, 10      Make sure of the more important things so             as not to stumble others over any matter
1:15-18      We can rejoice even when the enemies of the truth             speak about it contentiously, for this only serves             to publicize the truth
1:19         Prayer by God’s servants is effectual
1:27, 28     Christians’ unity and courage in the presence of             their opponents is a proof from God that he will             deliver his servants and destroy his enemies
2:5-11       Humility brings exaltation from God
2:27         God can be thanked for his mercy when one of                 his faithful servants recovers from an illness
3:16         To what extent the Christian has made progress, he             should continue walking orderly in this same             routine in order to receive the prize
3:20         Christians should look to the heavens, where their             citizenship exists, not to earthly connections
4:6, 7       Do not be anxious; in every situation submit your             petitions to God, and he will give peace that guards             your heart and mental powers
4:8          Consider at all times the right and praise worthy             things
OUTLINE OF CONTENTS
I. Gratitude to God for the congregation’s love and faithfulness (1:1-11)
A. Confidence that they may continue to completion (1:1-7)
B Prayer they will grow in knowledge and discernment (1:8-11)
II. Results of Paul’s efforts in prison (1:12-20)
A. His making pubic the reason why he is in bonds encourages brothers to speak fearlessly (1:12-14)
B. Christ publicized whether done in sincerity or contentiousness (1:15-20)
III. Paul’s desire in the Philippians’ behalf, and counsel on conduct (1:21–2:18)
A. He may die, but if he stays on he can benefit them (1:21-26)
B. They should stand firm, without fear, be willing to suffer (1:27-30)
C. Love one another, maintaining humility, as Christ did (2:1-11)
D. Maintain blamelessness, be illuminators, keep grip on word of life (2:12-18)
IV. Timothy and Epaphroditus to be sent to Philippi (2:19-30)
A. Timothy will genuinely care for their interests in Christ (2:19-24)
B. Epaphroditus’ faithfulness, his sickness; exhortation to hold him as dear to them (2:25-30)
V. Warning against “those who mutilate the flesh” (3:1-21)
A. Those of the true “circumcision” serve by God’s spirit and do not boast in the flesh (3:1-4a)
B. Righteousness through faith in Christ the important thing (3:4b-11)
1. Paul could boast in being a Hebrew and keeper of law according to Pharisaical concept (3:4b-6)
2. But he counts these fleshly things as refuse, looks to attaining resurrection through Christ (3:7-11)
C. Though not yet having laid hold on prize, Paul forgets all other things to strive for it (3:12-21)
1. He encourages Philippians to imitate his example (3:17)
2. Enemies of torture stake have minds on earthly things, but true Christians’ citizenship is in heavens (3:18-21)
VI. Exhortation to unity, rejoicing, proper thinking and practice (4:1-9)
A. Euodia and Syntyche exhorted to be of same mind in Lord (4:1-3)
B. Rejoice, be reasonable, not anxious, relying on God (4:4-7)
C. Consider things righteous, true, lovable (4:8, 9)
VII. Report on Paul’s affairs in prison (4:10-23)
A. Through strength of God, Paul self-sufficient (4:10-13)
B. Philippians have always shared; now their provisions through Epaphroditus abundant, as an acceptable sacrifice to God (4:14-18)
C.  Assurance of God’s blessing, greetings and prayer for their welfare (4:19-23)

