PHOEBE
(Phoeʹbe) [radiant].
A Christian sister of the first-century Cenchreae congregation. Paul, in his letter to the Christians at Rome, ‘recommends’ this sister to them, and calls on them to render her any needed assistance as one who “proved to be a defender of many, yes, of me myself.” (Rom. 16:1, 2) It may be that Phoebe delivered Paul’s letter in Rome or else accompanied the one who did.
Paul refers to Phoebe as “a minister of the congregation that is in Cenchreae.” This raises the question as to whether his use of the term di·aʹko·nos (“minister”) is in a governmental sense, as at 1 Timothy 3:8 and Philippians 1:1, or is simply in a general sense. Some translators view the term in an official sense and hence render it as “deaconess” (RS, JB). Goodspeed’s translation views it in a general sense and translates it as “helper.”
The basic idea conveyed by di·aʹko·nos, as also by the verb di·a·ko·neʹo, is that of rendering personal service to another, as with one waiting on a table. (John 2:5, 9; Luke 12:37; 17:7, 8; 22:27) Women are described a number of times as ministering to Jesus in this general sense, doubtless preparing and serving food, perhaps caring for clothing and rendering similar personal services. (Matt. 27:55; Mark 15:41; Luke 8:3; John 12:2) In the parable of the sheep and the goats, Matthew uses di·a·ko·neʹo to embrace not only the providing of food and drink but also such activities as providing clothing and visiting one sick or in prison. (Matt. 25:44) It would appear that Phoebe was a “minister” in this basic sense, for there is no indication in the Scriptures that women were appointed to office as were those men designated as di·aʹko·noi. Though the term di·a·koʹnis·sa (“deaconess”) does appear in ecclesiastical writings, these are from the late second or third centuries C.E. at the earliest and evidently represent a later development at a time when the Christian congregation was already well along in the foretold apostasy.
Cenchreae, as a major port for the prominent city of Corinth, would be a location giving many opportunities for displaying hospitality to persons passing through there, including the apostle Paul. (Acts 18:18) Some suggest that it was in this sense that Phoebe served as “a defender of many.” Nevertheless, the term translated “defender” (pro·staʹtis) has the basic sense of “protectress” or “succorer,” so that it implies not mere cordiality but a coming to the aid of others who are in need. It may also be rendered “patroness.” Phoebe’s freedom to travel and to render notable service in the congregation may indicate that she was a widow and possibly a woman of some material wealth. So, she may have been in position to use influence in the community on behalf of Christians who were being wrongly accused, defending them in this way; or she may have provided refuge for them in time of danger, serving as a protectress. The record gives no details.

