PORCUPINE
A large rodent distinguished by its protective spines or quills. There is considerable dispute as to the exact meaning of the Hebrew word qip·podhʹ, variously rendered “bittern” (AV, Da), “hedgehog” (AT, Le) and “porcupine (s)” (AS, NW). (Isa. 14:23; 34:11; Zeph. 2:14) In the light of Hebrew etymology, G. R. Driver (Palestine Exploration Quarterly, May-October 1955, p. 137) rejects the rendering “bittern” and suggests that the Hebrew qip·podhʹ may apply both to the porcupine and to a bird. But he recommends “ruffed bustard” as a likely translation for qip·podhʹ in the above texts. Koehler (Lexicon in Veteris Testamenti Libros, p. 845) prefers “hedgehog” at Isaiah 14:23; 34:11, but “short-eared owl” at Zephaniah 2:14. That one Hebrew word may apply to two entirely different animals is illustrated by the term tin·sheʹmeth, which denotes both a flying creature, the “swan,” and a swarming creature, the “chameleon.”—Lev. 11:18, 30.
Despite the uncertainty, however, there is good basis for consistently translating qip·podhʹ as either “porcupine” or “hedgehog,” rather than “bittern.” Both older and modern lexicons generally list “hedgehog” or “porcupine” as defining qip·podhʹ in all cases. These renderings have the support of the Septuagint and the Vulgate, as well as of Hebrew etymology and related languages such as Aramaic, Arabic and Ethiopian. The fact that both the porcupine and the hedgehog roll themselves up when in danger harmonizes with the root word (meaning “to gather together or roll up”) from which qip·podhʹ is believed to be derived.
On the basis of inferences drawn from Isaiah 14:23 and Zephaniah 2:14 regarding the desolation of Babylon and Nineveh, some raise the objection that the porcupine (or the hedgehog) could not be the animal intended, since this creature does not frequent reedy pools of water, nor can it sing or climb to the top of columns. However, according to Isaiah 14:23, not the reedy pools, but Babylon was to become the possession of porcupines. Interestingly, one explorer of Babylon’s ruins reported finding “quantities of porcupine quills.” Similarly, the reference to a voice “singing in the window” at desolated Nineveh can apply to any bird that might perch in a deserted window or even to the sound of the wind and need not apply to the porcupine. (Zeph. 2:14) As to the porcupine’s ‘spending the night among the pillar capitals [the top portion of the pillars],’ it must be remembered that the picture drawn is of a city in ruins. Hence, it is certainly possible that the pillars are here considered as fallen to the ground.

