PUBLIC INSTRUCTOR
[Gr., gram·ma·teusʹ, a man of letters, a teacher of the law].
The apostle Matthew uses this term twice with reference to Christians. At Matthew 13:52 it is translated “scribe” in the Authorized Version, “scholar” in Knox, “teacher” in The New English Bible. At Matthew 23:34 the plural (gram·ma·teisʹ) is rendered “men of learning” (Kx), “instructors” (ED), “teachers” (NE).
Under the Law, the Levites were charged with seeing that the people received public instruction. (Lev. 10:11; Deut. 17:10, 11; 2 Chron. 17:7-9) While this duty fell to them as the priestly tribe, Moses the Levite, in his capacity of mediator of the Law covenant, and, later, Joshua of the tribe of Ephraim, as leader of the nation, were also, in effect, public instructors of God’s people. (Deut. 4:1; 34:9; Josh. 8:35) Likewise, the judges and the faithful kings gave instructions in the Law when they heard and judged cases and when they presided on occasions having to do with worship.—1 Ki. 8:1-61; 2 Ki. 23:2.
An outstanding example of a public instructor is the priest Ezra, who, with Nehemiah’s support, conducted a program of public instruction for the Israelites repatriated from Babylon. He read the Law and organized the Levites for the performance of their duties of “explaining the law to the people,” “putting of meaning into it” and “giving understanding in the reading,” thereby “instructing the people.”—Neh. 8:1-9.
When Jesus was on earth, the scribes (gram·ma·teisʹ) were men versed in the Law and teachers of the people, but they had become corrupted by traditions of men and pagan doctrines. The term “scribes” was used toward them more as a title, designating them as a class, rather than having to do with their original copyist duties.
Jesus came to bear witness to the truth. To get the good news of the Kingdom preached, he taught his disciples to be teachers, public instructors respecting the kingdom of God. He magnified their office and the importance of listening to their teaching when he likened each of them to a man having a veritable treasure store from which to draw. (Matt. 13:52) These he sent forth to Israel, but Israel’s own scribes did not discern the treasures that God, through these men, was holding out to them. To the contrary, they opposed the public instruction and took part in scourging, persecuting and killing Jesus and his associate public instructors, thereby proving themselves to be false instructors. Nevertheless, many persons of Israel and of the nations were taught by Jesus’ instructed ones and, in turn, they themselves became public instructors in God’s Word.—Matt. 23:34; 28:19, 20.

