RACHEL
(Raʹchel) [ewe].
Daughter of Laban, younger sister of Leah, and Jacob’s first cousin and preferred wife. (Gen. 29:10, 16, 30) Jacob fled from his murderous brother Esau in 1781 B.C.E., traveling to Haran in Paddan-aram, in the “land of the Orientals.” (Gen. 28:5; 29:1) Rachel, a girl “beautiful in form and beautiful of countenance,” served as a shepherdess for her father and she met Jacob at a well near Haran. Jacob was received into his uncle’s household and one month later agreed to serve Laban seven years in order to marry Rachel, with whom he was now in love. His love did not weaken during the seven years and so these “proved to be like some few days” to him. On the wedding night, however, his uncle substituted the older daughter Leah, who evidently cooperated in carrying out the deceit. Accused of trickery by Jacob on the following morning, Laban appealed to local custom as an excuse for his conduct. Jacob agreed to carry out a full marriage week with Leah before receiving Rachel and thereafter to work another seven years for Laban.—Gen. 29:4-28.
Rachel did not disappoint Jacob as his wife, and Jacob showed her more love than Leah. Jehovah now favored Leah in her disadvantaged position, blessing her with four sons, while Rachel remained barren. (Gen. 29:29-35) Rachel displayed jealousy of her sister as well as despair over her own infertility, a condition then viewed as a great reproach among women. Her fretful impatience angered even her loving husband. To compensate for her own barrenness she gave Jacob her maidservant for procreation purposes (as Sarah had done earlier with her slave Hagar) and the two children born as a result were considered Rachel’s. Leah’s maid and Leah herself produced a total of four more sons before Rachel’s hope was finally realized and she brought forth her own first son, Joseph.—Gen. 30:1-24.
Jacob was now ready to depart from Haran, but his father-in-law prevailed upon him to remain longer, and it was six years later that, at God’s direction, Jacob pulled away. Due to Laban’s double-dealing methods, Jacob did not advise him of his departure, and both Leah and Rachel were in agreement with their husband in this. Before leaving, Rachel stole her father’s “teraphim,” evidently some type of idol images. When Laban later caught up with the group and made known the theft (apparently his major concern), Jacob, unaware of Rachel’s guilt, showed his disapproval of the act itself, decreeing death for the offender if found among his entourage. Laban’s search led into Rachel’s tent, but she avoided exposure, claiming to be indisposed due to her menstrual period, while remaining seated on the saddlebags containing the teraphim.—Gen. 30:25-30; 31:4-35, 38.
At his meeting with his brother Esau, Jacob showed his continued preference for Rachel by putting her and her only son last in the order of travel, doubtless viewing this as the safest position in the event of attack by Esau. (Gen. 33:1-3, 7) After dwelling for a time in Succoth, then in Shechem and finally in Bethel, Jacob headed farther S. Somewhere between Bethel and Bethlehem, Rachel gave birth to her second child, Benjamin, but died in childbearing and was buried there, Jacob erecting a pillar to mark the grave.—Gen. 33:17, 18; 35:1, 16-20.
The few details recorded can give only an incomplete picture of Rachel’s personality. She was a worshiper of Jehovah (Gen. 30:22-24), but showed human failings, her theft of the teraphim and her shrewdness in avoiding detection perhaps being at least partly attributable to her family background. Whatever her weaknesses, she was dearly loved by Jacob, who, even in old age, viewed her as having been his true wife and prized her children over all his others. (Gen. 44:20, 27-29) His words to Joseph shortly before dying, though simple, nevertheless convey the depth of Jacob’s affection for her. (Gen. 48:1-7) She and Leah are spoken of as having “built the house of Israel [Jacob].”—Ruth 4:11.
Archaeological discoveries may shed some light on Rachel’s appropriation of her father’s “teraphim.” Cuneiform tablets found at Nuzi in N Mesopotamia, and believed to date from about the middle of the second millennium B.C.E., reveal that some ancient peoples viewed the possession of household gods as representing legal title to inheritance of family property. Some suggest that Rachel may have felt that Jacob had the right to a share in the inheritance in Laban’s property as an adopted son and that she may have taken the teraphim to ensure this or even to gain advantage over Laban’s sons. Or she may have viewed the possession of these as a means of blocking any legal attempt by her father to claim some of the wealth Jacob had gained while in his service. (Compare Genesis 30:43; 31:1, 2, 14-16.) These possibilities, of course, depend upon such custom being true of Laban’s people and upon the “teraphim” actually being such household gods.
Rachel’s grave site “in the territory of Benjamin at Zelzah” was still known in Samuel’s time, some six centuries later. (1 Sam. 10:2) The traditional location of the grave lies about a mile (1.6 kilometers) N of Bethlehem. This, however, would place it in the territory of Judah, not Benjamin. Therefore others suggest a location farther N, but any attempt at precision is useless today.
“WEEPING OVER HER SONS”
At Jeremiah 31:15 Rachel is depicted as weeping over her sons who have been carried into the land of the enemy, her lamentation being heard in Ramah (N of Jerusalem in the territory of Benjamin). Since Ephraim, whose tribal descendants are often used collectively to stand for the northern kingdom of Israel, is mentioned several times in the context (vss. 6, 9, 18, 20), some scholars believe this prophecy relates to the exiling of the people of the northern kingdom by the Assyrians. (2 Ki. 17:1-6; 18:9-11) On the other hand, it might relate to the eventual exiling of both those of Israel and of Judah (the latter by Babylon). In the first case, the figure of Rachel would be very appropriate since she was the maternal ancestor of Ephraim (through Joseph), the most prominent tribe of the northern kingdom. In the second case, Rachel’s being the mother not only of Joseph but also of Benjamin, whose tribe formed part of the southern kingdom of Judah, would make her a fitting symbol of the mothers of all Israel, their bringing forth sons now seeming to have been in vain. Jehovah’s comforting promise, however, was that the exiles would “certainly return from the land of the enemy.”—Jer. 31:16.
This text was quoted by Matthew in connection with the slaughter of infants in Bethlehem at Herod’s order. (Matt. 2:16-18) Since Rachel’s grave was at least relatively near Bethlehem (though apparently not at the traditional site), this figure of Rachel weeping was appropriate to express the grief of the mothers of the slain children. But even more so was this quotation of Jeremiah’s prophecy appropriate in view of the similarity of the situation. The Israelites were subject to a greater Babylon, in whom is found the blood of all those who have been slaughtered on the earth. (Rev. 17:5, 6; 18:24), and the killing of the children was by a representative of a foreign power that dominated the Israelites. The “land of the enemy” into which the children had gone was obviously not a political region as in the earlier case. It therefore appears to refer to the grave, the region ruled over by ‘King Death’ (compare Psalm 49:14; Revelation 6:8), death being called “the last enemy” to be destroyed. (Rom. 5:14, 21; 1 Cor. 15:26) Any return from such “exile” would, of course, mean a resurrection from the dead.

