RAMOTH-GILEAD
(Raʹmoth-gilʹead) [height of Gilead (witness heap)].
A strategic city in the territory of Gad E of the Jordan. The city was also called by the shortened form Ramah. (2 Ki. 8:28, 29; 2 Chron. 22:5, 6) It was one of the Levite cities on that side of the river (1 Chron. 6:80), and it was selected as one of the cities of refuge. (Deut. 4:43; Josh. 20:8; 21:38) Solomon appointed a deputy in Ramoth-gilead to care for providing food for the king from cities in Gilead and Bashan.—1 Ki. 4:7, 13.
When, after the division of the kingdom, Syria made attacks on Israel, Ramoth-gilead played an important part in Israelite history, evidently being sort of a key to the territory E of the Jordan. At some point the Syrians took the city. Despite the promise of Ben-hadad II to return the Israelite cities that had been taken earlier, apparently Ramoth-gilead was not returned. (1 Ki. 20:34) Hence, Ahab of Israel attempted to recover it, with the aid of King Jehoshaphat of Judah. This effort, which Micaiah counseled against, resulted in Ahab’s death.—1 Ki. 22:13-38.
Ahab’s son Jehoram, along with Ahaziah of Judah, also fought the Syrians at Ramoth-gilead. Second Kings 9:14 says: “Jehoram himself had happened to be keeping guard at Ramoth-gilead . . . because of Hazael the king of Syria.” So it may be that Jehoram had earlier taken the city, and was defending it (not attacking it) when Ahaziah joined him in the fight against Hazael. In the fighting Jehoram was wounded and he retired to Jezreel to recover. At Ramoth-gilead Elisha’s attendant anointed Jehu the military chief to be the next king.—2 Ki. 8:25–9:14; 2 Chron. 22:5-8.
The exact location of Ramoth-gilead is uncertain. One of many suggested locations is Tell er-Ramith, about thirty miles (48 kilometers) SE of the southern tip of the Sea of Galilee. The name of this tell could have been derived from the name Ramoth-gilead. It is on a hill overlooking a plain, which agrees with the meaning of Ramoth (“height”). The location would have been appropriate for a deputy responsible for Gilead and Bashan.—1 Ki. 4:13.

