RIVER
Among the main rivers mentioned in the Bible are the Hiddekel (Tigris), Euphrates, Jordan, Abanah and Pharpar. (Gen. 2:14; 2 Ki. 5:10, 12) The Nile, though not designated by that name, is referred to as yeʼohrʹ (sometimes yeʼorʹ), which is understood to mean a stream or canal (Isa. 33:21) or a water-filled shaft or gallery. (Job 28:10) The context makes it apparent when the terms yeʼohrʹ or yeʼorʹ designate the Nile; therefore, the name Nile appears in Bible translations.—Gen. 41:17, 18.
The Euphrates is often simply called “the River.” (Josh. 24:2, 3; Ezra 8:36; Isa. 7:20; 27:12; Mic. 7:12) Being the longest and most important river of SW Asia, the Euphrates was the “great river” (Gen. 15:18) to the Hebrews. Therefore, its being referred to as “the River” resulted in no ambiguity. King David, with the help of Jehovah, was able to extend the boundaries of the Promised Land as far as the Euphrates. (1 Chron. 18:3-8) Concerning his son Solomon, it was stated: “He will have subjects from sea to sea and from the River [Euphrates] to the ends of the earth.” (Ps. 72:8) In Zechariah’s prophecy these words are repeated and point forward to the earth-wide rulership of the Messiah.—Zech. 9:9, 10; compare Daniel 2:44; Matthew 21:4, 5.
The first river mentioned in the Bible is the one that apparently had its source in Eden and watered the garden that Jehovah provided as a home for Adam and Eve. This river broke up into four headwaters, which, in turn, resulted in rivers, the Pishon, the Gihon, the Hiddekel and the Euphrates. The regions (Havilah, Cush and Assyria) referred to in connection with these four rivers existed in the post-Flood period. (Gen. 2:10-14) So it appears that the writer of the account, Moses, used terms familiar in his day to indicate the location of Eden’s garden. For this reason it cannot be established with certainty whether what is said about the courses of the Pishon, Gihon and Hiddekel applies to the post-Flood period or to the pre-Flood period. If the description relates to the time before the Flood, the Flood itself may well have contributed to changing the courses of these rivers. If to the post-Flood period, other natural phenomena, such as earthquakes, may since have altered their courses, hindering the identification of some.
The “river of Egypt” (Gen. 15:18) may be the same as the “torrent valley of Egypt.”—Num. 34:5; see SHIHOR.
FIGURATIVE USE
Rivers served as a barrier to the progress of enemy forces and played a vital role in the defense of certain cities, such as Babylon. Jerusalem, however, had no river as a natural means of defense. Nevertheless. Jehovah God was as the source of a mighty river of protection to that city. Enemies that might come against Jerusalem like a hostile galley fleet would experience disaster.—Isa. 33:21, 22; see GALLEY.
Water is necessary for life, and Jehovah is referred to as the Source of living water. (Jer. 2:13) But apostate Israelites turned their attention to Egypt and to Assyria. That is why Jehovah, through his prophet Jeremiah, said: “What concern should you have for the way of Egypt in order to drink the waters of Shihor? And what concern should you have for the way of Assyria in order to drink the waters of the River? . . . Know, then, and see that your leaving Jehovah your God is something bad and bitter.” (Jer. 2:18, 19) Evidently the waters from human sources that are looked to as being vital to one’s existence are also referred to at Revelation 8:10 and 16:4.
The disastrous flooding of a river is used to represent the invasion of enemy forces.—Isa. 8:7.
Regarding the “river of water of life” (Rev. 22:1), see LIFE (River of Water of Life).

