SILVAS, SILVANUS
(Siʹlas, Sil·vaʹnus).
A leading member of the first-century Christian congregation in Jerusalem, a prophet and a companion of Paul on his second missionary journey. He was apparently a Roman citizen. (Acts 15:22, 26, 27, 32, 40; 16:19, 25, 37, 38) Likely the name “Silvanus,” found in the letters of Paul and Peter, was the Latinized form of the Greek name “Silas,” used by Luke in Acts.
The congregation at Jerusalem chose Silas to accompany Barnabas and Paul back to Antioch, Syria, to carry to the congregation there the decision regarding circumcision.—Acts 15:22, 30-32.
Whether Silas remained in the vicinity of Antioch or returned to Jerusalem is uncertain. (Some manuscripts contain Acts 15:34, reading: “But it seemed good to Silas to remain there further.” But the most prominent manuscripts omit this verse.) (Acts 15:33, ftn., NW, 1950 ed.) At any rate Silas was in Antioch at the start of Paul’s second missionary tour. Beginning there, he and Paul traveled up into Syria, then Cilicia and other regions of Asia Minor, Timothy joining them at Lystra and Luke at Troas.
Being invited into Macedonia in a dream given to Paul, they first stayed in Philippi. In the marketplace there, Silas and Paul were beaten with rods by order of the civil magistrates and were put in prison stocks, but as they prayed and sang songs during the night, they were released from bonds by an earthquake and the prison doors were opened. The jailer was much frightened and, listening to Paul and Silas, became a Christian, caring for their injuries suffered from the beating.—Acts 15:41–16:40.
Their ministry found success in Thessalonica and Beroea, where Silas and Timothy remained behind temporarily while Paul went on to Athens and Corinth. (Acts 17:1, 10, 14-16; 18:1) When Silas and Timothy finally caught up with Paul in Corinth, they continued to assist Paul. While there they joined with Paul in writing the two letters to Thessalonica. (1 Thess. 1:1; 2 Thess. 1:1) Silas is not mentioned again in the historical narrative of Paul’s travels.
Some years later, around 62-64 C.E., Peter wrote his first letter from Babylon “through Silvanus,” evidently meaning that Silvanus acted as Peter’s secretary. He was there described as “a faithful brother,” and was likely the Silvanus earlier associated with Paul.—1 Pet. 5:12.

