SUNDIAL
An instrument for indicating the time of the day by means of the sun’s rays striking an object and casting a shadow on a graduated surface or dial, the shadow gradually becoming longer or shorter according to the sun’s distance from its zenith. The object used to produce the shadow was usually a style or gnomon, that is, a thin triangular plate of metal placed over the face of the dial, although a string or other object might also be used. The dial face could be a plane surface, a concave one, or even a cylinder.
The use of sundials extends back beyond the eighth century B.C.E. in both Babylon and Egypt. The Greeks and Romans developed advanced types of sundials, and even portable sundials became quite common.
In the Scriptures there is no direct reference to sundials. The Hebrew word ma·ʽalahʹ, translated “dial” at 2 Kings 20:11 and Isaiah 38:8, in the Authorized Version, literally means “steps” (NW) or “degrees,” as is indicated in the Authorized Version marginal readings on these verses. This word is also used in the superscriptions of the fifteen ‘Songs of the Ascents,’ Psalms 120-134.
In the scriptures mentioned, at 2 Kings 20:8-11 and Isaiah 38:4-8, the account is related of the portent God gave sick King Hezekiah in answer to Isaiah’s prayer. It consisted of causing a shadow that had gradually fallen to reverse its direction and go back up ten steps. This could refer to the steps or degrees of a dial for measuring time, and it is not impossible that Hezekiah’s father possessed such a sundial, even obtaining it from Babylon. However, the Jewish historian Josephus in discussing the account speaks of these steps of Ahaz as being “in his house,” apparently indicating that they formed part of a stairway. There may have been a column placed alongside the stairs to receive the sun’s rays and cause a shadow to extend gradually along the steps and serve as a measurement of time.
The miracle performed evidently involved the relationship between earth and sun, and, if so, it was therefore similar to the miracle recorded at Joshua 10:12-14. It appears that this portent had far-reaching effects, inasmuch as 2 Chronicles 32:24, 31 shows that messengers were sent from Babylon to Jerusalem to inquire about it.

