THESSALONIANS, LETTERS TO THE
Two inspired letters of the Christian Greek Scriptures, the first to be composed by the apostle Paul, who identifies himself as the source of both. (1 Thess. 1:1; 2:18; 2 Thess. 1:1; 3:17) At the time these letters were committed to writing Silvanus (Silas) and Timothy were with Paul. (1 Thess. 1:1; 2 Thess. 1:1) This points to Corinth as the place from which the letters were sent, as there is no record that all three men labored together again after their stay at Corinth in the course of Paul’s second missionary journey. (Acts 18:5) Since the apostle’s eighteen-month activity in Corinth appears to have begun in the fall of 50 C.E., likely it was at about this time that the first letter was written to the Thessalonians. (Acts 18:11; see CHRONOLOGY, page 348.) The second letter must have followed not long thereafter, probably about 51 C.E.
In all outstanding catalogs of the second, third and fourth centuries C.E. both letters are listed as canonical. They also harmonize fully with the rest of the Scriptures in admonishing God’s servants to maintain fine conduct at all times. Noteworthy, too, is the emphasis placed on prayer in these letters. Paul, along with his fellow workers, always remembered the Thessalonians in prayer (1 Thess. 1:2; 2:13; 2 Thess. 1:3, 11; 2:13), and the apostle encouraged them: “Pray incessantly. In connection with everything give thanks.” (1 Thess. 5:17, 18) “Brothers, continue in prayer for us.”—1 Thess. 5:25; 2 Thess. 3:1.
BACKGROUND FOR FIRST THESSALONIANS
Practically from the beginning the congregation to which First Thessalonians was addressed experienced persecution. After arriving at Thessalonica, Paul preached in the synagogue there for three sabbaths. A considerable number of persons became believers, and a congregation was established. Fanatical Jews, however, stirred up mob violence. Not finding Paul and Silas at the home of Jason, the mob dragged Jason and certain other brothers before the city rulers, accusing them of sedition. Only upon giving “sufficient security” were Jason and the others released. This prompted the brothers to send Paul and Silas to Beroea by night, evidently for the sake of the congregation and the safety of the two men.—Acts 17:1-10.
Thereafter, besides continued persecution (1 Thess. 2:14), the congregation seemingly experienced great sorrow over losing one(s) of their number in death. (1 Thess. 4:13) Aware of the pressure that was being brought to bear against the new congregation and very much concerned about its effect, Paul dispatched Timothy to comfort and strengthen the Thessalonians. Earlier the apostle had tried to visit them twice, but ‘Satan cut across his path.’—1 Thess. 2:17–3:3.
Receiving Timothy’s encouraging report about the faithfulness and love of the Thessalonians, Paul rejoiced. (1 Thess. 3:6-10) However, they needed further encouragement and admonition to resist weaknesses of the flesh. For this reason Paul, besides commending the Thessalonians for their faithful endurance (1 Thess. 1:2-10; 2:14; 3:6-10) and comforting them with the resurrection hope (1 Thess. 4:13-18), exhorted them to continue following a course approved by God and to do so more fully. (1 Thess. 4:1, 2) The apostle, among other things, counseled them to abstain from fornication (1 Thess. 4:3-8), to love one another in fuller measure, to work with their hands (1 Thess. 4:9-12), to stay awake spiritually (1 Thess. 5:6-10), to have regard for those working hard among them, to “admonish the disorderly, speak consolingly to the depressed souls, support the weak, be long-suffering toward all” and to “abstain from every form of wickedness.”—1 Thess. 5:11-22.
OUTLINE OF CONTENTS
I. Salutation and pronouncement of blessing (1:1)
II. Activity of Paul and fellow workers in Thessalonica and its result reviewed (1:2–3:13)
A. Thessalonian Christians became an example to believers in Macedonia and Achaia, and their faith became well known to others, giving Paul and associates reason to thank God (1:2-10)
B. Paul and fellow workers preached “good news” with great deal of struggling, did not make selves burden to Thessalonians, became gentle in their midst, exhorted them like a father (2:1-12)
C. Acceptance of “word of God” and endurance of suffering by Thessalonians reason Paul and associates thanked God (2:13-16)
D. When separated from them, Paul longed to see them; twice efforts to visit them failed, but then sent Timothy (2:17–3:5)
E. Paul’s rejoicing over good news that Thessalonians continued to be faithful and his prayer that they might abound in love (3:6-13)
III. Exhortations for Thessalonians to conduct themselves aright; also comments about resurrection and coming of Jehovah’s day (4:1–5:22)
A. Abstain from fornication (4:1-8)
B. Love one another in fuller measure and work with hands (4:9-12)
C. As dead will rise, no need to sorrow as those having no hope (4:13-18)
D. Jehovah’s day to come like thief in night, calling for spiritual wakefulness (5:1-11)
E. Show regard for those presiding, be peaceable, admonish disorderly, pursue good toward one another and all others, rejoice, pray incessantly, make sure of all things, abstain from wickedness (5:12-22)
IV. Concluding pronouncement of blessing and request that brothers pray for Paul and fellow workers and that letter be read to all (5:23-28)
BACKGROUND FOR SECOND THESSALONIANS
The faith of the Christians at Thessalonica was growing exceedingly, their love for one another was increasing and they were continuing to endure persecution and tribulation faithfully. Therefore, the apostle Paul, as in his first letter, commended them and encouraged them to continue standing firm.—2 Thess. 1:3-12; 2:13-17.
Some in the congregation, however, were wrongly contending that the presence of Jesus Christ was imminent. Possibly even a letter wrongly attributed to Paul was interpreted as indicating that “the day of Jehovah is here.” (2 Thess. 2:1, 2) This may have been why the apostle made a point of the genuineness of his second letter, saying: “Here is my greeting, Paul’s, in my own hand, which is a sign in every letter; this is the way I write.” (2 Thess. 3:17) Not wanting the brothers to be seduced into accepting erroneous teaching, Paul showed that other events had to precede the coming of Jehovah’s day. He wrote: “It will not come unless the apostasy comes first and the man of lawlessness gets revealed.”—2 Thess. 2:3.
A problem that had already existed earlier in the congregation still needed attention. In his first letter to the Thessalonians Paul had told them: “We exhort you, brothers, . . . to make it your aim to live quietly and to mind your own business and work with your hands, just as we ordered you; so that you may be walking decently as regards people outside and not be needing anything.” (1 Thess. 4:10-12) There were those in the congregation who had not taken this admonition to heart. Hence Paul ordered such persons to work with quietness and eat food they had themselves earned, adding: “But if anyone is not obedient to our word through this letter, keep this one marked, stop associating with him, that he may become ashamed. And yet do not be considering him as an enemy, but continue admonishing him as a brother.”—2 Thess. 3:10-15.
OUTLINE OF CONTENTS
I. Salutation and pronouncement of blessing (1:1, 2)
II. Expression of gratitude for faithfulness of Thessalonian Christians and assurance that God will bring vengeance upon those making tribulation for them (1:3-10)
III. Prayer that Thessalonians might be counted worthy of God’s calling (1:11, 12)
IV. Apostasy and revealing of man of lawlessness precedes coming of Jehovah’s day (2:1-12)
A. Thessalonians should not get excited about messages to the effect that Jehovah’s day is here (2:1, 2)
B. Man of lawlessness described (2:3-12)
V. Admonition on proper conduct (2:13–3:15)
A. Stand firm in things taught (2:13-17)
B. Paul’s request to pray for him and fellow workers and his confidence that Thessalonians will do things ordered (3:1-5)
C. Work, not meddling in other people’s affairs (3:6-12)
D. Direction on handling cases of those not complying with apostle’s admonition (3:13-15)
VI. Concluding pronouncement of blessing; Paul’s greeting (3:16-18)
See the book “All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial,” pp. 227-231.

