TITUS, LETTER TO
The apostle Paul identifies himself as the writer of this letter to Titus, a fellow worker of his whom he had left behind in Crete to ‘correct the things that were defective and to make appointments of older men’ in the various congregations there. (Titus 1:1, 4, 5) The letter’s authenticity is attested by all outstanding ancient catalogs of the Christian Greek Scriptures, starting with the Muratorian Fragment of the second century C.E.
TIME AND PLACE OF WRITING
As no record exists that Paul engaged in Christian activity on the island of Crete before his first imprisonment at Rome, he must have been there with Titus sometime between his release and final imprisonment. Thus the time for the letter’s composition would be between about 61 and 64 C.E. Macedonia may have been the place from which the letter was sent; it was apparently there in the same general period that Paul wrote First Timothy (1:3).
THE LETTER’S PURPOSE
The letter evidently was to serve as a guide for Titus and gave him apostolic backing for the performance of his duties in connection with the Cretan congregations. His assignment was not an easy one, for he had to contend with rebellious persons. As Paul wrote: “There are many unruly men, profitless talkers, and deceivers of the mind, especially those men who adhere to the circumcision. It is necessary to shut the mouths of these, as these very men keep on subverting entire households by teaching things they ought not for the sake of dishonest gain.” (Titus 1:10, 11) Also, lying, gluttony and laziness were common among the Cretans, and apparently some of the Christians reflected these bad traits. For this reason Titus had to reprove them with severity and show what was required of Christians, whether young or old, male or female, slave or free. Personally he had to be an example in fine works and show uncorruptness in teaching.—Titus 1:12–3:2.
OUTLINE OF CONTENTS
I. Salutation and pronouncement of blessing (1:1-4)
II. Instructions regarding the appointment of older men and correcting matters in Cretan congregations (1:5–3:11)
A. Qualifications for those appointed as older men (1:5-9)
B. Severe reproof to be given those not conducting themselves properly (1:10-16)
C. Titus’ responsibility to provide healthful teaching concerning conduct befitting aged men, aged women, younger men and slaves, and about subjection to governmental authority (2:1–3:2)
D. Having received declaration of righteousness, all should be instructed to keep minds on maintaining fine works (3:3-8)
E. Foolish questionings to be shunned and one promoting a sect to be rejected after first and second admonition (3:9-11)
III. Personal instructions for Titus, greetings and concluding pronouncement of blessing (3:12-15)
See the book “All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial,” pp. 237-239.

