Family Planning​—The Christian Viewpoint
AT THE first World Population Conference, in 1974, the 140 nations who met resolved that all couples “have the basic right to decide freely and responsibly the number and spacing of their children and to have the information, education, and means to do so.”
Many consider that resolve to be a good one. True, God told Adam and Eve, and later Noah’s family, to “be fruitful and become many and fill the earth,” but no such command was given to Christians. (Genesis 1:28; 9:1) The Scriptures neither encourage Christian couples to have children nor tell them to refrain. Married couples may decide for themselves whether to have children or not and, if they do plan for children, how many they will have and when they will have them.
A God-Given Responsibility
Did you notice, though, that the World Population Conference statement said that couples should decide “responsibly the number and spacing of their children”? This principle of responsibility is also in harmony with the Bible. Christian parents recognize that while children are a precious gift from God, along with the gift comes considerable responsibility.
First of all, there is the responsibility to care for children materially. The Bible says: “Certainly if anyone does not provide for those who are his own, and especially for those who are members of his household, he has disowned the faith and is worse than a person without faith.”​—1 Timothy 5:8.
Providing for one’s family involves more than just putting food on the table and paying the bills, though this is often a big job in itself. Responsible Christian couples, in planning the size of their families, take into consideration the mother’s physical well-being as well as her emotional, mental, and spiritual welfare. Taking care of a child occupies a lot of time, and when baby follows baby after baby, mothers often sacrifice not only their rest, recreation, personal development, and involvement in Christian activities but also their physical and spiritual health.
Responsible Christian parents also consider the needs of their children. The State of the World’s Population 1991 says: “Children born into large, closely-spaced families have to compete with brothers and sisters for food, clothing and parental affection. They are also more susceptible to infections. If these children survive their vulnerable childhood years, their growth is more likely to be stunted and their intellectual development impaired. The prospects of these children in adult life are greatly diminished.” This, of course, is not the case in all large families, but it is something that Christian couples should consider when planning the number of children they will have.
Christian parents have an obligation to care for their children spiritually, as the Bible commands: “You, fathers, do not be irritating your children, but go on bringing them up in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.”​—Ephesians 6:4.
Emeka, a Christian who teaches law in Nigeria, has been married one year and is in no hurry to father a large family. “My wife and I have discussed how many children we will have. We considered having five but decided on three. Later we concluded that two would be better. It is hard to bring up children according to Bible principles. It is a big responsibility.”
Some Christian couples have decided to have no children in order to devote all their time to serving God. Stated a missionary in Africa who agreed with her husband to remain childless: “I don’t feel that I’ve missed out by not bearing children. Although my husband and I haven’t experienced the joys of parenthood, our lives have been full of other joys. By being involved in helping others learn Bible truth, we have spiritual children in many parts of the world. We love them, and they love us. There is a special bond between us. With good reason, the apostle Paul likened himself to a nursing mother because of his tender affection for those whom he helped spiritually.”​—1 Thessalonians 2:7, 8.
Birth Control
Does the Bible condemn birth control? No, it does not. The choice is left with the couple. If a married couple decides to practice birth control, their choice of contraceptives is a personal matter. However, the method of birth control a Christian couple chooses should be governed by a respect for the sanctity of life. Since the Bible indicates that a person’s life begins at conception, Christians would avoid contraceptive methods that abort, or end the life of, the developing child.​—Psalm 139:16; compare Exodus 21:22, 23; Jeremiah 1:5.
So couples may properly make different choices when it comes to family planning. Some may desire to limit the number of children they will have. Others, using some method of contraception, may decide not to have any children at all. Many birth-control methods are available, each with its advantages and disadvantages. In deciding which method is best for them, couples should remember that some methods are far more efficient than others. They should also inquire about possible side effects. Doctors and family-planning clinics are equipped to offer advice about birth-control methods and to help couples choose the one that best meets their needs.
The decision a couple makes to have many, few, or no children is a personal one. It is also an important decision with far-reaching consequences. Married couples would be wise to weigh the matter carefully and prayerfully.
[Box on page 8, 9]
Popular Birth-Control Methods
Sterilization
In men: A simple surgical procedure whereby a small incision is made in the scrotum and the tubes that carry sperm are cut.
In women: A surgical procedure in which the Fallopian tubes are tied or cut in order to prevent the egg from passing into the uterus.
Advantages: Of all birth-control methods, sterilization is the most effective.
Disadvantages: Can be permanent. In both men and women, operations have restored fertility, but this cannot be guaranteed.a
Birth-Control Pills
These include the progestin-only minipill. They work to interfere with a woman’s normal hormone levels in order to prevent the egg from maturing and being released.b
Advantages: Highly effective in preventing pregnancy.
Disadvantages: Some physical side effects, but these are less for healthy nonsmokers under the age of 40.
Diaphragm and Spermicide
The diaphragm is a dome-shaped rubber cup stretched over a flexible rim. After spreading the sperm-killing jelly or cream (the spermicide) in the cup, the cup is inserted into the vagina to fit around the cervix.
Advantages: A safe, quite reliable form of birth control when used properly.
Disadvantages: Must be used every time a couple has intercourse. Skill is required to insert the device properly, and it should be inserted prior to intercourse and left in six to eight hours afterward.
Cervical Cap
A plastic or rubber cuplike device that is smaller than the diaphragm. Like the diaphragm, it is inserted over the cervix but fits more snugly and requires less spermicidal cream or jelly.
Advantages: The cap is comparable to the diaphragm in effectiveness, and it can remain in place for 48 hours. Spermicide need not be applied upon repeated intercourse.
Disadvantages: It is more difficult to insert than the diaphragm, and placement over the cervix should be checked before and after each act of intercourse. Uterine or cervical infections are possible risks. The cap should be worn only by women with normal Pap tests.
Sponge
A spermicide-containing polyurethane sponge that is inserted into the vagina to cover the cervix, thus forming a physical and chemical barrier to sperm. It is discarded after use.
Advantages: The sponge can be left in place up to 24 hours and is effective if intercourse is repeated during that time.
Disadvantages: Some allergic reactions and a few cases of toxic shock syndrome reported.
The Intrauterine Device
Also called IUD, loop, or coil, this metal or plastic device is placed in the uterus. While there is uncertainty as to how it actually works, doctors believe that it prevents fertility in several ways. One of these ways probably is to prevent the fertilized egg from attaching itself to the wall of the womb.
Advantages: A reliable means of birth control.
Disadvantages: Sometimes results in bleeding or pain, and may sometimes be abortive in its mode of operation.c
Condoms
A sheath that fits over the penis to prevent semen from entering the vagina.
Advantages: A safe, effective means of birth control. Reduces the chances of transmission of sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS.
Disadvantages: Disliked by some because application requires interruption of sexual act.
Withdrawal
Withdrawal of the penis from the vagina just before ejaculation.
Advantages: Requires no expense, preparation, or external apparatus.
Disadvantages: Not sexually satisfying, requires great self-control, and is highly unreliable.
Rhythm Method
Couples refrain from intercourse during the days in the woman’s menstrual cycle when she is most fertile.
Advantages: Safe, no harmful side effects, requires no action at time of intercourse.
Disadvantages: Not a very successful method of preventing pregnancy unless the couple are highly motivated and adhere strictly to instructions for practice.
Hormonal Implant
The newest contraceptive on the birth-control scene, a series of tiny silicon cylinders are implanted under the skin of a woman’s arm. For up to five years, these continuously release a minute amount of a hormone into the bloodstream. During this time she is protected from pregnancy.
Advantages: Highly effective. Fertility can be restored by removing implant.
Disadvantages: Minimal. Similar to the progestin-only birth-control pill (minipill). When progestin-only inserts are used, pregnancy possibly is prevented by abortive means.d
[Footnotes]
A discussion of whether sterilization is compatible with Christian principles is found in The Watchtower of May 1, 1985, page 31.
A discussion of how birth-control pills prevent birth is found in The Watchtower of June 15, 1989, page 29.
A discussion of whether the IUD is compatible with Christian principles is found in The Watchtower of May 15, 1979, pages 30-1.
A discussion of how birth-control pills prevent birth is found in The Watchtower of June 15, 1989, page 29.

