From Our Readers
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome  We cried with appreciation in our family when we received our Awake! on CFS. (August 22, 1992) Jehovah’s organization is so caring in trying to give understanding to those who have not been stricken with this terrible and weird disease! Thank you, too, for the appreciation expressed for our care givers, who carry such a heavy burden.
K. C., Australia
I looked like the woman on the cover. The articles gave me the strength to go to a doctor and to realize that I am really ill. I had blamed it all on depression. But thanks to Jehovah, the anguish I have felt is gone.
M. A., Spain
Finally, a magazine on CFS! I have tried to explain to others how I feel but with disappointing or occasionally mortifying results! These articles are examples of how your publications meet the urgent needs of individuals.
F. C., Italy
I still cannot believe that I finally have answers to my questions about my health. I have had CFS for 14 years without finding out what it was. I have been to many doctors who maintained that I had depression or an emotional problem. I have sent copies of this magazine to 25 of these doctors.
J. A. G., Brazil
I already had a goodly amount of knowledge about CFS. What I needed most was what you provided in the paragraph on page 14 that talked about what Jehovah God thinks. Thank you so much! I cry every time I read that paragraph, which by now is close to 50 times!
S. D., United States
Between the tears and the chills, I made it through this article. I suffer from CFS. My diagnosis was very long in coming. But the physical pain I have had hasn’t seemed as great as the pain I have felt because my Christian brothers did not understand. It seems Jehovah always knows when to supply us information.
K. J., United States
My daughter has suffered from CFS for a few years, so I was very glad to receive the August 22nd Awake! It set out the problems so clearly that I could not put the magazine down till I had finished. Then I reread it. It will be one of the magazines I keep in my special file for quick reference. This magazine touched me so greatly that I just had to say thank you.
M. E., England
Alcoholic Parents  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . An Alcoholic Parent​—How Can I Cope?” (August 8, 1992) My father is a recovering alcoholic. He was very abusive, both physically and mentally. I started drinking at an early age and was well on my way to becoming an alcoholic myself at the time when my mother began studying with Jehovah’s Witnesses. I’m happy to say that in August 1991, I was baptized! I am now applying to be a pioneer [full-time] evangelizer. I appreciate how understanding the article was of the feelings young people have toward alcoholic parents. We may love them, but that doesn’t mean we condone what they do.
L. W., United States

