A Friendly Island Listens​—Report from Sri Lanka
JESUS’ prophetic statement that the good news of the Kingdom would “be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness” indicated a widespread work. (Matt. 24:14) Among the countries that have been reached with the “good news” in this time of the end is the friendly island of Sri Lanka, till recently called Ceylon. This teardrop-shaped island of 25,322 square miles (65,584 square kilometers), located just south of India in the Indian Ocean, is only 270 miles (435 kilometers) long and 140 miles (225 kilometers) wide.
The American writer Mark Twain, who visited Sri Lanka in 1896, described the capital city, Colombo, in these words: “What a dream it was of tropical splendours of bloom and blossom and Oriental conflagrations of costume! The walking groups of men, women, boys, girls, babies​—each individual was a flame, each group a house afire for colour.” The physical attractions of this beautiful tropical island, as well as the friendliness and hospitality of its colorful people, are to be observed down to this day.
For the 550 or more witnesses of Jehovah in Sri Lanka, proclaiming God’s kingdom is a pleasant assignment. Regardless of where in the island you choose to tell the “good news,” usually the people welcome you and invite you into their homes. As you tell the Bible message and its promise of a happy future for mankind, it is likely that you will be offered a cup of the refreshing tea for which this country is famous. Publishers of the Kingdom message are often made welcome, too, at Buddhist temples for discussions of the Bible hope with head priest and underpriests.
RESPONSE TO THE “GOOD NEWS”
Has the proclaiming of the “good news” by Jehovah’s Christian witnesses aided Buddhists, Hindus and Muslims to learn and accept the truth? There has been noteworthy success among the Hindus. Former Hindus are to be found among the part-time and full-time Kingdom proclaimers in the local congregations. Even some elders and ministerial servants were formerly Hindus. One such person is presently an overseer in a congregation and has been very zealous and successful in aiding his wife, sisters and in-laws to learn the truth. An unusual problem arose with his mother who had chewed betel nut throughout her life. Her teeth were worn down to the gums, and as soon as she stopped chewing, her teeth ached. She could not qualify for baptism as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses unless she stopped chewing the betel drug. How was this problem solved? The dentist came to the rescue by extracting what was left of her teeth. Then she was baptized.
A few former Buddhists are publishers of the “good news” today and one is even serving as a full-time pioneer. While progress with Muslim persons has been limited, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Sri Lanka rejoice in the fact that an elder and a ministerial servant were previously followers of the Muslim religion.
Persons young and old are being disillusioned as to the teachings and practices of the Church systems of Christendom. An example of their failure to provide satisfactory instruction to their members is seen in the experience of a young man in his mid-twenties who had been born a Roman Catholic. Dissatisfied by the teachings of his church, he looked to Buddhism for answers to his many questions. But he was still undecided. Then someone gave him a Watchtower magazine. On the back was an advertisement under the caption “Is your faith shaken?” He immediately wrote to the local branch office of the Watch Tower Society. A “special pioneer” Witness called at his home and discussed the question of faith with the young man and his parents. Today all three members of this family are publishers of the “good news.” Pioneers working Roman Catholic areas have many fine experiences like this to relate.
PROGRESS OVER THE YEARS
The “good news” was first brought to Sri Lanka as early as 1910, when seeds of truth were sown in the hearts of a few interested people and their families. In 1912 Brother C. T. Russell, the then president of the International Bible Students Association, visited this country. Later in 1917 the photographic slide, motion picture and sound production called the Photo-Drama of Creation was shown in the cities of Colombo and Kandy. The progress of the truth was slow for many years until missionaries were sent to lend a hand in 1947. Since then the work has gone ahead on a more organized footing, and expansion resulted.
Zeal and endurance on the part of faithful missionaries have been important factors in the building up of the congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the country. Today there are 17 congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses in principal towns throughout the island. The peak of publishers reporting in 1977 was 552. Forty-nine persons were baptized during this same year. Jehovah’s Witnesses in Sri Lanka had reason to be joyful when, in 23 different locations on the island, a peak of 1,662 persons attended the Memorial of Jesus’ death on April 3, 1977. This attendance figure indicates a fine potential for further increase in the future.
The distribution of the Kingdom News tracts, which receives much enthusiastic support, has resulted in the “good news” reaching many isolated persons who now manifest interest in the Bible message. An outstanding response was noted with the distribution of the tract entitled “How Crime and Violence Will Be Stopped.” A flood of requests for Bible literature poured into the Sri Lanka branch office of the Watch Tower Society. Some persons also requested home Bible studies, which the local Witnesses were happy to provide.
WITNESSING IN RURAL TERRITORIES
As you approach the typical rural home you may notice a bustle of activity as the folk inside get a chair or two for you and your companion to sit on. Then they stand respectfully listening to what you have to say. Often they will insist that you stay to have a refreshing drink of kurumba or thambili, which are varieties of young coconut. The liquid centers of these fruits are sweet and most pleasant to taste and you would be surprised how many servings you can consume in a single morning as you busily proclaim the “good news” from house to house in the hot tropical sun.
Sometimes the enthusiasm of these hospitable and humble people in rural areas can be very touching, as was the experience of two pioneer Witnesses who work such territory. They came across a very old woman to whom the message was presented and an offer of a Bible study aid was made. The old woman went into her house and returned with her savings collected in a clay till (piggy bank). She broke it open and out poured scores of small, shiny coins. She patiently counted 150 of these​—the equivalent of three Sri Lanka rupees (20 cents U.S.), and gave them to the pioneers as a contribution for the book that she was so anxious to have.
SPIRITISM AND SUPERSTITION WIDESPREAD
People of various communities and religious affiliations are known to be quite superstitious. Widespread spiritistic practices make it necessary for Christians to be alert so as not to be ensnared. This is illustrated by the experience of a witness of Jehovah, whose granddaughter had used some oil for a headache. This oil belonged to the Witness’ daughter-in-law who is a Buddhist and who had obtained the oil from a temple. The moment she applied the oil on her head, the granddaughter, a dedicated witness of Jehovah, began to act in a strange manner. She seemed to be dazed and kept asking questions of her grandmother, such as “Where am I?” “Who are you?” The grandmother discerned that this may have been due to the oil, so she immediately washed it off. This had the desired effect, for the child came back to her senses.
Since many persons in Sri Lanka are ensnared by spiritistic practices, the witnesses of Jehovah in this country have been thrilled to receive the recent English-language publication Good News to Make You Happy, as it promises to meet the very needs of the people in this Oriental land. Many of the Sinhalese-speaking and Tamil-speaking publishers are anxiously awaiting this book in their own languages so that they may be better equipped to teach in their territory.
RESPONSE TO THE CALL FOR MORE WORKERS
In response to the call for more workers in the final harvest, a number of young persons have entered the full-time “pioneer” service. (Matt. 9:38) Some have even given up lucrative jobs because of recognizing the great need for more workers to help in the last ingathering. Among these are a young married couple who left their secular jobs to take up pioneering and who were sent to serve in an area where the need was great. Today they rejoice that a congregation has been established there. This is what they have to say concerning their decision:
“Having a balanced view of material things and our love for our Creator, Jehovah, enabled us to make a decision to leave our secular jobs and take up the pioneer service. Since making this decision we have not for even a minute regretted taking this step. Trusting in Jehovah to help us in the work of spreading the life-giving message has indeed resulted in many spiritual blessings. In our new assignment here many sheeplike ones are thirsting for the truth. Meeting them and helping them to come to an accurate knowledge of the Bible constantly reminds us of the urgent work that should be accomplished before the ‘great tribulation.’ It warms our hearts to see many responding to the message. It gives us great happiness and joy to see many regularly attending the congregation meetings. There is no greater work than the pioneer work that we can do today to make Jehovah’s heart glad.”
In this country it is not easy to find part-time employment to enable any who wish to engage in the regular pioneer work to do so while maintaining themselves. However, a number have made adjustments in their employment in order to have a greater share in the preaching and discipling work. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) One husband gave up an executive job in a government corporation and, with his wife and three young children, established his own home textile printing industry. The parents pioneer by alternating their days of work at home. Many publishers of the “good news” are “tasting” the pioneer service on a temporary basis. In April 1976, which is a month of school and public holidays, 79 Kingdom publishers were busy in the regular and auxiliary pioneer service.
HAPPY CONGREGATIONS OF JEHOVAH’S PEOPLE
The two traveling overseers who visit the congregations experience much joy from their assignment because of the fine spirit of love and hospitality that prevails. One of these traveling ministers, with his wife and two young sons, visits congregations on his motorcycle. He says:
“Being a circuit overseer entails hard work, especially with a family, but it is a wonderful assignment from Jehovah. To work with the brothers, to hear their experiences of faith and to partake of their hospitality is a grand experience. The brothers, however poor they may be, show great hospitality in looking after us as a family of four. At times many families get together as a group and have meals during the visit, making use of it as a time for relaxation.”
The other traveling overseer, who carries out his assignment accompanied by his wife and three-year-old daughter, usually uses public transport like buses and trains to reach the congregations in his circuit. When serving a congregation he often uses a bicycle. He says: “My wife sits on the bar and our daughter on my wife’s lap. We travel in this manner covering five to seven miles [8 to 11 kilometers] sometimes.” Occasionally they have to stop to relieve benumbed legs and tired limbs. But the constant chatter of their daughter and her many questions and occasional singing help to brighten such journeys. This circuit overseer says: “We enjoy the service of Jehovah and have the joy of serving our brothers.”
Jehovah’s people in Sri Lanka may be few in number, but they enjoy a spiritual prosperity that invigorates them actively to proclaim their faith wherever they are. This is a cause for much anxiety on the part of the churches of Christendom in the island, whose representatives frequently publish literature warning their members of the untiring activity of these proclaimers of the “good news.” Some of the anti-Witness literature published by those of Christendom’s churches speaks enviously of the zeal and earnestness of Jehovah’s Witnesses, even encouraging church members to manifest like qualities in upholding their beliefs. Jehovah’s Witnesses in Sri Lanka are indeed making progress with Jehovah’s help and look forward to helping more sheeplike persons to find salvation out of the “great tribulation.”​—Matt. 24:21, 22.

