page 1 

VOL. XXXVI JANUARY 1 No. 1 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

View from the Watch Tower 3 

Meantime, What Shall We Do? 3 

Opportunities Never So Great as Now 4 

What About the Money Supply? 4 

Eureka Drama a Success 5 

Righteous and Unrighteous Anger 5 

The First Armageddon Battle 7 

The Power of a Faithful Woman 8 

Gideon— the Man of Courage 9 

Gideon's Brave Three Hundred 10 

1915-Our YearText-1915 11 

The Life Promised to the Church 12 

Hope for the World 13 

Interesting Letters 14 

More About London Drama Exhibitions 14 

Drama Prospering in Switzerland 14 

Says Colossal Thanksgiving is Due 14 

Drama Scenario in the Family 15 

Re Associated Bible Students 15 

Mid-Winter Toronto, Ont, Convention 15 

page 2 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



SYMBOLIC BAPTISM AT THE N.Y. CITY TEMPLE 

Until further notice opportunities for symbolizing death 
with Christ will be given the first Sunday of each month. 



"WHY FINANCIERS TREMBLE" 

In the next Volunteer matter the above will be the title of 
the leading article. In ordering ask for Vol. Monthly No. 67. 



R5610 : page 2 

THE DRAMA IN MANY TONGUES 

The DRAMA is being shown and heard by the Finnish, 
the Swedish, the Danish, the Norwegians and the Germans. 
We are hoping to have copies of these records for American 
use shortly. The Danish records have already arrived. We 
also have some inquiries for these in Polish, Greek, Spanish 
and Italian. If the interest seems sufficient to justify it we 
hope to have a fairly good array of foreign translations of 
the DRAMA. Any interested should address EUREKA DRAMA 
DEPT., 17 Hicks St. 

page 2 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR FEBRUARY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
February follow: (1) 67; (2) 22; (3) 259; (4) 16; (5) 164; (6) 
7; (7) 4; (8) 222; (9) 307; (10) 123; (11) 152; (12) 107; (13) 
25; (14) 14; (15) 170; (16) 58; (17) 113; (18) 132; (19) 160; 
(20) 105; (21) 165; (22) 91; (23) 324; (24) 322; (25) 313; (26) 
333; (27) 188; (28) 312. 



R5601 : page 3 

VIEW FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

WHEN our worthy President and also his 

Holiness the Pope requested Christian 

people to pray God for the cessation of the 

European war, we declared that the prayer 

was not in harmony with the Divine arrangement 

and would not be answered. We 

pointed out that according to the Scriptures 

the 2520 years of Gentile dominion ended in 

September, 1914; and that the war is the 

one predicted in the Scriptures as associated 

with the Great Day of Almighty God— "the Day of 

Vengeance of our God." We pointed out the Word of 

the Lord through the Prophet Joel respecting the gathering 

of all nations to the Valley of Jehoshaphat— the valley 

of death.-Joel 3:1-12. 

The experiences of Elijah in the closing of his ministry 
showed us how the Great Day of the Lord will be ushered 
in: first, the wind rending the rocks, representing the 
present war; secondly, the great earthquake, representing 
the Revolution that will follow the present war; thirdly, 
the fire, representing the Anarchy that will follow the 
Revolution; fourthly, "the still, small Voice" of God— 
which will follow the anarchy in the world— through Messiah's 
Kingdom speaking, "Peace! be still!" "Beat your 
spears into pruninghooks and your swords into plowshares, 
and learn war no more!"— Micah 4:3. 

We see no reason for thinking that the present war 
will terminate until either Great Britain or Germany has 
a decisive victory upon the sea. The strife between these 
two has been fomenting for thirty years. Each has wished 
the destruction of the other's fleet and colonies, but 
dreaded the war which would accomplish these ends, well 
knowing in advance that it would be a terrible one. The 
unfortunate circumstances which suddenly led up to 
Austria's assault upon Servia, Russia's defense of Servia, 
and France's revenge for Alsace-Lorraine, involving Germany 
on both sides, presented Great Britain the long-sought 
opportunity for crushing her commercial rival. 
It seems improbable that the British would now consent to 
cessation of war until a complete victory would be had over 
Germany, or until her own existence would be in jeopardy. 

So far as at present may be discerned, nothing very 
decisive may be expected before Spring. Meantime, the 
soldiers are perishing, vast debts are accumulating and 
the industries of peace are being neglected. By and by, 
doubtless, the people will awaken to a saner view of the 
matter, and ask themselves why the people of Europe cannot 
live as happily there as they can live together in the 
United States. By and by they will raise the question as 
to why it should be wrong to murder one another at any 



private behest, and yet right to slay one another at the 
command of kings and kaisers. By that time the earthquake 
stage of the trouble will be near. 

When the Earthquake, or Revolution, so prominently 
mentioned in the Scriptures shall have come, that, no 
doubt will be the time when the kings and the captains of 
industry, of finance and of politics will in self-defense 
greatly exalt the power of religious leaders. Then we may 
expect that the Federation of Churches will exercise a 
power in the world such as has not been since the days 
of Papal supremacy. In the symbolic language of Revelation, 
that will be the time in which the "Image of the 
Beast" will have life and work great wonders, threatening, 
commanding, in the name of Heaven.— Rev. 13:11-18. 

MEANTIME, WHAT SHALL WE DO? 

The effect of the war is not unfavorable in all respects. 
From Europe we have the word that a great religious 
impression is being made upon the people by 
the war. In their own distress and the distress of their 
loved ones on the battlefield, there is a natural tendency 
to turn to Heaven for help. At the same time there is a 
quickening of understanding. People are more ready to 
think than previously. Told that the soldiers are fighting 
for the Lord's Cause, and with the implication given that 
those who die are more or less martyrs for the cause of 
right (and are therefore heirs of Heaven), the people 
are fighting valiantly. 

The newspapers tell them how the Catholics and the 
Protestants of Great Britain are praying for the Allies 
against their enemies; and how the German churches, 
Catholic and Protestant, are praying for the Germans and 
against the Allies. The people are wondering and will 
wonder still more as they think further as to how these 
different prayers can be answered— how the Germans 
could be taken to Heaven for fighting against the Allies 
and the Allies be taken to Heaven for fighting against the 
Germans! With all their thinking some will be sure to 
wonder whether or not these are reasonable conclusions, 
and what is their foundation. 

On the other hand, they will think of the Hell of fire 
and the Purgatory of suffering taught them from infancy; 
and if all the soldiers are going to Heaven, they will wonder 
who is going to Hell. The sober thinking which the 
war is engendering will, no doubt, be helpful in the end, 
however unreasonable some of the conditions may be in 
the beginning. Saner views must ultimately come. 

The American people are in some respects suffering 
more from the war than are the people of Europe; for 

R5601 : page 4 

the traffic of the world is temporarily hindered. They have 
not the business stimulus which prevails in Europe, because 
of military preparation there. 



Americans, too, have a better opportunity of taking a 
calm, unprejudiced view of the war than have the people 
of Europe, who are so close to it and so liable to be influenced 
by the specious arguments of crafty leaders who 
tell them that the war is necessary for the maintenance of 
civilization— putting on their own construction as to what 
is real civilization. Partisan spirit, called patriotism, runs 
high in the countries engaged in the strife. The newspapers 
defend and uphold the governments; so do the 
preachers; so do the orators. The few who take the saner 
and correct view of matters are forced to silence. 

From a distance the war seems most unreasonable. 
Germany should be allowed to build as many ships as she 
desires, until her people, vexed and worn out with the cost 
of militarism, will insist on a change of governmental 
policy. Great Britain should be allowed to have as many 
ships as she wants and as her people are willing to pay 
for. Each nation should be allowed to do all the business 
she can do justly, honestly. 

Christian ministers should have long ago pointed out 
to the people that the present kingdoms of Europe are not 
God's kingdoms, but human institutions; and that all 
these, according to the Bible, will eventually pass away at 
the inauguration of Messiah's Kingdom. The reverence 
of the Lord should have been taught, and patient waiting 
for His time and way. The effect of the war has certainly 
in America been favorable to Christian enlightenment. 
People who may be said never to have thought before 
on religious subjects are thinking now, thinking hard, 
and many are reaching reasonably sane conclusions. 

The work which our Society has been doing in the 
world for several years is bearing some fruitage. People 
who sneered at the thought of Christ's Millennial Kingdom 

R5602 : page 4 

being imminent, and who trusted for a time that the 
world would be converted by the nominal churches, are 
now awakening to a realization of the fact that the fulfilment 
of the Lord's Prayer is the only real salvation of 
the world, and are continually praying, with more meaning 
than before, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be done 
on earth, even as in Heaven." They are beginning to 
realize that not only have the heathens abroad doubled 
within a century, but that the heathenism at home is much 
greater than they had believed, and that the so-called 
Christianization of modern civilization is but a thin veneer. 

OPPORTUNITIES NEVER SO GREAT AS NOW 

All these conditions are favorable. Every tract and 
every book circulated now is likely to do three or four 
times as much good as in times past; for the people are 
getting awake to read, awake to think. Not only so, but 
they are more and more coming to doubt the theology of 
the creeds, and to see that the majority of ministers 



neither teach from the Bible nor believe in it as the only 
and the inspired Revelation of the Divine purposes. 

We are well aware that some of our dear readers have 
the thought that the Gentile Times having closed, the 
Gospel Message was closed. Some of these brethren feel 
that it is useless to continue the Message. We cannot 
sympathize with their reasoning. The Divine command 
was that they should preach the Word, not until the close 
of Gentile Times, but until the Church would be completed. 
Just how long it will be before the Church will 
be completed we cannot say, but we do believe it is our 
privilege to tell the Good Tidings as long as there are 
hungry hearts to receive the Message; and we do believe 
that some of those coming to a knowledge of the Truth 
now are amongst the finest characters that have ever 
come into the Truth. 

We believe also that the evidences strongly favor the 
thought that some of those who have recently come into 
the Light are fully received of the Lord into the blessings 
and privileges of the Church— His members. Some of 
them have the real spirit of sacrifice, which is one of the 
sure signs. They manifest a love for the Truth, which 
is another favorable sign. The Lord grants them clearness 
of understanding in the Truth, which is another indication 
of their having been begotten of the Holy Spirit. 
Some of them are willing and glad to suffer for the sake 
of the Truth, which is one of the best evidences that we 
could ask that they have received the Spirit of Christ. 

So long as we see such evidences of the Lord's blessing 
by the preaching of His Word, should we falter, should 
we hesitate? Should we not rather be enthusiastic and 
redouble our efforts in the service of the King and for 
the service of the brethren, that they may be delivered 
from the bondage of ignorance and superstition into the 
glorious light of the knowledge of God? 

We are asked, Did not the forty years of Harvest 
seem to close with the end of Gentile Times? We answer, 
Yes; we had so expected. But we remember that the 
Jewish harvest, which was a picture the Lord drew, was 
a little different from our harvest. Under the Law, the 
Jews were commanded to leave the corners of their fields 
unreaped, so that there might be something for the gleaners 
to do after the regular harvesters had done their work, 
that while the barns were being filled and the tares 
were being bundled and burned, making ready for a new 
crop, the gleaners might gather the wheat from the corners 
of the harvest field. Perhaps the present work is largely 
that of gleaning. It would appear so. 

Looking back at the Jewish Harvest, we perceive that 
it ended in the year 69 A.D., but that certain features of 
the Harvest work continued over into the year A.D. 70. 
The burning of the chaff took place then. While that was 
in progress and the nation of Israel was being overthrown, 
doubtless there was a gleaning work, as the eyes of understanding 
began to open and as the people began to realize 
the fulfilment of Scripture. And just so it seems to be 



here. Shall we not be earnest in our endeavor to do this 
gleaning work? Surely we will be if we still maintain our 
love for the Lord's name and character! This will lead 
us to tell forth His glorious character, to show forth the 
errors which have beclouded the name of our Heavenly 
Father by misrepresenting His Divine Plan of the Ages. 
Surely we will be energetic in this work if our love for 
the brethren continues; for we see many who seem to be 
true children of God still in great darkness respecting 
the great and wonderful Truths to which our eyes of 
understanding have opened. 

WHAT ABOUT THE MONEY SUPPLY? 

But some may say, "Did we not read between the lines 
in the Society's Annual Report that the financial streams 
were drying up? And have we not heard that thirteen 
DRAMAS have been withdrawn, representing fifty exhibitions 
per day explanatory of the Divine Plan of the Ages? 
And does this not indicate that God's time has come for 
closing down the work?" 

Our reply is that these things are so, but that we have 
a reason to surmise that God intends to send us in His own 
way further financial support, that His Message may go 
forth with great force throughout the whole world! With 
this in view, we are having all the DRAMAS overhauled 
and put into good order, anticipating that the funds to 
operate them will be in our hands shortly. Although we 

R5602 : page 5 

are still walking by faith and not by sight, we urge upon 
all the dear friends everywhere to slack not their hand in 
the Divine service, but rather to continue to labor and to 
wait, assured of God's favor and blessing in any event. 

More than this, we suggest that all the dear brethren 
who have been active in the DRAMA work, and who are 
temporarily discontinued, do not enter into other business 
permanently, but hold themselves in readiness for this 
wonderful means of proclaiming the Truth which reaches 
so many people and gives them so much satisfaction and 
enlightenment respecting the Bible and its true Message. 
We also urge others who have not been with the DRAMA, 
but who may have knowledge of operating moving-picture 
films and stereopticon slides, that they make themselves 
as proficient as possible and advise us of their willingness 
and readiness and ability for this service. 

We request all I.B.S.A. Classes to consider well if 
they have any brethren of special ability whom they could 
recommend to the Society for such openings as may come: 
(1) Men clear in the Truth and loyal to it, ready to lay 
down their lives for it; (2) men of good address and 
possessing a talent for public speaking and an ability to 
speak grammatically. We want to have a list of these, 
that we may call for them if opportunity offers. But be 
sure that you conscientiously answer the questions above, 



and that you do not recommend any to the Society except 
those who would be a credit to the Truth and its service. 
There may be other ways in which some could serve without 
the talent of public speaking and without any particular 
knowledge of grammar; but for the public service the 
Society believes it to be the Lord's will that His Truth 
should be presented in a creditable form. 

Quite a number of our readers have had more or less 
experience in Colporteur work. Some of them have withdrawn 
from the service because of inability to meet their 
expenses, even though the Society gave them the books 
at less than cost— one half the selling price. Any such 
Colporteur, who has some ability and who could re-enter 
the work under favorable conditions, is requested to drop 
us a postcard stating willingness to re-enter and stating 
the number of books he was able to sell when in the service. 
Some of these might be assisted in one way or another 
so as to help them back again to this very important 
Colporteur work. We have methods and instructions now, 
by the use of which many are successful who formerly 
were unsuccessful. 

We want to get this list, so that, if a way should open 
up that we expect, we may know how to communicate with 
you promptly. We ask for this address on a postcard, so 
that it may be easily filed. 

The Volunteer work for 1915 should not be forgotten. 
As stated before, the people are awake and reading, 
whereas before many of them neglected the literature 
handed them. Now is the time to put a piece of literature 
into every home in your own city and to ascertain whether 
or not the adjoining towns and villages have been served 
—thus to extend your service in the Harvest work. We are 
ready to supply this literature free, paying the freight 
to destination. Send in your orders that they may be 
filled as promptly as possible. 

EUREKA DRAMA A SUCCESS 

In our Report we pointed out that, although only recently 
started, the EUREKA DRAMA service is proving a 
very efficient one, especially where it is taken into the 
small villages and cities. Empty churches, court houses, 
schoolhouses, etc., are very generally obtainable, when the 
people know that they are to have a very interesting entertainment 
free of charge. Some of the Classes have 
obtained these EUREKA DRAMAS by a partial payment 
down, the Society waiting on them for their greater convenience 
to pay the remainder. As these remainders are 
paid we are able to give out other DRAMA sets. Thus 
the work progresses. The blessing in every case seems to 
be not only to the public, but especially to those of the 
dear friends who are serving the public. 

Be of good courage and the Lord shall strengthen your 
heart! Let us be loyal, faithful, and forget not the cultivation 
of all the fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit. 
Thus shall we best be prepared for the glorious consummation 



of our hopes, which we believe so near at hand! 



R5603 : page 5 

RIGHTEOUS AND UNRIGHTEOUS ANGER 

"Love is not easily provoked."— 1 Corinthians 13:5. 

IN THE chapter from which our text is 

taken, St. Paul sets forth the prime necessity 

for the cultivation and development of 

Love, without which, whatever else we 

may attain, we shall be nothing in the 

sight of God. The Apostle tells us in the 

words of our text, that love is not easily 

provoked. Evidently he uses the word provoke 

here in a very different sense from 

its meaning where he says that we should 

"consider one another, to provoke unto love and good 

works." (Hebrews 10:24.) The thought in the latter 

text is to incite to good works, to call forth love in 

others, to exert an influence favorable to righteousness. 

The thought in our present text, however, is that of being 

excited, or roused, to anger. St. Paul declares that 

love is not easily thus aroused, but is long-suffering. 

We might say, strictly speaking, that it is not the 
quality of Love itself that would ever be moved to anger. 
Yet righteous anger— a just indignation aroused by our 
love for the principles of righteousness— is not incompatible 
with love. "God is Love," and the Scriptures assure 
us that He "is angry with the wicked every day." 
His anger is righteous indignation against sin. 

GOD'S RIGHTEOUS ANGER 

Looking to God as our great Example, we see that 
His Love was manifested on behalf of His human creatures 
in the beginning. It was love for humanity that 
provided the Garden of Eden with all its blessings and 
its perfect life, just as His love for the angels had provided 
all their blessings. But when Sin came in, Love 
stepped back; or in other words, Justice was the special 
attribute of God then manifested. It was better for 
mankind that there should be this punishment for sin; 
for from the foundation of the world God, foreknowing 
man's fall, had purchased his redemption. So even in 
the sentence of death His love for man persisted. But 
God is the opponent of sin, and when His Law was violated, 
Love, or He who is the embodiment of Love, was 
provoked to righteous anger. 

God's indignation was likewise kindled against His 
chosen people, the Jews, when He said to the Prophet 
(Jeremiah 8:19), "Why have they provoked Me to anger?" 
Many Scriptures speak of God's anger. That 



anger has ever burned against sin. It has been resting 
upon the world for six thousand years. But the Love of 
God has in no way been violated by this attitude against 
the condemned world. Therefore, Love can be justly 

R5603 : page 6 

provoked to anger. He who declares that Justice is the 
foundation of His Throne never indulges in sentiments 
which are not in the fullest harmony with that Justice. 
But He has arranged for the recovery of this condemned 
race. The Love of God has made this provision for His 
fallen creatures. 

GOD'S LOVE HELD IN ABEYANCE 

But Love is not easily provoked, not unjustly provoked. 
It required an act of intentional disobedience on 
the part of Father Adam to provoke God to anger. It 
was not because Mother Eve was deceived that the 
sentence came upon the world. The anger of God came 
upon mankind and the sentence of death was pronounced 
because of Father Adam's sin, which was committed with 
full knowledge. And during all these six thousand years 
of sin God's Love has been held in abeyance, so to speak, 
provoked to the point of withdrawal. 

But all the while God's character has not changed. 
He did not cause the diabolical conditions which have 
existed since the fall of man. Neither Love nor Justice, 
as embodied in Jehovah, would sanction sin; "The 
wages of Sin is death." (Romans 6:23.) And everything 
that goes with death as its natural result is a 
part of that penalty. But God has permitted these conditions, 
knowing that by His Power they would all be 
overruled for the ultimate good of mankind. The great 
Adversary of God is responsible for the disaster which 
Sin has wrought upon the earth. But the Almighty will 
yet cause the wrath of Satan to work out good for the 
children of men, ultimately crushing, annihilating, the 
great Enemy of righteousness.— Hebrews 2:14. 

The Love of God, thus held in abeyance, has bided 
its time, to be revealed to astonished man when the due 
time shall have come. Nearly two thousand years ago 
Love manifested itself on behalf of the world, when 
God sent forth His Only-Begotten Son to be man's Redeemer. 
He came to earth and gave His life— a willing 
sacrifice for human sin. Then the call went forth to 
gather the Church, the class who were in God's Purpose 
to be the Bride of His Son, to be associated with Him in 
the great future work for the race of Adam. During 
this Gospel Age, this Church is being gathered, and 
in due time will be exalted in Kingdom glory. Then 
God's love will manifest itself to our race. The Kingdom 
of God will lift up mankind from sin and degradation 
and death, into the light and glory of the Lord— all 
who are willing to accept life on God's terms. 



SPECIAL CRISES IN CHRISTIAN LIFE 

How earnestly we as children of God should watch 
and pray that we may indeed be fitted for our great future 
work— now so near! There is a danger that love 
will not be sufficiently strong in us; for by reason of 
the fall, sin and selfishness have come to be preponderating 
influences in the world. These, operating for six 
thousand years, have made man very deficient in love, 
sympathy, brotherly-kindness and long-suffering. Now 
there is a greater tendency toward anger, malice, hatred, 
strife, than toward love. Consequently, when God accepts 
us into His family, He tells us that one of the first 
requirements is love. Love must grow in our hearts and 
minds, and permeate all our thoughts, words and actions. 

Our fallen flesh, helped on by the unseen "powers of 
the air," will seek to prevent our attaining this necessary 
condition; and after we have attained it, strong pressure 
will at times be brought to bear upon us as New 
Creatures to induce us to withdraw from this position. 
From time to time the child of God has experiences with 
others of the brethren that seem to threaten his spiritual 
health, or even his spiritual life. The powers of darkness 
assail him, endeavoring to encourage the feelings 
and sentiments which he is strongly tempted to adopt. 
He has come to a crisis in his Christian experience. He 
must go forward or backward. He cannot stand still. 
The struggle is on. Will this severe trial prove a stepping-stone 
to lift him nearer God, or will it be a stone 
of stumbling, to overthrow him? 

At such crucial times, the only refuge is prayer. The 
Lord permits these very trials to test our mettle as children 
of God. The Adversary will endeavor to place the 
matter before our agitated minds in the most unfavorable 
light as regards the brother or sister. He will seek 
to pervert the judgment, and to deceive the mind as to 
the real facts in the case; and our flesh responds to this 
view of the matter. The only safe course is to refuse 
to entertain in the slightest degree the thoughts of bitterness 
trying to find a lodgment in our mind and heart, 
and to cry at once to the Lord for strength and help 
in our time of need, seeking counsel of His Word bearing 
upon our proper attitude in such an emergency. Let 
us remember the words of the hymn we have often sung: 

"Yield not to temptation, 

For yielding is sin; 
Each victory will help you 

Some other to win. 
Fight manfully onward, 

Dark passions subdue; 
Look ever to Jesus, 

He'll carry you through." 

"FORGIVE, AND YE SHALL BE FORGIVEN" 



Let us, then, be kind and forbearing one with another, 
brethren, seeking to put the kindest construction 
upon the words, the actions and the natural tendencies 
of one another, remembering our own peculiarities and 
foibles. Let us remember that each of us is blemished 
by the fall, and that those of the brethren who try us 
most may have had hereditary tendencies and environments 
in earlier life of which we are not aware, and 
which would make us very pitiful if we knew. Let us 
remember also that we may be altogether unaware of 
some of our own weaknesses and mannerisms, which 
may grate upon others. We should be much more careful 
to note our own mistakes and faults than those of 
other brethren of the Lord. 

"Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger [fleshly anger], 
and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from 
you, with all malice; and be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, 
forgiving one another, even as God for 
Christ's sake hath forgiven you"— and still forgives you. 
(Ephesians 4:3 1,32.) "Put on, therefore, as the Elect 
of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, 
humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering, forbearing 
one another and forgiving one another, if any man have 
occasion of complaint against any; even as Christ forgave 
you, so also do ye. And above all these things, put 
on love, which is the bond of perfectness. And let the 
peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which ye are 
also called in one Body; and be ye thankful. Let the 
word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom."— 
Colossians 3:12-16. 

After the child of the Lord has gained the victory in 
a struggle like this, and has through prayer and determined 
effort brought the Arm of God to his deliverance, 
he is a stronger Christian than before the trial came. He 
has taken a stride forward in the narrow way; he has 
taken a firmer hold on God, and will be the better enabled 
to conquer in the next testing. But every failure 
to thus overcome leaves the child of God weaker and 
less able to resist the onslaught of his flesh and of the 

R5604 : page 7 

Adversary and his evil host, and the less sure of being 
a final overcomer. 

In speaking of love as respects the Church of Christ, 
the Apostle assures us that if we would be pleasing to 
the Lord we must develop richly this grace. Those who 
possess this quality in goodly measure will not be easily 
provoked to anger, will not readily take offense, will not 
be too watchful lest their rights and their dignity be infringed 
upon. Those who have little love will be easily 
angered and offended. Let us keep self down, and diligently 
continue the work of its crucifixion, looking ever 
to Him from whom cometh our help. The love which 
our Lord appreciates is longsuffering. This does not 



mean that there would never be occasions for just indignation, 

righteous anger. There should be a feeling 

of righteous anger when we see great injustice. Why? 

Because injustice is wrong. God is angry with injustice, 

when it is committed knowingly, or willingly. And 

so God's people should have no sympathy with injustice. 

LOVE SUPERADDED TO JUSTICE 

If the children of God do not carefully cultivate the 
quality of justice, they will get themselves into that attitude 
where they will not appreciate justice at all. But 
while appreciating what is right and what is wrong, we 
are to go further, and see that we cultivate diligently the 
quality of love, sympathy, charity. None can say that 
his own estimate of what constitutes justice and love is 
entirely right, and that the other man's estimate is entirely 
wrong, especially when this other is a brother or 
sister in Christ, seeking to develop the same Christlike 
qualities as ourself. Our viewpoints cannot be always 
the same; therefore let us not be too sure that our own 
viewpoint is the correct one, and the other view wrong, 
where there is any possibility of our being mistaken. 

No follower of Christ is so well developed that he can 
say, I do not need any further instruction along the lines 
of justice and love, but my brother needs it. And in 
our experiences with the brethren, where the other one 
seems to be at fault, let us say to ourselves, Here is a 
brother who perhaps has had more disadvantages than 
I have had. He is a brother of mine according to the 
Spirit. He seems to me to be doing wrong, but I sympathize 
with him because he probably does not know that 
his action is wrong. Or I may be wrong myself. If he 
saw the matter from my viewpoint, he would do differently. 
I will not judge him, but leave that for the Almighty, 
who is infallible in judgment and to whom judgment 
belongs.— 1 Corinthians 4:5. 

SYMPATHY FOR ALL MEN 

God has no sympathy with sin; but He has so much 
sympathy for sinners that He has provided His well-beloved 
Son to redeem and uplift the sinner. He has set 
apart a thousand years for this work of human uplift. 
We note injustice; we ought to note it. But it is not our 
province to flay, to inflict punishment. We are to "judge 
nothing before the time." We see acts committed that 
shock our moral sense. We are to say to ourselves, I 
believe that act to be criminal; but it is not for me to 
settle with that wrong-doer. God knows to what extent 
the individual is responsible; I do not. It is my duty as 
far as possible to view him from the standpoint of sympathy. 
It is my duty to assist him if it is in my power, 
if I have a proper opportunity— to help him out of his 
wrong views into right views. But even in this I am to 
be "wise as a serpent, and harmless as a dove." The 



conduct is wrong, but I cannot know how wrong the 
individual may be. 

So Love looks out and sees that the whole world is 
in much difficulty through the fall. And Love says, Be 
gentle toward all; be meek; be forbearing. We are ever 
to remember that we are in a world of sin, pain, sickness, 
death. From this viewpoint, Love will not be easily 
provoked, but will think kindly and sympathetically of 
others. Thus, beloved, shall we grow up into Christ, our 
glorious Head, in all things, until, made perfect and complete 
through His grace, we shall be presented to the 
Father "without spot or wrinkle or any such thing."— 
Ephesians 5:27. 



R5604 : page 7 

THE FIRST ARMAGEDDON BATTLE 

-JANUARY 10.-JUDGES 4:4-24; 5:1-22.- 

SISERA AND BARAK-MRS. DEBORAH AND MRS. JAEL-WAS 
THE LATTER A MURDERESS ?-HOW "THE STARS IN THEIR 
COURSES FOUGHT AGAINST SISERA." 

"The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth, and delivereth 
them out of their troubles."— Psalm 34:17. 

WE HAVE heretofore pointed out that the 

great Battle of Armageddon— the anti-typical 

one— is near— that it will quickly 

follow the present world-war. Today's 

Study relates to the first of the great battles 

in the Valley of Megiddo, noted for its 

many slaughters, and therefore made the 

basis of the Divine prediction respecting 

the "Time of Trouble such as was not 

since there was a nation," which will precede 

and prepare the way for Messiah's glorious Rule of 

a thousand years.— 1 Cor. 15:24-26; Rev. 20:6. 

The Israelites, guilty of idolatry, had, according to 
God's covenant with them, been chastened by the permitting 
of their enemies to vanquish them. They had come to 
great straits. Their enemies had become strong and high-handed. 
General Sisera, of the Canaanites, having humbled 
the Israelites of North Palestine for years, started 
with a large army, intent upon victories, to the southward. 
The strength of his army is shown in the statement 
that it contained nine hundred iron chariots. 

By the time he had gotten as far southward as the 
Valley of Megiddo, messengers reached him, informing 
him that Barak, a leader among the Israelites, had improved 
the opportunity of his absence and was also leading 
southward an army of ten thousand Israelites. Under 
Divine guidance Barak made Mt. Tabor his army base— 



the same which, in Jesus' day, became known to His 
followers as the Mount of Transfiguration, where the 
coming Kingdom of Messiah was represented in a vision. 
Thus we have another remarkable feature of the picture 
of the future— the association of the vision of the Kingdom 
in proximity with the Armageddon field of disaster 
picturing the overthrow of present institutions. 

A DISCOMFITED ARMY 

General Sisera, disdaining the poorly armed Israelites, 
advanced with his army on both sides of the River Kishon 
toward Mt. Tabor. Then it was that the word of the 
Lord came afresh to General Barak, directing him to advance 
against the army of the Canaanites. The slaughter 
was a great one, as related in our lesson. Sisera's army 
was discomfited, so that it scattered. A great storm and 
cloudburst swelled the river, making quagmires of the 
lower valleys, rendering useless the chariots of Sisera. 

R5604 : page 8 

His soldiers, fleeing for their lives, were cut down by the 

Israelites, while other thousands were swept by the 

freshets down the river to the sea. This interference of 

God on behalf of His people Israel in figurative language 

is styled the fighting of the "stars of heaven" against Sisera's 

army. Similarly in the great Armageddon near at 

hand it will not be human might that will prevail, but the 

disconcerted hosts will effect the complete disruption of 

the present order of things, for "every man's hand shall 

be against his brother and against his neighbor." (Ezekiel 38:21; 

Zechariah 8:10; 14:13.) It is the cloudburst of 

Truth and the rising waters of knowledge which are 

bringing to pass this great human catastrophe— which the 

Lord will overrule for the blessing of the world. 

THE POWER OF A FAITHFUL WOMAN 

Although the Lord has been pleased usually to use men 
in connection with His work, not only as typical characters, 
but also as evangels of the Gospel, nevertheless the 
Scriptures give us pictures of noble women who, because 
of the delinquency of men, have been used and almost 
forced into public service by God's providence. Notable 
amongst the instances of such in the Bible is the case of 
Mrs. Deborah. She perceived how neglect of the Divine 
Law had borne fruit in the subjugation of her people. She 
perceived that this was spreading throughout the land of 
Canaan, and that what was needed was a guide to point 
the people to the right way— back to God. The Canaanites, 
whom they had not conquered, had conquered them. 

The conquest was permitted of God. It had its incipient 
state when the Israelites neglected the Divine direction 
that they should live separate from all other people. Instead, 
they had begun to intermarry with the Canaanites. 



These, in turn, had enticed their husbands and their children 
to the heathen gods of worship. Apparently many of 
Israel who had not gone over to idolatry had nearly lost 
their knowledge and appreciation of the true God. 

The same is a difficulty today in this land— everywhere. 
The revulsion of Christian people from the monstrous 
creedal errors of the past has alienated many from 
the Bible, under the belief that the Bible and the creeds 
teach the same doctrines. This is the explanation of empty 
pews and a distaste for religion. What the people need is 
correct information respecting the true God of Love and 

R5605 : page 8 

His real Plan, as outlined in the Bible. 

In the dark hour of Israel's oppression, the princes of 
the tribes seemed to lack patriotism as well as faith in 
God. Each tribe was a separate State and there was no 
cohesion between them— the Divinely intended bond of 
union, the true religion, having relaxed. It was about 
this time that the Lord, seeking a channel through which 
to be gracious to His people, found that channel in a 
woman— Deborah. She realized the situation more keenly 
than others, probably because more deeply consecrated to 
God and His service. She removed from her home in the 
northern part to a central place in the Highlands of 
Ephraim. From there she sent encouraging, stimulating 
messages to the chief men of the various tribes. She 
was respected. Her counsel was appreciated. Her advice 
was sought. In this sense she judged— admonished, 
guided, assisted— Israel. 

FULL DEVOTION OF HEART ESSENTIAL 

Deborah is styled a prophetess. This might mean a 
public teacher, or it might mean one through whom the 
Lord sent special messages. Some things connected with 
the story indicate the latter. Surely the Lord used her, 
and that because she was a willing and consecrated servant 
of His Cause, His people. What a lesson here for all 
of God's people— that in order to be used in the Lord's 
service and accomplish things for Him and His, full devotion 
of heart is essential! 

At an opportune time, when Sisera's army with nine 
hundred chariots had proceeded southward to Megiddo, 
Deborah sent word to Barak, a leader in her tribe— Naphtali. 
She admonished that now was the time to do something 
for the deliverance of God's people, and that he 
should immediately march to battle with ten thousand 
Israelites. Barak refused unless she would co-operate. 
She agreed to do so, forewarning him, however, that the 
honor of the matter would thus be divided with herself, 
and that he would miss a part of his blessing by reason of 
his lack of courage. Thus it was that when Barak's army 
moved to Mt. Tabor, it was under General Barak's command, 
but a woman was the real mouthpiece or agent 



of God, in directing the affairs of the battle which brought 
such signal victory to Israel. 

WAS THE WAR JUSTIFIED 7-MRS. JAEL 

General Sisera's chariots stuck in the mire; his army 
defeated, he fled afoot with others, only to be overtaken 
by the victors. Entering a supposedly hospitable tent, he 
hid himself and fell asleep. His hostess improved the 
opportunity and drove a tent-pin through his temple. The 
act has been denounced as a breach of hospitality by 
some, but by others it has been defended on the grounds 
that the custom still of the Arabs of Palestine is that any 
man intruding into a woman's tent is worthy of death. 
Anyway, let us remember that Jael was not a Christian 
woman, not begotten of the Holy Spirit, not taught in the 
School of Christ and that, therefore, whatever may be 
said of her would have no bearing whatever in respect 
to Christians who are under the Law of the Spirit of 
Christ— the Law of Love. 

Incidentally, let us remember that none of the Jews 
stood in the same relationship to God and His Divine purposes 
that true Christians occupy. Their warfare in the 
flesh typifies our warfare as New Creatures against the 
weaknesses and appetites of our flesh. Let us remember 
also that the death of Sisera and his army did not precipitate 
them into a hell of eternal tortures, but merely was 
the passage-way by which they were "gathered to their 
fathers"— "slept with their fathers." They have known 
nothing since, and will know nothing in the future until 
the time of their awakening; and that awakening God has 
graciously timed so that it will be after Messiah shall have 
taken possession of the world, and by the establishment of 
His Kingdom shall have overthrown the kingdom of 
Satan and the reign of Sin and Death. 

Sisera and his army will come forth, like the remainder 
of mankind, as a result of the redemptive work of Jesus, 
finished at Calvary. They will come forth in order that 
the grace of God may be testified to them, and that they 
may have an opportunity, by obedience to the laws of the 
Kingdom, to prepare themselves to enter into everlasting 
life on the plane of human perfection in an earthly Paradise. 
With this though before us, it makes little matter 
whether death comes upon us through war pestilence or 
disease. Only those who have heard of Christ, who have 
accepted Him and who have been begotten of the Holy 
Spirit as New Creatures— only these are on trial at the 
present time. The trial of all the remainder of the world 
is future; for knowledge is an essential feature of testing 
for life eternal or death eternal. 



"A thousand years! earth's coming glory! 

'Tis the glad Day so long foretold; 
'Tis the bright morn of Zion's glory, 



Prophets foresaw in times of old." 

R5605 : page 9 

GIDEON--THE MAN OF COURAGE 

--JANUARY 17.-JUDGES 6:11-40.- 

A LOGICAL MAN-A STRONG CHARACTER-TOO HUMBLE FOR 
SELF-CONFIDENCE-FAITH AFTER PROOF-HOSPITALITY REWARDED 
-DARING AND DOING FOR GOD- 
FAITH GROWING SEEKS FRESH PROOFS. 

"Blessed is the man whom Thou choosest."— PSALM 65:4. 

ALTHOUGH the Scriptures tell us that not 

many great, rich, wise and strong are 

chosen of the Lord for His work, we may 

be sure that this is not because they would 

be unacceptable, but because their wisdom, 

riches, strength, courage, usually make 

them too self-confident and not sufficiently 

reliant on the Lord— not sufficiently humble 

to be taught of Him and to be glad of 

opportunities for His service. It was to 

Gideon, a stalwart young Israelite, that the angel of the 

Lord was sent with a message and with a work. His 

salutation was, "The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man 

of valor." Gideon replied with excellent logic, "Why, if 

the Lord be with us, hath all this befallen us? and where be 

all His miracles of which our fathers told us?" 

The Midianites and others of the nomadic peoples from 
the East, discerning that the land of Canaan was very 
fertile, repeatedly invaded it, confiscating much of the 
product of the land, so that on this very occasion Gideon 
was threshing out a few sheaves of wheat, fearing to have 
a customary threshing lest the Midianites should rob them 
of all their possessions and increase their levy. 

The angel was not there to discuss theology, but to inspire 
Gideon and to make of him a messenger of the 
Lord in the deliverance of His people. The humility of 
the man shines out in his protest that his family was one 
of the poorer of the tribe of Manasseh, and that he himself 
was inferior to his brethren of his own father's house. 
Surely a mistake had been made in the selection, and a 
more capable person should be found! But to this the 
angel of the Lord replied, "Surely I will be with thee, and 
thou shalt smite the Midianites as one man." 

When we remember the Lord's promise to Israel that 
He would defend them and protect their interests— when 
we remember that their interests were earthly interests- 
then we should remember also that this protection was dependent 
upon Israel's maintenance of heart-loyalty and 
faithfulness to God. In the same Covenant the Lord assured 



the people in advance that if they would wander away 
into idolatry He would bring upon them various adversities 
—that their enemies should reap their harvests, etc. 
Thus we may know the answer to Gideon's question of 
why the Lord allowed the distress in which they were. 
It was not that God was unfaithful to His Covenant, but 
that the Israelites had been unfaithful. 

A proof of this unfaithfulness is found in our lesson 
and its context. Gideon's father had the charge or was 
caretaker of the groves of Baal and Ashtaroth. Their 
images were near his home— apparently on his property. 
These groves were large posts, significant of honor, 
erected near the idol; and these were maintained by the 
people of Gideon's own time, his own father being one of 
the principal of them. Here was the secret of Israel's 
helplessness and subjection to the Midianites. 

Although Gideon apparently did not surely know who 
was his visitor, nevertheless something in the conversation 
persuaded him that he had an honorable guest. He 
prepared him a feast, and brought it to him. Instead of 
eating it the angel directed that the soup be poured out on 
a rock round about the food, and then touched the cakes 
and the lamb with his staff. A miracle followed which 
demonstrated that the visitor was the angel of the Lord- 
fire proceeded from the rock and entirely consumed the 
food, which thus was accepted as a sacrifice. Immediately 
the angel vanished from Gideon's sight; for he had accomplished 
the purpose of his mission. 

THE MINISTRY OF ANGELS 

Here we have another illustration of the fact that we 
are surrounded by spirit beings, invisible to our natural 
eyes, and the fact also that in God's providence in olden 
times He communicated to mankind through these angels, 
of whom we read, "The angel of the Lord encampeth 

R5606 : page 9 

around about them that fear Him, and delivereth them." 
And again, "Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth 
to minister unto those who shall be heirs of salvation?" 
Doubtless the angels of the Lord are as present with His 
people as ever— indeed more so during this Gospel Age 
since Pentecost then ever before, because now God's people 
are the Spirit-begotten ones specially precious in their 
Father's sight— Psalm 34:7; Hebrews 1:14. 

"Their angels do always have access to the Father," 
was the comment of the Lord Jesus respecting His followers. 
It is a part of their business to look after the 
interests of the consecrated members of the Body of 
Christ and to deliver them from everything that would not 
be for their advantage, in harmony with the assurance that 
"all things shall work together for good to those who 
love God." But it is the interest, the good, of the New 
Creature that is being considered and not the interests of 



the flesh. These messengers, no less powerful, are invisible 
throughout the Gospel Age because the Lord would 
have the members of the House of Sons walk by faith and 
not by sight— 2 Corinthians 5:7. 

In olden times, however, in the time of the House of 
Servants, the Lord's representatives assumed human bodies 
and ordinarily appeared in connection with their visits to 
humanity, so that they might have the better opportunity 
of direct conversation and instruction when communicating 
their messages. Thus the angels of the Lord appeared 
to Abraham and ate with him. He knew them not 
until subsequently they revealed their identity. 

GIDEON'S GREAT COURAGE MANIFESTED 

The same night following the visit of the angel, the 
Lord made a further revelation to Gideon, instructing 
him to destroy the idols upon the property and to overthrow 
the altar of Baal and to build instead an altar to 
Jehovah, to kill one of his father's bullocks and therewith 
to make burnt offerings unto the Lord, using for the 
purpose the wooden pole, or "grove," which formerly did 
honor to Baal. The work was accomplished in the night 
because his father, his brethren and the men of the village 
would have stoutly resisted the work, had they known of 
it. Gideon, therefore, was very courageous when once he 
knew that he had been called of the Lord to do the work. 

Indeed, we may say that conviction that our work is 
of Divine authority is a power of itself in the heart of any 
man or woman. This is part of the lack of today— lack of 
faith in God, and failure to recognize a mission that is of 
God. Much of the preaching, praying and good endeavors 
is, therefore, formalistic, "having a form of godliness 
without its power." From such we turn away, as St. Paul 
directed. We are seeking to be God's servants and we 
want surely to know the Divine Word. Armed with it, 
"one may chase a thousand." 

A young Hebrew pursuing his course in Harvard University 
said, "I have a talent for music and am pursuing 
it; but, oh, I feel as though I want to find some great 

R5606 : page 10 

object worthy of my life and to give my life for that 
object!" Undoubtedly there is such a sentiment in many 
of the young, especially between the years of twelve to 
twenty. Happy are the youth who, in God's providences, 
come under wise, helpful instruction, that they might realize 
that the grandest use of life possible is to render it 
to God in His service and in the service of humanity! 
Gideon was one of this type, as is manifest all through 
the story. He had the courage and the faith, and merely 
needed to have the knowledge of God and to be commissioned 
to go forth in His name to do His will. 

When the villagers found what had happened and 
traced it to Gideon they called upon his father to deliver 



him up to death, but the latter wisely responded as to 
whether or not a god of mighty power would need to be 
defended. If Baal could not defend himself he could not 
defend Israel. The argument was potent. The people 
were prepared to look for a better God as their deliverer. 
Meantime, in harmony with his commission, while the 
Midianites were gathering, Gideon sent messengers to the 
various tribes, with the result that thirty thousand volunteers 
responded to give battle to the invaders. 

But meantime, also, Gideon required fresh evidences of 
the Lord that he was doing the Divine will. The one test 
was that a wool fleece laid out in the open over night 
might be thoroughly wet with the dew, while the ground 
all about it might be dry. The Lord responded and 
granted the proof; for Gideon wrung from the fleece a 
bowl of water. But this was not enough. Who could 
tell but what there was some special attraction for the 
fleece in the water? He would reverse the test and ask 
God to grant a demonstration that all around the fleece 
might be perfectly wet with dew and that the fleece might 
be dry. This was also granted. 

But we are not to think that because the Lord thus 
granted proofs to Gideon it would be proper for us today 
to make similar tests. We have much advantage every 
way. Behind us are the experiences of Gideon and others 
for now thousands of years— added to which we have the 
New Testament records of God's favor toward mankind 
and the Lord Jesus. We have the "wonderful words of 
life" and an introduction to the Heavenly Father through 
the begetting of the Holy Spirit as a result of faith in the 
precious blood. Ours is a different case. The Lord would 
have us walk by faith in the lessons already taught us, and 
not by sights and signs of our own time. 



R5606 : page 10 

GIDEON'S BRAVE THREE HUNDRED 

-JANUARY 24.-JUDGES 7:1-8,16-23.- 

A LITTLE ARMY TOO LARGE-'THINE BE THE GLORY"-COWARDS 

OFF FOR HOME-COWARDS' SPRING-STILL TOO MANY- 
WHY THE LAPPERS WERE CHOSEN-"DO AS I DO"-PITCHER, 
LAMP, TRUMPET-JEHOVAH AND GIDEON-THE VICTORY 
-THE INCIDENT A PARABLE-ITS MEANING. 

"Not by might, nor by power, but by My Spirit, 
saith Jehovah of hosts. "-ZECHARIAH 4:6. 

TODAY'S Study reminds of the victory of the 

Spartan Three Hundred over the Persian 

hosts, except that in this case the battle depended, 

not upon human bravery, but upon 

the Lord's blessing. Our last Study showed 



us Gideon, encouraged by the Lord's promise 

of victory, sending messengers to the 

various tribes in Israel. Today's Study 

shows the resultant army of 32,000 with 

Gideon at the foot of Mount Gilboa, at 

Harod Spring— a little lake which drains off eastward to 

the Jordan. On the farther side of the lake were the 

Midianites, numbering about 135,000. An invading host, 

they had for some time been pillaging the Israelites unmolestedly; 

but now they learned that Gideon's army was 

gathering; and they assembled themselves to crush it. 

While Gideon was feeling that his army was far too 
small for such a battle— one to four— the Lord directed 
him to the contrary— that the army was too large, and 
that there would be danger that the victory He purposed 
should come might not be appreciated as being from the 
Lord, but be thought to indicate the dexterity of Israel's 
warriors. Accordingly, by Divine direction, Gideon gave 
word to his army of 32,000 that as many of them as were 
fearful and preferred to return home might do so. Many 
were fearful— 22,000. The name of the spring, Harod, 
signifies coward; and it has been assumed that the name 
was given it because of the fear manifested by the 22,000 
who went home. 

Surely the faith of Gideon was tried as his little army 
melted to 10,000 men! But the Lord said to him, There 
are yet too many. Cause the host to go down to the spring 
to drink; and discern between those who drink directly 
from the pool, kneeling down and putting their mouths 
into the water and sucking it up, and those who, bending 
over, lap from their hands as a dog laps with his tongue. 

There were Three Hundred of this latter class left by 
this test; and the Lord declared these to be the proper 
ones to especially win the victory. The remaining 9,700, 
however, would later join in the pursuit of the enemy. 

The custom of lapping water with the hand is still 
common with the people of Palestine— shepherds, etc. 
They became very expert at it. Symbolically, this act 
would seem to signify alertness and obedience. An ox 
drinks by putting his mouth into the water and sucking 
it and, when thirsty, gives his entire attention to the 
sucking of the water, refusing to pay any attention to the 
commands of his owner, and even resisting the use of the 
rod upon his flanks. The dog, on the contrary, while lapping 
the water with his tongue, is all alert, with his eyes 
watching in every direction, seeing everything about him, 
and ready to quit the water at any moment in pursuit of 
obedience to duty. 

If water here, as elsewhere in the Bible, be understood 
to represent the Truth, these two companies of Gideon's 
army would represent two classes who love and appreciate 
the Truth. Both classes drink of the water of Truth, but 
the one class more for their own satisfaction. The other 
class, watchful, attentive, drink according to their needs, 
and do not neglect alertness in the Master's service, keeping 
eyes and ears open for the guidance of Divine providence 



at all times. This latter, wiser class are represented 

R5607 : page 10 

by the Three Hundred who were with Gideon, Gideon himself 
representing Jesus, the Captain of our Salvation. 

THE VICTORY AT ARMAGEDDON 

Armies in olden times evidently did not keep so strict 
a watch as do modern armies. At all events, Gideon and 
a trusted companion were able to penetrate in the darkness 
of the night amongst the tents of the Midianites. 
Listening, they heard one relate his dream of how a barley 
loaf rolled down a hill and did havoc. Another offered 
the interpretation that this was Gideon and his small 
army, which was likely to be their undoing. The incident 
shows that the Midianites were fearful, apprehensive. 
Gideon was confident; his faith was strengthened by this 
little experience which the Lord permitted him to have. 

R5607 : page 1 1 

About midnight, shortly after the hour of the changing 
of the guards amongst the Midianites, was the time 
appointed for Gideon's attack. The method of warfare 
was novel. The Three Hundred were divided into three 
companies, and spread out over a considerable space near 
the Midianites. In addition to their usual armor, sword, 
etc., Gideon and his Three Hundred had new weapons. 
Each in his left hand had a pitcher of earthenware, each 
pitcher had in it a lamp; and each soldier had in his other 
hand a ram's horn trumpet. The instructions to the three 
separated bands were that those who were immediately 
with Gideon should do as he did; and that the other bands, 
hearing, should imitate, breaking the front of their 
pitchers to let the light shine out ahead, shouting aloud, 
"Jehovah and Gideon," and blowing in the rams' horns. 

The Midianites, waking out of sleep, beholding the 
flashing lights, hearing the clash of the pottery like the 
sound of armor, hearing the shouting of voices and the 
blowing of trumpets, imagined themselves being surrounded 
by a great host; and half-dazed, they fled. They 
fought each other, mistaking each other for foes. Gideon 
and his Three Hundred pursued and were soon in the 
fight, assisted by the remaining 9,700. The victory was a 
great one. The Lord was recognized to be the Deliverer; 
and Gideon, His servant, was honored accordingly. 

SOME LESSONS FOR TODAY 

Referring to Old Testament matters the Apostle declares, 
"These things were written aforetime for our instruction." 
(Romans 15:4.) In addition to the lessons 
learned at that time the Lord, through some of these 
experiences of the past, gives certain spiritual lessons to 



Spiritual Israel. Gideon's call resembles the Gospel Call 
for volunteers on the side of righteousness— of right 
against wrong, truth against error. 

Many in the world hear the Message, have sympathy 
with it and respond, purposing to become soldiers of 
Christ; but before they are fully accepted, the voice of 
Jesus calls to them, saying, Sit down and count the cost; 
it is better not to put your hand to the plow and become 
a servant of the Lord than afterward to look back and 
wish that you had not become one. 

The sight of the enemy, the "fear of death" (Hebrews 2:15), 
causes them to walk not with the Master, because it 
is too much. When they first responded to the Call, they 
thought of the glory and honor, but overlooked the fact 
that these could be obtained only at the cost of hardship 
and endurance. These cowards who turn back, and never 
really take the vow of consecration, are perhaps no worse 
off than if they had never responded. But they will not 
share in the great victory— the laurels will not be theirs; 
the crown of life will not be their portion. 

Then comes the second test— that of obedience and 
loyalty. One class of the Lord's people, like the faithful 
dog, put obedience to the Master's voice first, alert to do 
His will. Another portion of the Lord's consecrated 
people heed less the Master's voice, and even the rod; 
and being less alert to the service of the Lord, they are 
less used of Him. 

Compared to the world, the most alert ones are but as 
very few. It is those of the Lord's people who are alert 
that He chooses and grants the greatest opportunities for 
service. These are the ones most willing to break the 
earthen vessel— to use their present earthly lives in the 
service of the Lord— that the light of Truth may shine 
out, and that the Cause of Truth may have a victory. 
These zealous ones are most faithful in blowing upon the 
trumpet, representative of God's Word. These have the 
blessed opportunity for letting their light shine. Their 
zeal entitles them to special privileges and opportunities. 

The victory of the Lord is attained by the Antitypical 
Gideon and His little bank of faithful followers, "not by 
might, nor by power, but by My Spirit, saith the Lord." 
The Lord's Spirit is represented by the light of the lamp 
shining from the broken vessel. The broken vessels of 
Gideon's host represent how the Lord's people present 
their bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God, 
in His service— in letting the light shine out— in fighting 
a good fight against the hosts of sin. 

We are doubtless near the time when the great victory, 
the antitype of Gideon's, will be accomplished, when 
the hosts of sin, the powers of evil, will fall upon one 
another for their mutual destruction. The present war 
amongst the nations of Europe is the beginning of this, 
but not its end. According to the Bible, the climax will 
be a temporary reign of anarchy, which will fully prepare 
the world for Messiah's glorious Reign of Righteousness. 



R5607 :page 11 

1915-OUR YEAR TEXT--1915 

WE have chosen as a text for the year the Master's 

words uttered just before His crucifixion 

to two of His dear disciples, who had 

asked to sit with Him in His Throne. We 

have selected the Master's reply as the text 

for this year: "Are ye able to drink of My 

cup?"-Matthew 20:20-23. 

Who knows what this year may bring 
forth! Who knows but that there may be 
some special trial, cup of suffering or 
ignominy, for the loyal followers of the Lamb during 
1915! It seems well that we should have this text especially 
before our minds, "Are ye able to drink of My 
cup?" Let us answer as did the two disciples on that 
occasion, "We are able." This was not a boast on their 
part. It was merely a declaration of their full decision 
that, whatever circumstances or conditions might arise, 
they had no thought of any other course than that of 
obedience to the Lord and of following in His footsteps. 

Let us make such a decision promptly. Let us think 
of it daily. Let us remember, too, that to all those who 
make such a prompt decision of their determination to 
drink of His cup, the Lord gave the same assurance that 
He gave to those two disciples; namely, "Ye shall drink 
of My cup." We are glad of the assurance that we shall 
drink of the Lord's cup, because we know that only those 
who drink of His cup will share with Him in the glories 
of the future, because we know that those who drink of 
His cup are especially loved of the Father, because we 
delight to do the will of our Father and to walk in the 
footsteps of our Lord Jesus. 

We have some little cards illustrative of this year's 
text. We had hoped for them in time for the holidays, but 
our printing was delayed. We shall be glad to send one 
of these cards to each regular attendant of the different 
Classes of the I.B.S.A., upon application of the Class 
Secretary, or to any other WATCH TOWER subscriber living 
in a place where there is no class. You will please receive 
them as little souvenirs from the Society. The card has a 
medallion head of the Savior— a beautiful one, embossed. 
Around the edges is shown a grape-vine, bearing large 
bunches of grapes, representing the fruitage of the Holy 
Spirit, proceeding from the Church and primarily from 
the Lord, who declares, "I am the Vine; ye are the 
branches." At the bottom of the card is a very fine reproduction 
of the Last Supper. On the card are the 

R5607 :page 12 

words of our text for the year, "Are ye able to drink of 



My Cup?" 

The medallion picture of our Lord is an extraordinary 
one— admittedly one of the finest. The legend respecting 
it is interesting. It is the reproduction of an intaglio cut 
in an emerald. It purports to have come from the Roman 
Governor of Judea to the Roman Caesar, and was found 
amongst the valuables of the Caesars at the time of the 
fall of Constantinople, which for some time was the seat 
of government. It was presented to the Pope and is now 
amongst the treasures of the Vatican. A finely painted 
copy of this in a gilt frame was presented to us, and this 
picture and the frame have been reproduced on the card 
for the comfort and refreshment of you all. It is our desire 
that one copy of it should be in the hands of each 
WATCH TOWER subscriber; hence the above suggestion 
as to how you can best procure it. 

On the reverse side of this card we have printed "Our 
Morning Resolve." Quite a good many have expressed 
their appreciation of this little Resolve and have assured 
us that it brought them a blessing— greater contentment 
of heart— greater resignation to the Divine will— greater 
joy in the Lord. We trust that having it on these cards 
may induce many of THE WATCH TOWER readers to make 
this Resolve their own and thus to share in this blessing. 
"The blessing of the Lord maketh rich." 



R5608 : page 12 

THE LIFE PROMISED TO THE CHURCH 

"This is the promise which He hath promised 
us, even eternal life."— 1 John 2:25. 

FROM the standpoint of Christian thought in 

general, the words of our text would be 

practically meaningless; for the great majority 

of people believe that everlasting conditions 

are forced upon all humanity from 

the moment of birth, and that all must live 

forever somewhere. Therefore they argue 

that whoever does not merit Heaven must, 

at death, of necessity go to a Hell of eternal 

torment. This erroneous conclusion is based 

upon the assumption that every human being possesses 

everlasting life and cannot possibly rid himself of it, 

even if he tried. We are born, they declare, with a deathless 

nature, and whoever comes into being must continue 

to live somewhere to all eternity. 

The Scriptures, however, teach to the contrary. They 
declare that no one can have life except as God gives it 
to him. When God created man, He gave our first 
parents perfection of life and organism. Then He informed 
them that they might have that life forever if they 
would obey His Laws; but that if they were disobedient 



He would put upon them the penalty of sin— death; that 
as soon as they had transgressed, the sentence, or curse, 
of death would go into effect— "Dying, thou shalt die." 
They disobeyed, and the penalty came upon them. 

After nine hundred and thirty years of dying, Adam 
was dead. During all that period the penalty was coming 
upon him gradually. Daily he was dying, until finally he 
ceased to breathe. We see that the children of Adam 
could not share his perfect life; for he had lost it before 
any of them came into the world. Thus the world has 
been misshapen in sin and iniquity— a dying race. 

NO LIFE EXCEPT THROUGH CHRIST 

The Scriptures tell us that there would have been no 
future life for the human family had it not been for 
God's provision in Christ. "God so loved the world that 
He gave His Only Begotten Son, that whosoever believeth 
in Him might not perish"— lose life altogether. Even 
before God sent our first parents forth from Eden, He 
promised that eventually there would be a Redeemer. 
The Seed of the woman would at some future time bruise 
the Serpent's head. 

Although death reigned from Adam to Moses, nevertheless 
there was a hope held out to mankind that one day 
the curse would be removed. This hope was transmitted 
through the family of Seth, afterwards through the family 
of Noah, and later through Abraham and his posterity, 
the children of Israel. This hope was merely a suggestion; 
no definite revelation was made respecting God's 
purposes. True, the Prophet Enoch, the seventh from 
Adam through the line of Seth, had prophesied, "Behold 
the Lord cometh with myriads of His saints, to execute 
judgment upon all," and thus had intimated that one day 
righteousness would be established in the earth. Even 
the Promise made to Abraham, "In thy Seed shall all 
the families of the earth be blessed," was not a clear, 
positive statement of everlasting life, although it implied 
a resurrection from the dead. 

When the Israelites found that they could not gain 
life everlasting by keeping the Law of God, the Lord 
promised to send them a Deliverer, who would take away 
their stony heart and make a New Covenant with them. 
Their experience under the Law Covenant taught them 
that nothing they could themselves do would deliver them 
from the power of Sin and Death. Messiah would be 
their Deliverer.— Romans 11:26. 

THE IMPORT OF JESUS' TEACHINGS 

When Jesus came, He brought the words of eternal 
life, everlasting life. As St. Paul declares, Jesus Christ 
"brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel." 
(2 Timothy 1:10.) The fact that our Savior 
brought these to light demonstrates that they were not 
seen before. Although there had been an intimation of 



God's Plan given to Abraham, yet everything looked contrary 

to this. The death penalty which God had pronounced 

in Eden seemed to preclude all hope of life everlasting. 

Although God had stated more or less vaguely 

that He would one day deliver humanity from the curse 

of sin and death, no one could tell how this could be— how 

God could remit the death penalty and still be just. 

But when Jesus came, He brought the whole subject 
to light. He showed that His redemptive work, provided 
by God's gracious arrangement, would eventually 
give life everlasting to all who would accept of it upon 
the Divine terms. He also brought immortality to light. 
He revealed the fact that God purposes not only to give 
the world of mankind life everlasting, but to give the 
faithful followers in Jesus' footsteps a higher kind of 
life— immortality. Thus a new thought was brought out 
—one never even dreamed of before. 

Our Lord's statements respecting life everlasting and 
immortality are not so clear as are the statements made 
by His Apostles. We recall that these Apostles were 
promised that they should be especially guided in their 
utterances. Whatsoever they would bind on earth would 
be binding and obligatory in the sight of God; and whatsoever 
they would loose would not be considered binding 
in God's sight. But in what our Lord Jesus said there 
was a basis for all that the Apostles said and taught. 

There was a reason why Jesus did not clearly specify 
things in respect to Himself. This He declared when He 
said to His disciples, "I have many things to say unto 

R5608 : page 13 

you, but ye cannot bear them now." To have attempted 

to tell them all about the glory, honor and immortality to 

which the Church was being called would have been to 

give them more than they could have borne. The natural 

man cannot receive the things of the Spirit of God— the 

deep things. Hence it was best for our Lord to leave 

those deep spiritual subjects. After Pentecost the spirit-begotten 

would be enabled to understand.— John 16:12-14. 

HOPE FOR THE WORLD 

The whole subject matter of Jesus' teachings was this 
everlasting life. He had come for the very purpose of 
giving His life a Ransom for many, that men might have 
restored to them the favor originally enjoyed. The Scriptures 
nowhere teach that all have life inherently; on the 
contrary, they teach the very reverse. "He that hath the 
Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of God hath 
not life." "He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting 
life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life, 
but the wrath of God abideth on him." 

The Promise mentioned in our text we understand to 
refer particularly to the Message brought by our Lord 
Jesus: "Which salvation began to be spoken by our 



Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard 
Him." (Hebrews 2:3.) When Jesus came, He threw 
light upon the entire subject of God's Plan for human 
salvation from sin and death. He showed that there was 
to be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of 
the unjust— of those in a justified condition and of those 
not justified. He would raise them up at the Last Day, 
at the beginning of the great Seventh Day of a thousand 
years, during which His Messianic Kingdom would prevail 
and the blessing would be world-wide. As the long-promised 
Seed of Abraham, He and His Church would 
bless all the families of the earth. 

SPECIAL PRIVILEGES OF THE CHURCH 

Our text refers to a certain class only. It does not 
include the world. "This is the promise which He hath 
promised us." (1 John 2:25.) The promise is now to 
the Church, and to no others. All the promises for the 
world are made along the line of general principles. All 
the world are to be blessed, and the blessing that will 
come to them is an opportunity to gain life everlasting. 
God made everything dependent upon the Son: "He that 
hath the Son hath life"— no others. So only believers 
can have life now— and these not in the complete sense- 
only the beginning of that life which will be perfected in 
the resurrection. The world have no life in them, and 
cannot have it, except under God's arrangement. 

Those who now come to Christ are the Church, the 
Bride class, and are an especially privileged class. They 
come into the life that is incorruptible. But there is a 
promise for the world, and only believers know about this 
provision for mankind. All shall have opportunity for 
attaining everlasting life. God has provided a trial Day, 
a Judgment Day, to demonstrate whether, when mankind 
shall have been brought to a knowledge of the Truth, 
they will accept His terms and thus attain everlasting life. 

The Lord will make it quite possible for the world to 
gain life everlasting on the human plane, just as He is 
now making it possible for the Church to attain life on 
the Divine plane. The thing for the consecrated people 
of God to do, then, is to strive to be of the "us" class. 
This term applies to those who become disciples, those 
who believe in the Kingdom glory and honor offered 
them, and who, so believing, devote their lives to walking 
in the footsteps of Jesus, even unto death. 

This "us" class includes not only the antitypical 
Priests, but also the antitypical Levites. But while both 
classes will have eternal life, everlasting life, "the crown 
of life" (immortality) is only for those who will prove 
themselves to be "more than conquerors." The Scriptures 
hold out a special promise to all who will walk carefully 
in the footsteps of Jesus. This class are promised join t-heirship 
with Him, the privilege of sitting with Him in 
His Throne.— Revelation 3:21. 

On one occasion our Lord said to the Jews, "For as 



the Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the 

Son to have life in Himself." (John 5:26.) In this 

statement, doubtless, He touched upon the subject of immortality. 

As the Father has inherent life, so He gave 

to the Son to have this life; and as the Son had the 

promise of this life during His earthly ministry, so He 

had the actuality of it in His resurrection. This same 

R5609 : page 13 

promise is given to the Church which is His Body.— 
John 10:27,28. 

On another occasion He said, "Except ye eat the flesh 
of the Son of Man, and drink His blood, ye have no life 
in you." (John 6:53.) This would be inherent life— life 
in themselves. The difference between this life and ordinary 
life is that the former is inherent, and the latter 
maintained. All the angels have a life not forfeited, an 
eternal, everlasting life. It can cease if God so choose, 
but it is not a life that has a terminating period. We do 
not know how the angels are supplied with life, but the 
fact that the Scriptures declare that some of them will 
die is a proof that they do not possess immortality. 

A WORD OF CAUTION 

We should be very careful in our use of language. If 
we were to say to the majority of people that we believe 
that only the elect Church will have immortality, they 
would misunderstand us altogether— they would misunderstand 
us to mean that all the remainder of humanity 
were to perish like brute beasts. Therefore we should be 
sure that we make the thought clearly understood. Everlasting 
life is a life that needs to be sustained; immortality 
is that Divine degree of life that needs not to be 
sustained. 

Jesus said, "I am come that they might have life, and 
that they might have it more abundantly." (John 10:10.) 
It was life that Adam lost. That life was everlasting in 
the sense that it might have lasted forever. It was not a 
life granted for a fixed period— a year or even a million 
of years— but was to last so long as it was not forfeited. 
In this Scripture our Lord refers to two classes— the 
obedient of the world, who will have sustained life everlastingly, 
and the Church, who with Jesus will share the 
Divine nature will have life "more abundant" in the 
sense that it will be inherent life, not requiring to be 
sustained. 

This is the promise, then, which He has promised us. 
If we would make our calling and election sure to glory, 
honor and immortality, we must exercise great carefulness 
indeed. Those who attain the prize will get the 
grandest blessing God has to give. All should understand 
that we have something to do in realizing the gracious 
promises of God to us. While God is both able and willing 
to perform His part of the contract, yet we must 



make sure that we co-operate in every reasonable way. 

"And can we hope to gain, dear Lord, such wondrous bliss- 

To dwell with Thee in light ineffable? 

Oh, can we e'er attain such joy as this— 

The life immortal, incorruptible? 

Ah, yes! for Thou hast promised, and Thy Word is sure, 

And thus inspired we press along the way; 

The path is lonely, but the end is sweet, 

And openeth into realms of perfect day." 



R5609 : page 14 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
MORE ABOUT LONDON DRAMA EXHIBITIONS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings and love in our Redeemer! The interest in connection 
with the PHOTO-DRAMA at the London Opera House 
continues, so that a further fifteen-days' exhibition has been 
arranged for. The enclosed card gives the figures to date. 

This is proving by far the most economical exhibition 
held in London. Owing to the great interest in the DRAMA 
we have no need to spend a penny on advertisements for the 
repetition; we issue a plentiful supply of tickets, and leave 
the people themselves to do the canvassing, and they are 
glad to do it. The electrical equipment belongs to the House, 
so we have no charges on that account; the profit on the 
sale of Scenarios pays for the electric current, and we have 
only the rent to find; on this last occasion even this was 
provided by one of the audience. Brother Tharratt, who is 
acting as floor manager, had an envelope put into his hand 
by one of the crowd passing out— a perfect stranger to him. 
To his joy when he opened the envelope, he found twenty L5 
notes ($500.00), which is just the amount required for rent 
for a further fortnight's presentation. 

You can well understand, dear Brother, how our hearts 
rejoice in this manifestation of the Lord's approval. It is 
heartening to see with what eagerness the crowds press forward 
to their seats and listen intently to the message from 
the Lord; they show further appreciation of the DRAMA by 
frequent applause. We wish the House were larger that all 
might be enabled to find accommodation; night after night 
we are packed out, and great numbers are turned away. 

It is surely a foretaste of how the "pure language" will 
be sought after by and by, and indicates how the great work 
of Restitution will be accomplished in the comparatively 
short space of time. 

We think of you, dear Brother, and often wish you were 
here to see for yourself something of the wonderful results 
of your noble service for the Lord and His precious Truth. 
How London would delight to see you at this time! 

Desiring for you, and all the loved ones with you, a continuance 



of the Lord's blessing, 
Your brother and servant, H. J. SHEARN, 

Supt. of DRAMA for London. 



DRAMA PROSPERING IN SWITZERLAND 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Concerning the DRAMA work in German Switzerland, I can 
give you good news; since I wrote last, we had very good 
exhibitions in Zurich, Basle and St. Gall. Altogether 40,000 
visitors and 60 exhibitions at the expense of 50 francs [about 
$12] per exhibition, rent and everything else included. In all 
these places we found remarkable interest, and a large number 
of letters of appreciation came in, which I turn over to you, dear 
Brother, as the author of the DRAMA. We got over 3,000 addresses 
of such ones, who express a special interest in Present 
Truth, and we are anxious to lead them on further. All this 
keeps me exceedingly busy, and therefore I hardly find time 
for correspondence. I lecture nearly every night and Sundays 
two or three times publicly and always crowded halls. Present 
conditions have very much to do with it, as people are wakening 
up. We sell much literature, but there are many who cannot 
even afford to pay ten or twenty cents for a booklet or a 
volume. To these we loan one after another, in order that 
no one who has interest is hindered from getting the Truth. 

As we are nearing Christmas and a new political year, we 
naturally ask ourselves: Will it be the last one? The Lord 
alone knows, and we are glad to wait patiently this side of 
the Veil till He calls us thither by such or other means. Our 
times are in His hands, and He cares well for us. What can 
we ask more? His name be blessed! 

The many difficulties are growing fast, and people begin to 
become more and more afraid about the things to come. It 
seems hard to believe that the Church should gain more influence 
yet over the state. Everything we hear goes to the contrary, 
and shows how little influence the Church really has today. 
In Germany and German Switzerland most of the pious 
people say, "If Germany loses the war, then we will not believe 
any longer in the existence of a living God. It would 
prove that there is no such Being, for Germany fights for a 
just cause." 

On this occasion I transfer to you, dear Brother Russell, the 
heartiest Christmas and New Year wishes from Sr. Lanz, myself 
and children and all the dear friends over here, who do 
not forget to thank the Lord every day more for the blessed 
Truth we got by your mediation. May the Lord be your great 
Reward, and help us all to become partakers of His blessed 
Kingdom, which ere long will be established. 

With much brotherly love, I remain, 
Your Servant in the Lord, 

EMIL LANZ, Bern (Switzerland). 



SAYS COLOSSAL THANKSGIVING IS DUE 

DEAR MR. SHEARN of the London, Eng., I.B.S.A. Drama:- 

I feel constrained to write you to indicate in some way my 
intense thankfulness, first to God, and after Him to Pastor 
Russell, yourself, and the I.B.S.A., for the great blessing 
of the last month. 

As yet, I am a trifle bewildered by the magnitude of the 
outlook. In all modesty and reverence, I feel as though the 
Almighty had taken me into His confidence and solved problem 
after problem that I had always thought insoluble. Often I 
have tried to read and understand the Bible (both Testaments), 
and the statements have appeared involved, incoherent, and 
unintelligible. Now it would seem impossible to misunderstand; 
the whole Book seems to blaze with information. 

Formerly I had just grasped a point here and another 
there; but there was no connection between the points, and 
I had come to the conclusion that— in my case, at any rate— 
the connections could not be made during life. 

I feel devoutly thankful for one thing, though, which 
now— in this fuller knowledge— would be impossible; and that 
is, I am thankful that I had fully made up my mind to pay 
God the only compliment possible in my so-recently unenlightened 
state— to trust Him and to believe that He was 
infinitely better than His ordinary servants made Him out 
to be. 

Then came the PHOTO-DRAMA, and my chat with you the 
last thing Saturday, and your explanatory lectures Sunday. 

What pleases me most is that I had trusted God while in 
the dark; for to doubt now is a sheer impossibility. 

This letter is therefore an attempt to put in words the 
feeling of a colossal thanksgiving due to the teaching of the 
I.B.S.A. and the direct blessing of God in leading me to it. 

R5610 :page 14 

I have never wanted wealth before; but I want it now to 
help on, to the utmost of my power, the Holy work of this 
real man of God— Pastor Russell. 
With all best wishes, very faithfully yours, 

GEORGE RAWLINSON. -England. 



REALIZES THE PROMISED ONE HUNDRED FOLD 

MY DEAR BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

In the Master's name, Greetings: I feel constrained to 
write to you today, because it is the anniversary of a day 
which marked the opening wide of a door of opportunity to 
labor effectively in the Lord's service. 

Though having been associated with Present Truth since 
1900, it was only three years ago today that, kneeling at my 
table, I wrote out and signed the Vow— a solemn reminder of 
my personal covenant with the Lord, and sealed it with tears 
which, like "The Cup," were mingled sweet and bitter. Daily 



my desire has been, "May Thy rule come into my heart more 

and more, and Thy will be done in my mortal body"; and 

whilst praying for you and all at the Bethel Home and everywhere, 

I have tried to scrutinize more carefully my thoughts, 

words and actions that I might be of more use to the Lord 

and His dear people. 

So fortified, and encouraged repeatedly by our Father's 
smile, time passed in joyous service, and then that beautiful 
Resolve you commended to us appeared in THE TOWER. 
There was no waiting this time. My heart leaped to take 
advantage of this further fortification, and as I took up "The 
daily round, the common task," I said, "I will, this day, as 
a saint of God, fulfil my vows, continuing the work of sacrificing 
the flesh and its interests," and I tried to be humble, 
gentle and true to all; and then, when the anxieties pressed 
sore, and my "old man," naturally a mutterer, was tempting 
me to worry and fret, I remembered the closing lines and 
sought God's grace to "Repel all anxiety, all discontent, all 
discouragement." 

I can now see that before November 11, 1911,1 was not 
in an attitude which invited the utmost blessing from the 
Lord, but since that time I have realized the promised one 
hundredfold in this present life, and now look forward with 
full assurance of faith to that deliverance which soon shall 
swallow up our present hopes in wondrous realization. 

May the Lord bless thee, dear Pastor. I thank Him continually 
for your able and faithful ministry, and esteem very 
highly the privilege of association with you in the dissemination 
of the Harvest Message, particularly in these closing 
days, when we have the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION. 

Your brother by His Grace, H. C. THACKWAY. 

R5610 :page 15 

CREATION DRAMA ITEMS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

At Dothan, Ala., a Jewish merchant said to one of the 
brethren there, "My son was out to see your pictures last 
night (Part 3), and he says he loves Jesus now." 

At Pell City, Ala., a holiness revival meeting was in 
progress, and they had been praying that the Lord would 
close up the motion-picture house which had started recently 
—the only one in town. The revivalist lost his congregation 
when the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION was opened up, 
so he closed his meetings and came, too. This incident ought 
to appeal to the owners of motion-picture houses. 

One lady came out at the close of Part 3 and said, "I 
have been a Christian and read my Bible for many years, 
but I never loved the Lord Jesus as much as I do tonight." 

At Cairo, Ga., the ministers decided to fight us, and one 
of them, apparently more fair-minded than the rest, decided 
to come and see Part 1., so that his opposition might be intelligent. 
The result was he came to see all the parts and was 
much impressed. 

At Sylacauga, Ala., the electric lights are furnished by 



water-power, but a continued drought had closed down the 
electric light plant and, of course, the motion-picture houses, 
too. So the Opera House was offered to friends at the low 
rate of $10 for four days. It seemed the $10 was to be 
wasted, but a day or two before the windows of heaven were 
opened, and the rain descended, and they had plenty of power 
for the PHOTO-DRAMA. 

I am greatly thankful for the privilege of a part in this 
phase of the Harvest work, and daily pray that I may be 
kept humble and faithful in the discharge of my privileges 
to the very end. 

Yours in much Christian love, B. H. BARTON. 



DRAMA SCENARIO IN THE FAMILY 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

For many years not a few parents have expressed the 
desire to have something additional to the Bible Talks for 
the instruction of their children in Truth matters. The 
thought has struck my mind just lately, as I was advising a 
mother regarding doctrinal instruction for her children, that 
the Scenario of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION would be just 
the thing to give instruction for children, that would be 
far better than that of the Bible Talks, and yet as necessary 
for their capacity, simpler in style and contents than the 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. While you may not have intended 
such a use of the Scenario while preparing it, yet it 
seems that it is well adapted to the purpose of giving such 
general instructions on the doctrines, precepts, exhortations, 
histories, types and prophecies, as well as such promises of 
the Scriptures as would be adapted to the capacity of many 
of the children of the Truth people. 

During my visits in various homes I have, among other 
things, given the parents help for their children's instruction; 
but have felt that we needed something beyond the history 
of the Bible, as necessary and good as that is, for the instruction 
of the Truth children. The Scenario, I think, will 
be a most excellent thing to fill this need. 

With much Christian love and wishes for the Lord's continued 
blessing on you, 

I remain, your brother and servant, PAUL S. L. JOHNSON. 



"BETTER THAN FOUR WEEKS REVIVAL" 

DEAR FRIENDS :- 

The PHOTO-DRAMA, with its trials and blessings, has come 
and gone, but I hope it has not been in vain; for it has left 
its mark here as nothing else has done for a long time back. 
The trials it brought us were considerable; but the blessings 
so far outweighed and exceeded the trials that the latter 
passed into insignificance. 

We are truly thankful to you for giving us the opportunity 



of showing the DRAMA here. And we can never thank and 
praise our dear Heavenly Father enough for giving us this 
grand and wonderful privilege of helping in the work of 
presenting the DRAMA to the people of this town and vicinity. 
It is truly a marvelous witness for the Truth, and we trust 
that much good has been done here that will bear fruit in 
God's due time. And we are so glad and thankful that we 
could have a share in this, that the cost to us has seemed not 
worth mentioning. I am sure I speak the sentiments of all 
the class here. 

Many are the favorable comments. One man said, "The 
DRAMA did the town more good than a four weeks revival." 
Another, "It is the finest thing that ever came to town; bring 
it again." Another, "It did me more good than anything I 
ever saw or heard." Many pronounced it the finest thing they 
had ever seen, even in the largest cities. So far, six have 
ordered complete sets of the books; one of them is an infidel. 

I saw the DRAMA at the Clinton, Iowa, Convention, but 
never realized what a wonderful and powerful witness for 
truth it is, until it was shown here. It has been such a blessing 
to me and has filled my heart with such an overflow of 
joy that I could not contain it all. The joy comes largely 
from having the privilege of serving it to others. 

Yours in the love and service of the Lord, 
E. M. LANE.-Iowa. 



GREATEST BLESSING THAT HAS COME INTO HER LIFE 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I feel I must write you a note of thanks for the greatest 
blessing that has come into my life, through the blessed 
promises of the Divine Plan of the Ages. I feel as though 
God had taken me into His very presence by giving me a 
glimpse of the glory of His love. 

Last May, when the PHOTO-DRAMA came to Birmingham 
for a month it was my privilege to see it, and through its influence 
I was led to purchase the SCRIPTURE STUDIES. I have 
read and reread with growing delight those precious pages 
with the Bible at my side. 

This has brought sure peace and contentment, answering 
the "Why?" that has been for years tugging at my heart-strings. 
How good God is to be so tenderly patient, and how 
I want to appreciate His love for us and do everything I 
know to please Him! 

I realize the time is short, and by His grace am starting 
in the Colporteur service this week, grateful for the honor 
to be an ambassador for Christ. 

I have just learned that a record is kept at the Tabernacle 
office of those who have sent in their names as having made 
the Vow their own. I recognize it as the deeper significance 
of my consecration vow, and have reverently asked God to 
help me make it and keep it my own, desiring that my name 
be added to the record. 

By His grace, one of the little ones in Christ, 



MRS. EDLENA B. GIB SON. --Ala. 



RE ASSOCIATED BIBLE STUDENTS 

DEAR BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

We have noted the paragraph in November 1st WATCH 
TOWER re the name "ASSOCIATED BIBLE STUDENTS" in place of 
the one we have been using, "INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS 
ASSOCIATION." We can see some reasons why we are not 
entitled to use the latter name and we think the new one a 
very good one. 

Shall we take down the signs that now appear on the 
Temple and change our stationery? (The signs over the 
doors now read, "PEOPLE'S TEMPLE, LOCAL HEADQUARTERS 
INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION.") 

Trusting we may impose on your valuable time long enough 
to reply to these queries, and assuring you of our continued 
love and prayers, we are, THE LOS ANGELES ECCLESIA. 

IN REPLY 

The words "ASSOCIATED BIBLE STUDENTS" on a religious-notice 
page of newspapers seems a very good name. We 
therefore use it in advertising local New York Meetings. This 
does not mean that we have abandoned the use of the words 
INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION in connection 
with all literature, conventions and general affairs. As respects 
the friends everywhere, if they think it best to continue 
the use of the name INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS 
ASSOCIATION they may do so; but we would like that it be 
used only as you have used it in Los Angeles; namely, "Local 
Headquarters (or Local Class) INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS 
ASSOCIATION." 



MID-WINTER TORONTO, ONT., CONVENTION 

We have arranged for a Three-Day Convention— January 
30, 31 and February 1— at the time of Brother Russell's visit. 

Trust you can give notice in the next WATCH TOWER. 
May the Lord's blessing be upon our mutual efforts to praise 
and serve Him. Requests for accommodations may be addressed 
to me as below. 
Your brother and fellow-servant, W. C. DOUGLAS, 
Sec'y I.B.S.A. Toronto, Ont, Class, 
1 1 Kennith Avenue. 



page 16 

International Bible Students Association Classes 



STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 



SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the 
Divine Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption 
and restitution: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner 
and time of the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible 
Testimony on this subject: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. 
(Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies 
which mark events connected with the "Time of the End," 
the glorification of the Church and the establishment of the 
Millennial Kingdom; it also contains a chapter on the Great 
Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the dates and other 
teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 
6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Battle of Armageddon," shows that the 
dissolution of the present order of things is in progress, and 
that all the panaceas offered are valueless to avert the predicted 
end. It marks in these events the fulfilment of prophecy, 
noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of Matt. 24 and 
Zech. 14:1-9: 688 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats 
an all-important subject— the hub, the center around which all 
the features of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the 
most careful and prayerful consideration on the part of all 
true Christians: 640 pages in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative 
Week (Genesis 1,2), and with the Church, God's "New 
Creation." It examines the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, 
obligations and hopes appertaining to those called and 
accepted as members of the Body under the Head: 750 pages, in 
embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) 
$3.00 (12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (2s. 6d.) 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: German 
and Swedish, six vols.; Dano-Norwegian, five vols.; Greek, 
four vols.; Finnish, three vols.; French, two vols.; Hollandish, 
Spanish, Italian, Hungarian, Polish, Arabic, Roumanian, 
Chinese and Japanese, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform 



with English edition, prices the same. 

For the Blind in American Braille, English Braille and 
New York Point. 



page 17 

VOL. XXXVI JANUARY 15 No. 2 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

The Soul, Not the Body, Brought forth 
from the Tomb 19 

A Candle as an Illustration 19 

In What Sense the Dead Sleep 19 

Points Not Usually Noticed 20 

What Christ's Death Accomplished 20 

A Stupendous Miracle 21 

The Tragedy of Samson 21 

Points to Be Remembered 22 

Victory in Death 22 

King David's Great-Grandmother 23 

Two Beautiful Characters 23 

Value of Positive Decision 23 

How to Become a Christian 24 

The Voice of the Lord 24 

Parental Responsibility Toward Children 25 

God's Reproof of Eli 25 

Divine Disapproval of Weak Character 25 

Reports from Foreign Missions— 1914 26 

Interesting Letters 31 

page 18 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



SYMBOLIC BAPTISM AT THE N.Y. CITY TEMPLE 

Until further notice opportunities for symbolizing death 
with Christ will be given the first Sunday of each month. 



"WHY FINANCIERS TREMBLE" 

In the next Volunteer matter the above will be the title of 
the leading article. In ordering ask for Vol. Monthly No. 67. 



THE DRAMA IN MANY TONGUES 

The DRAMA is being shown and heard by the Finnish, 
the Swedish, the Danish, the Norwegians and the Germans. 
We are hoping to have copies of these records for American 
use shortly. The Danish records have already arrived. We 
also have some inquiries for these in Polish, Greek, Spanish 
and Italian. If the interest seems sufficient to justify it we 
hope to have a fairly good array of foreign translations of 
the DRAMA. Any interested should address EUREKA DRAMA 
DEPT., 17 Hicks St. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY 

Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
VOLUME VI. 
Week of February 7....Q. 15 to 20 Week of February 21. ...Q. 25 to 30 
Week of February 14.. ..Q. 21 to 24 Week of February 28. ...Q. 31 to 36 
Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each; 



or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



R5611 :page 19 

THE SOUL, NOT THE BODY, BROUGHT FORTH FROM THE TOMB 

"There shall be a resurrection of the dead, 
both of the just and of the unjust."— Acts 24:15. 

WHEN we consider that for centuries people 

have been accustomed to confusion in respect 

to the teachings of Scripture, it is 

natural that the question should be asked, 

What proof have we that it is not the body 

that sleeps in death, and that meantime the 

soul has not passed on to the higher 

realms? The answer is that in the Word 

of God we find no suggestion that such is 

the case. The Bible says nothing about the 

resurrection of the body, but much about the soul. Repeatedly 

the Word of God calls death a sleep. Every 

night the body sleeps, if it is in good condition; and 

this natural sleep of the body is Scripturally used to illustrate 

the condition of all who die the Adamic death. 

In order to get the matter clear in our minds we 
must go back to the beginning and see what the soul is. 
First of all we read in the Genesis account (1:27) that 
God created man— not man's body, but man. The question 
then arises, What is man? 

We answer, Man is not so much avoirdupois, but an 
intelligent being, a personality. What God formed out 
of the dust of the earth was not man, but merely a form, 
or body, that would be made into man. Then into its 
nostrils God breathed "the breath of lives"— the Hebrew 
term signifying the breath or vitality common to all animal 
beings. It was not a special kind of life different 
from that which the lower animals have; on the contrary, 
it was the same kind of life given to fish, fowl 
and beasts— the power to live. 

The same kind of life is carried forward in the human 
family that is carried forward in beasts. This vitality 
common to all animal creatures infuses the body 
and thus energizes it. The difference between man and 
the lower animals is that while they have the same kind 
of life man has the superior brain. Man's head is shaped 
differently; therefore he can think of subjects about 
which the lower animals cannot think, because he has a 
better brain. A man with a head of a given shape cannot 
think with the same breadth of mind as a man with 
a better shaped head— a man who is less fallen. Some 
have lost more, others less, of the original perfection, 
of the original intelligence, given man in his creation. 

A CANDLE AS AN ILLUSTRATION 



A careful examination of the Genesis account of 
man's creation reveals the fact that when the breath 
came into the body which God had formed out of the 
dust of the ground, the combination produced soul, sentient 
being, with personality. The body in itself has no 
personality, the breath of life has no power, no sentient 
being, but when the two came together, they produced 
sentient being. 

Perhaps the best illustration of the thought is afforded 
by a candle. The candle is composed of tallow 
or wax and wick. The flame is produced by an outside 
power— the spark of fire. When the spark is applied to 
the wick, the air begins to combine with the wax or the 
tallow, and the result is light. 

Let the candle represent the body, the air represent 
the breath of life— vitality— and the flame the being, the 
personality. God alone can strike the match— create the 
human being. This life which came from God in the 
beginning was given to Adam upon certain conditions, 
certain restrictions; namely, it was to continue forever 
if man remained obedient to God, but if he was disobedient 
God would take his life from him. 

Adam was disobedient, and his soul was sentenced to 
death. (Ezekiel 18:4,20.) It was not the body that 
sinned and was sentenced to death, while the soul remained 
pure. On the contrary, "The soul that sinneth 
it shall die." The sentence of death pronounced upon 
Adam affected his soul. As it was the spark of life that 
produced the soul, so the taking away of the spark of 
life extinguished the soul. To revert to the illustration 
of the candle: If some one blow upon it, the flame will 
be extinguished; thus is produced an adverse condition. 

But before Father Adam died, before the flame of 
life was fully extinguished, he had imparted the spark 
of life to his children; and these in turn imparted the 
spark of life to theirs. Thus the spark of life has been 
transmitted from generation to generation. In the illustration, 
if before we say, "I will blow out the light of 
that candle," it has been used to light other candles, the 
extinguishing of the flame of the first candle will not 
affect the others. But the fact that the transmitted 
spark of life was impaired is evident; for whereas 
Adam lived nine hundred and thirty years under adverse 
conditions, his children as a rule could not live nearly so 
long, thirty-three years now being the average life-time. 

IN WHAT SENSE THE DEAD SLEEP 

Everywhere the Scriptures state that it is the soul 
that is dying. The question then might arise, If the 
soul dies, what hope of a future life has mankind? The 
Bible answers that from the beginning God foreknew all 
that would happen, and that already in His Plan He had 
made arrangements whereby there would be a resuscitation, 



R5611 : page 20 

a re-quickening, of these human souls that have 
died. Nothing is beyond His knowledge or His power. 
Nowhere does He say that there will be a re-quickening 
of the body, but of the soul. 

The Sadducees of Jesus' day did not believe in the 
resurrection of the dead. When, therefore, they heard 
that Jesus had said that all in the graves would ultimately 
hear His voice and come forth, they disputed 
His statement as foolish. Coming to Him with a proposition 
which they thought would expose the fallacy of 
His teachings, they said to Him, Suppose a woman had 
seven husbands, all of whom died before she did, whose 
wife would she be in the resurrection?— Luke 20:27-40. 

Jesus replied that they erred because they neither 
understood the Scriptures nor appreciated the Power of 
the Almighty. He reiterated His statement that there 
would be a resurrection of the dead, and reminded them 
that God had so implied in His message to Moses at the 
burning bush, when He said, "I am the God of Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob." The Master's argument is that 
this statement is of itself a proof of the resurrection; for 
God surely would not refer thus to beings forever blotted 
out of existence; that God's purpose of a resurrection is 
fixed, unalterable, and that those whom men call dead 
"all live unto Him"— from God's standpoint they are 
asleep, and not destroyed. The Word of God therefore 
speaks of the dead as sleeping. 

Throughout the Old Testament we read that different 
ones were gathered to their fathers or that they slept 
with their fathers. Did the body sleep? No, it was 
absolutely dead— returned to the dust from which it 
was created. What was it, then, that slept? That 
which slept was that which God recognized as the personality- 
the soul. The souls of both good and bad 
slept; for it is written that "there shall be a resurrection 
of the just and of the unjust." 

Abraham's fathers were not saintly men, but heathen. 
He was called out from amongst his kindred to be a 
servant of God. When Abraham was gathered to his 
fathers in death he went to the same place where they 
were— Sheol in the Old Testament, Hades in the New— 
the tomb, the death state. Of all the kings of Israel, 
good and bad, and of the Prophets, we read that they were 
gathered to their fathers. They are asleep in death. 

POINTS NOT USUALLY NOTICED 

When Jesus entered the room where the young 
daughter of Jairus lay dead, He declared, "Weep not; 
she is not dead, but sleepeth." He did not say that she 
was in Heaven or in Purgatory or in Hell. He spoke in 
the same way about Lazarus, saying, "Lazarus sleepeth." 
His disciples replied, "If he sleep, he shall do well." 
They had not understood the Master's words. Finally 



Jesus said to them plainly, "Lazarus is dead.... Nevertheless, 
let us go unto him." So they went to the tomb 
where Lazarus was. 

When Jesus met Martha and Mary, He did not tell 
them that Lazarus was in Heaven, with a harp in his 
hands, etc.— nothing of the kind. What He said was, 
"Thy brother shall rise again"; thy brother shall live 
again. Martha replied, "I know that he shall rise again 
in the resurrection at the last Day"— the great Day, the 
Seventh Thousand- Year Day, the Day of Christ's Kingdom, 
when all the dead will be due to come forth. To 
encourage her, Jesus said, "I am the Resurrection and 
the Life"— there will be no resurrection except by My 
power— why not ask Me now? But Martha did not get 
the thought; for Jesus said, "Where have ye laid him?" 

Martha and Mary took our Lord to where Lazarus 
was. When Jesus gave command that the stone be rolled 
away from the tomb, Martha protested, saying that since 
her brother had then been dead four days, corruption 
must have set in. We read that Jesus said, "Lazarus, 
come forth"— out of the cave where he had been laid. 
Jesus did not say, Lazarus, come down from Heaven, nor 
did He say, Lazarus, come up from below.— John 11:1-46. 

Lazarus was a very dead man; for he had died four 
days before Jesus came. Yet from the Divine standpoint 
he was asleep, as the Master declared; that is to 
say, his soul was not destroyed. According to the Scriptures, 
the soul can be put out of existence. On one occasion 
our Lord said to His disciples, "Fear not them 

R5612:page20 

that kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but 
rather fear Him which is able to destroy both soul and 
body in Gehenna"— the Second Death.— Matthew 10:28. 

WHAT CHRIST'S DEATH ACCOMPLISHED 

The soul is that individuality which God has decreed 
shall have an opportunity of coming to a knowledge of 
everlasting life. All this opportunity is in Christ. As 
St. Paul says, "For to this end Christ both died and 
rose, and revived, that He might be Lord both of the 
dead and of the living." (Romans 14:9.) He lived as 
a man, and died that He might thereby have the right 
to control all those who have gone into the prisonhouse 
of death. Therefore the Scriptures tell us that there 
must be a resurrection of the dead. 

Our Lord says that all will hear His voice and come 
forth from the tomb. (John 5:28,29.) In 1 Corinthians 15, 
St. Paul explains how this can be. He points out 
that the death of Christ is for all: "As all in Adam die, 
even so shall all in Christ be made alive— every man in 
his own order." Then he proceeds to show that the first 
to come forth will be the Church class. He also declares 
that if there is no resurrection of the dead, our 



preaching is vain and our hope is gone. He concludes 
that since Christ is risen from the dead there is therefore 
an assurance of the resurrection. 

THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY 

The restoration of the bodies of the billions who 
have died would be a very absurd proposition. Scientists 
tell us that the human frame changes once in every 
seven years; that continually old matter is being replaced 
with new, so that a man who has reached the 
age of forty-nine years has had seven bodies during his 
lifetime. The change of the body did not affect the personality 
of the man, however. The sloughing off of a 
hand or a foot or the loss of an eye might have taken 
place, but the human soul continues; for it is this intelligent 
human being that has resulted from the union 
of matter and vitality. God's proposition is the restoration 
of this soul, this personality. Never does He speak 
of the resurrection of the body. 

The theory of the resurrection of the body has involved 
theologians in many difficulties. Some years ago 
a story went the rounds of the newspapers to the effect 
that the coffin of a man who had been buried at the foot 
of an apple tree had been unearthed, and the discovery 
made that the roots of the tree had penetrated the coffin 
and absorbed the body, and that at these roots there was 
something resembling a hand, an arm, a human limb, etc. 
In other words, the tree had been living upon that human 
body. The apples from that tree had been sold to 
various persons and shipped in all directions; some had 
been fed to hogs, etc. Those who hold to the theory of 
the resurrection of the body would have a knotty problem 
to solve in trying to fit their theory to these facts. 

There is not one statement in the Bible that declares 

R5612 : page 21 

that the same body that dies is to be brought forth in 
the resurrection. On the contrary we read, "Thou sowest 
not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may 
chance of wheat or of some other grain; but God giveth 
it a body as it pleaseth Him." He will have no difficulty 
in making a body; Divine Power is equal to any emergency. 
The Sadducees doubted the Power of God. 

A STUPENDOUS MIRACLE 

We admit that to produce a body with the same convolutions 
of the brain, the same individuality, the same 
soul, the same sentient being, is a miracle so great that 
we cannot conceive of it. Yet it is that very thing 
which God purposes to do for the whole human family 
—thousands of millions in number. 

It is for us to follow the Word of God, to reject all 
extraneous matter from whatever quarter it may come, 



and to "receive with meekness the engrafted Word, 
which is able to make us wise." We are to discard the 
things which are without Scriptural authority. Nothing 
that man can offer can compare with what we find in 
the Word of God; the Bible is the very essence of 
grandeur, beauty, justice, love. 

In Isaiah's prophecy we read that Jesus "poured out 
His soul unto death," that His soul was made "an offering 
for sin." (Isaiah 53:12,10.) Then again we read, 
"Thou wilt not leave My soul in Sheol [the grave]; 
neither wilt Thou suffer Thine Holy One to see corruption." 
(Psalm 16:10.) Explaining this prophecy, the 
Apostle Peter says that God would not leave Jesus' soul 
in Hades— the grave. (Acts 2:22-31.) The soul of Jesus 
was not left in the tomb. 

Speaking of His own resurrection, Jesus said, "I am 
He that liveth, and was dead; and behold, I am alive 
forevermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and of 
death." (Revelation 1:18.) God raised Him up from 
the death condition on the third day. On the very morning 
of His resurrection He said to Mary, "Touch Me 
not; for I have not yet ascended to My Father. ...I 
ascend to My Father, and your Father, and to My God 
and your God." (John 20:17.) He was the first One 
who descended to the tomb, and was raised from the 
dead, and who has ascended far above angels, principalities, 
powers, and every name that is named.— Ephesians 1:20-23; 
Philippians 2:9-1 1. 

Since our Lord has passed through these experiences, 
the Apostle's suggestion is that He who brought the Lord 
Jesus from the tomb is also able to bring us. He tells us 
that we need not sorrow as do those who have no hope; 
for if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, let us 
believe that He will bring all that are in the death condition 
back to life. (1 Thessalonians 4:13,14.) Let us 
believe that "all who are in the graves shall hear His 
voice, and shall come forth" (John 5:25-29)— the Church 
first. As it is written, "Blessed and holy are all they 
that have part in the First Resurrection; on such the 
Second Death shall have no power; but they shall be 
priests of God and of Christ; and shall reign with Him 
a thousand years."— Revelation 20:6. 

Others shall come forth to a resurrection over whom 
the Second Death may have power. Whether or not 
they will ever get altogether free from death will be 
determined by their conduct during the time of their 
opportunity— during the time when the riches of God's 
grace will be made known to them and when they will 
have the opportunity of coming back into full harmony 
with Him and of gaining life everlasting. 



R5612 : page 21 

THE TRAGEDY OF SAMSON 



--JANUARY 31. --JUDGES 13:8-16,24,25.- 

SAMSON BORN A NAZARITE-HIS BIRTH FORETOLD-HIS MISSION 
FORETOLD-THE VALUE OF A MISSION-HOW HE JUDGED 
ISRAEL-SAMSON'S WEAKNESSES-HIS LOYALTY 
TO GOD-HIS VICTORY IN DEATH. 

"Beware, I pray thee, and drink not 
wine, nor strong drink."— Judges 13:4. 

ALL Jews who took a certain vow were styled 

Nazarites. No one should confound these 

people with the residents of a certain city 

called Nazareth. Jesus was a resident of 

Nazareth, but He was not under the vow 

of the Nazarite. The vow of a Nazarite 

was that he would avoid spirituous liquor in 

every form, and that his hair would not be 

cut. Samson from his birth was under this 

vow, which, by the direction of the angel of 

the Lord, was adopted for him by his parents. In some 

sense the vow seems to have signified the full, complete 

consecration of the individual to God and His service. 

Twice before Samson's birth, an angel of the Lord 
communicated with his parents to the intent that the mind 
of the mother, especially, should be impressed with the 
importance of abstemiousness; and that thus her child 
should be born under a favorable endowment. Undoubtedly 
his parents realized to what extent parents may give 
mental and physical strength to their children; and they 
would be alert to endow their offspring favorably. 

While the life, the virility, comes from the father, the 
mother has greatly to do with the stamping of the character. 
And in the mother's weakened condition prior to 
the birth of her child, the father could and should realize 
the situation, and appreciate his privilege of surrounding 
the mother with fine intellectual and spiritual influences. 
Thus the father moulds the thoughts of the mother and 
leads them in profitable directions, while the mother in 
turn stamps those high, noble aspirations upon her child, 
that he may be well-born— an honor to his family name, 
a blessing to his community and, above all, be qualified 
to be a servant of God. 

According to Divine promise Samson was to be one of 
the Judges of Israel; that is to say, one of the Deliverers 
of Israel. The need of deliverance is evident from the 
context. The Philistines (otherwise the strangers) resided 
in the southwest of Palestine. They are supposed 
to have been pirates, and preyed upon the Israelites by 
land, as travelers are upon the deep. They were a war-like 
people, and evidently very intelligent as respects 
manufactures. Their cunning is shown in the fact that 
they not only disarmed the Israelites, but prohibited their 
making any iron implements or doing any kind of blacksmithing 
work. In this manner they held down the Israelites 



R5613 : page 21 

in a species of peonage, exacting tribute of them. 

A great maritime power of our day still more shrewdly 
practises a similar oppression in India— supplying from 
her mills and shops implements of labor, while guarding 
against importation of war materials. Moreover, modern 
methods of finance bring to her rich revenues without the 
outwardly rude and crude methods of the Philistines. 

Samson's work for his people must not be measured 
by merely the amount of damage he did to the Philistines 
in various ways as a warrior and as a strategist— setting 
fire to their wheat fields by ingeniously using foxes for 

R5613 : page 22 

the purpose, etc. Doubtless his chief work was one of 
reviving the spirit of his people, who had become thoroughly 
dejected, hopeless, under the oppression of their 
enemies. The lesson of what one man could do when he 
devoted his life to serving his people and to delivering 
them from their enemies must have been a great stimulus 
to patriotism, and an encouragement to return to the Lord 
and to expect Divine favor and prosperity as a result. 

POINTS TO BE REMEMBERED 

We must not forget that the Jews were not Christians, 
nor that the rules laid down by Jesus and the Apostles for 
Christians were not applicable to the Jews. Moses and 
the nation of Israel, according to the Scriptures, were a 
House of Servants. (Hebrews 3:5,6.) They were promised 
Divine blessings in proportion as they would serve 
faithfully, obediently, the Divine Law, which did not call 
upon them to be saints in the Christian sense of that word, 
applicable to the Church of Christ. 

Another difference between the Jew and the Christian 
is that the former was promised temporal blessings as a 
reward for faithfulness, while the latter is promised 
spiritual blessings with temporal adversities and trials of 
faith and patience, love and loyalty. Unless this distinction 
between the two Ages and the two Laws be borne in 
mind, we shall continually be in difficulty. 

According to the Law, Samson was rated as a very 
faithful servant of God. His faithfulness consisted in 
his loyalty to the Divine requirements, to the Cause of 
God and to Israel, the covenanted people of God. His 
faith was continually manifested in all that he did; and 
his whole life was used in serving his people. Hence he 
is rated in amongst the Ancient Worthies by St. Paul, in 
Hebrews 11:32, when enumerating those who through 
faith gained victories and had the testimony that they 
won the Divine approval. 

In a hundred ways Samson was neither a Christian 
nor an example to Christians. In many respects he lived 



after the flesh, notwithstanding his noble self-sacrifice in 
the service of the Lord. We should remember, however, 
that he was never begotten of the Holy Spirit. Only since 
Pentecost have any been begotten of the Spirit of the 
Lord as "New Creatures in Christ." True, we read that 
the Spirit of the Lord was upon Samson; but we are to 
bear in mind the distinction and the wide difference in the 
Spirit of the Lord coming upon the Prophets and other 
Ancient Worthies to move them to do this, that and the 
other thing for the accomplishment of Divine purposes, 
or to write this, that and the other thing in harmony with 
the Divine will. Such a mechanical operation of the Holy 
Spirit is wholly different from that which applies to the 
Christian, begotten of the Spirit, during this Gospel Age. 

We are to receive the Spirit of Adoption, the Spirit 
of sonship, the Holy Spirit, which, more and more permeating 
our lives, will make us more and more like unto our 
Father in Heaven. In all these spirit-begotten ones will 
be exemplified growth in grace, knowledge and love, by 
their development and manifestation of the fruits and 
graces of the Holy Spirit— meekness, gentleness, patience, 
long-suffering, brotherly kindness, love. 

VICTORY IN DEATH 

A woman was Samson's undoing. He confided to her, 
and she betrayed him. He informed her that he was 
under a vow which included not only his abstinence from 
the use of intoxicating liquors, but also that his hair 
should not be shorn; and that if the vow were broken, 
his special strength and power would be broken. While 
he slept, his deceitful friend cut off his hair, and then 
aroused him, saying, "The Philistines be upon thee, Samson!" 
But, the vow being broken, he was without the 
special strength which had made him so wonderful before. 

Samson's enemies gloated over him, put his eyes out, 
and kept him as a slave, grinding at the mills. But at a 
great feast they brought him forth as a trophy. He stood 
near two massive pillars which supported the roof of the 
great building; and with a prayer to God he grasped these 
and pulled down the entire structure, doing more damage 
to the Philistines in the killing of their chief men, and 
more therefore for the deliverance of his people, in that 
one act than in all the other experiences of his life. 
Samson's faith in God and desire to do His will are continually 
manifested throughout his life, when viewed from 
a proper angle. He "obtained a good report through faith." 

LESSONS FOR THE CHRISTIAN 

One lesson we may learn from Samson's experiences is 
the importance of having an object in life. No one can 
get the best out of his life unless he have some definite 
purpose before him. Parents should encourage their children 
not to aspire for things for which they have no 
capacity, no qualification, but to aspire for the best of 



what they are capable in life. 

"Dare to have a purpose true, 
And dare to make it known." 

In boys and girls between the ages of twelve and sixteen, 
there is a surging of the life forces which, rightly 
directed, tends to make of them noble men and noble 
women; but which, perverted into wrong directions, may 
make them vicious; or which, discouraged entirely, may 
make them do-less. Every parent and every guardian 
should realize these facts, and shape his dealings with 
the young under his care accordingly. 

Not only so, but there is in youth a striving for 
nobility, a realization that life is as so much of value, that 
it can be used but once, and that the direction of its start 
has much to do with the results. At such a time the faithful 
parent or guardian may be very successful in setting 
before the opening mind the reasonable obligation which 
he has toward the Creator, and the blessed privilege of 
laying down life itself on the side of right against wrong, 
on the side of Truth against error. With these matters 
thoroughly appreciated, the number of moral heroes in the 
world would be greatly multiplied. 

Another lesson associated is in connection with vows. 
Vows are voluntary matters. No one is obligated to take 
a vow; but a vow once taken should be observed faithfully, 
if its blessing would be enjoyed. We are not advising 
vows to men or to social or religious institutions, but 
we do recommend vows to the Lord respecting faithfulness 
to Him and to His Cause. But whoever takes a vow 
should remember that it were better not to take it at all 
than to violate it; for its violation serves to weaken the 
conscience, whereas its observance tends to strengthen 
the entire life and to make the individual the more fit, the 
more prepared, for the Lord's service here and hereafter. 
The Lord seeks amongst His people strong characters for 
efficient service. 



"Up, then, and linger not, thou saint of God, 
Fling from thy shoulders each impeding load; 
Be brave and wise, shake off earth's soil and sin, 
That with the Bridegroom thou mayst enter in. 
O watch and pray! 

"Gird on thy armor; face each weaponed foe; 
Deal with the Sword of Heaven the deadly blow; 
Forward, still forward, till the Prize Divine 
Rewards thy zeal, and victory is thine. 
Win thou the crown." 



R5613 : page 23 



KING DAVID'S GREAT-GRANDMOTHER 

-FEBRUARY 7.--RUTH 1.- 

A BEAUTIFUL STORY-ISRAEL'S HOME LIFE-BENEATH THE 
SURFACE-GOOD PEOPLE ASTRAY-NAOMI'S RETURN-RUTH'S 
CONVERSION-WHAT IT COST HER-WHAT SHE GOT. 

"Thy people shall be my people, 
and thy God my God."— Ruth 1:16. 

IT is said that when Benjamin Franklin was 

American Minister in Paris, he spent an 

evening with some of its literary people, 

during which he was called upon to contribute 

to the entertainment. Drawing from 

his pocket a manuscript prepared for the occasion, 

he remarked, "Reading a very 

ancient book, I came across a very charming 

bit of literature, which I believe will 

R5614:page23 

prove as interesting to many of you as to 
myself. I have copied it; and if you will permit, I will 
read it." It was the story of our lesson— indeed, the entire 
story of the Book of Ruth. The narrative tells that 
the audience was delighted and desired to be informed 
where in ancient history so beautiful and idealistic a tale 
could be found. They were more than surprised when he 
told them that he had copied it from the Bible; for 
France at that time, in its official and literary circles, was 
agnostic, if not atheistic. 

The story of the Book of Ruth gives us a little glimpse 
into the affairs of the Israelites, showing us that there 
was a deep spirit of religion underlying the surface of 
wars and captivities, etc., which naturally most impress 
themselves upon our attention in every history of every 
people. The opening was at Bethlehem, "the city of 
David," where centuries later Jesus was born, "David's 
Son and David's Lord." The religious sentiment of the 
family is shown by the import of their names. Elimelech, 
the husband's name, signifies "My God is King." His 
wife's name, Naomi, is said to mean "The pleasure of 
Jehovah." They had two young sons, Mahlon (sickly 
one) and Chilion (pining one). 

They became discouraged because of the invasions of 
their enemies and the frequent loss of the fruits of their 
labor, and finally, because of a severe drouth, which almost 
produced a famine, they left their home, crossed 
Jordan into the land of Moab, and dwelt there for ten 
years. There the two boys married. Both died, leaving 
widows; and Elimelech died. Evidently the leaving of the 
Land of Promise, the Land of the Covenant, to live 
amongst a people who were idolators, and who were not 



in covenant relationship with God in any way, had not 
resulted greatly to the benefit of the family; for when 
Naomi concluded to return to her native land, she had 
practically nothing. 

It is worth while here for us to learn a lesson to 
the effect that it is never good policy to sacrifice our 
religious interests for our temporal interests. With all 
Christians the motto should be "God First." It will not 
do to say that perhaps they moved to Moab that they 
might do a little missionary work; for although the 
Moabites were the descendants of Lot, and therefore related 
to the Israelites and had spoken to some extent the 
same language, nevertheless God's Covenant was merely 
with the descendants of Abraham, and the others were 
aliens, strangers, foreigners, from the commonwealth of 
Israel, like all other Gentiles. Nor would it have been 
proper for them to attempt to convert the Moabites; for 
God had not called the Moabites, but merely the Israelites 
—as we read, "You only have I known of all the families 
of the earth."— Amos 3:2. 

However, many Christians have made the same mistake 
that this family made; and if Christians indeed, they 
were all the more responsible, because the Christian has 
a higher relationship with God and should have a clearer 
knowledge of His will and more of the "spirit of a sound 
mind." It was unwise to take two boys into a heathen 
land, where they were likely to be contaminated; instead, 
every reasonable influence should have been thrown about 
them to preserve their loyalty to Jehovah. 

Doubtless Naomi realized all this, as indicated by her 
words in the lesson, "It grieveth me much for your sakes 
that the hand of the Lord is gone out against me." Here 
again we perceive that the hand of the Lord against her 
was really in her favor, and that it had a proper influence 
upon her and brought her back to the Land of Promise. 

TWO BEAUTIFUL CHARACTERS 

Naomi (the pleasure of Jehovah) must have been a 
beautiful character. This is evidenced by the deep affection 
manifested toward her by her two daughters-in-law. 
They both preferred to join her and to go to her homeland, 
to leave their own home associations; and they 
started with her. But as she reflected that they would be 
strangers in a strange land and would pine for home, even 
as she was pining now, she tenderly urged them to reconsider- 
to go back to their home and kindred, their habits 
and customs, and to remarry, etc. 

One of them so concluded, and kissed her good-bye; 
but the other one, Ruth, broke forth in such eloquent 
terms that her words have become permanently identified 
with classic literature: 

"Entreat me not to leave thee, 

And to return from following after thee; 

For whither thou goest, I will go; 



And where thou lodgest, I will lodge; 
Thy people shall be my people, 

"And thy God my God: 

Where thou diest I will die, 

And there will I be buried: 

The Lord do so to me, and more also, 

If aught but death part thee and me." 

When we say that Ruth was converted, we of course 
do not mean that she became a Christian or that she became 
an heir of Christian promises; for there were none 
such until after Jesus, by His death, opened up the "new 
and living way" beyond the Veil. She was converted to 
Judaism, and this is a fresh testimony to the faithful 
living of Naomi.— Verses 16,17. 

THE VALUE OF POSITIVE DECISION 

One thing here is worthy of note; namely, the positiveness 
with which Ruth made her decision. It was not 
a proposal to try for a time how it would go to live in 
Judea. It was a decision unto death. In this respect all 
true conversions are alike. The Christian, for instance, 
did not really become a Christian until he made just such 
a definite, positive consecration of himself to leave the 
world, its affairs, its loves, its hopes and ambitions, and 
to spend and be spent even unto death in the service of 
the Lord. The value of positive decision in respect to 
life we can hardly overestimate. Thousands of lives are 
blighted because of lack of decision. Positiveness for 
God is the only condition in which we can hope to "make 
our calling and election sure." 

True to God's promise to the Jewish people, Naomi 
and Ruth were blessed in their return to the Lord— to His 
people— to His Land of Covenant and Promise. We are 
to remember that all the promises to Fleshly Israel were 
earthly, while all those to Spiritual Israel are Heavenly. 

R5614 : page 24 

Both the nobility and the wisdom of Naomi's character 
are manifest in the course which she pursued on 
arriving in Bethlehem practically penniless, and unable 
to retrieve the interest of her husband and her sons in 
their share of the land. She did not beg, nor request 
Ruth to beg. There was no false cry nor false modesty. 
Ruth went out, like other poor women, to glean handfuls 
of grain after the reapers. Under the Law it was a part 
of God's provision for the poor that no one should reap 
the corners of his field, but should leave these for the 
poor. Naomi counseled Ruth to go gleaning in the fields 
of one of her wealthy relatives, named Boaz. 

KING DAVID'S GREAT-GRANDMOTHER 



As Naomi had surmised, the wealthy Boaz took note 
of the modest young woman who daily gleaned in his 
fields; and subsequently he learned that she was a relative 
through marriage. He pursued the course of the Jewish 
Law, and Ruth became his wife. Obed was the name of 
their son, Jesse was the name of his son, and David was 
the youngest of Jesse's sons. Thus Ruth the Gentile became 
identified with the royal family as an ancestor, and 
with King David's greatest Son and Lord— Jesus. 

The Bible is a very honest Book. It does not disguise 
the fact that Rahab, the harlot of Jericho, was received 
into the Jewish nation by marriage and became an ancestor 
to King David, Solomon and Jesus. It does not 
disguise the fact that Ruth was by nature a foreigner, a 
Gentile, and at one time an idolatress. No other book is 
so honest. Similarly the New Testament, with wonderful 
candor, tells all the details of how one of His own 
disciples betrayed the Master, of how all forsook Him and 
fled, of how the subsequently noble St. Peter denied his 
Master with curses, of how St. Peter and St. John, when 
preaching in the Temple, were perceived by the people 
to be ignorant and unlearned. 

Similarly the weaknesses and sins of King David and 
others of the royal family are in no sense covered or 
disguised. They are all laid bare and reproved, their 
punishments stated, and the repentance of the culprits 
noted. We dare trust such honest writers, even as in the 
history of today we would be willing to trust such writers. 
Indeed, we do not know of any history today that would 
compare with the Bible history in candor. 

HOW TO BECOME A CHRISTIAN 

In these Studies we make no attempt at impassioned 
appeal; but rather, in the words of Jesus, we suggest that 
each one, when considering whether or not he will join 
himself to the Lord, become a follower of Christ, shall 
first quietly "sit down and count the cost," as the Master 
directed. We do, however, earnestly urge the importance 
of decision, and a positive decision, as being essential to 
proper peace of mind and to proper Christian progress, 
and to an inheritance with the saints under the terms of 
this Gospel Age.— Colossians 1:12. 

Those who do conclude to give their hearts to God 
should know that "there is no other name given under 
Heaven or amongst men" whereby we can be recovered 
to God's favor, so as to be permitted to enter the House 
of Sons, than the name of Jesus. In His name means in, 
by and through all that His name stands for to have faith 
in God, obedience to His terms, etc. But when the decision 
is reached, it means, "Thy God shall be my God." 

Decision is reached to join the House of Sons through 
Christ. Be it noticed that we have not recommended the 
joining of any denomination, nor does the Bible. The 
instruction of the Bible is that each, to be a member of 
the House of Sons, must be joined to the Lord— to 



Christ, and through Him to the Father— in order to be an 
heir of God and a joint-heir with Jesus Christ. Such as 

R5615 : page 24 

do this have their names written, not on an earthly roll 
of membership, but "in the Lamb's Book of Life," "whose 
names are written in Heaven." 

Their next step should be to say, "Thy people shall be 
my people." And so surely as any of God's people are 
found, they are all brethren of one family, whether they 
be found amongst Roman Catholics or Baptists, amongst 
Methodists or Presbyterians, amongst Lutherans or 
Anglicans, or whether they be found outside of all denominations. 
God's people are all one, because by one Spirit 
they are all baptized into the one Spiritual Body, the 
Head of which is Christ, whose Spirit must pervade all 
His members.— 1 Corinthians 12:13. 

Not only should we seek for the people of God, but 
we should acknowledge and fellowship them, whether 
they be white or black, rich or poor, learned or ignorant; 
for "ye are all one in Christ Jesus," and "One is your 
Master, even Christ." 

The proper course for all those who come into Christ 
is to inquire for and search out "the old paths"— the footsteps 
of Jesus and the Apostles, their teachings, their 
practises— and not to be influenced by modern digressions, 
philosophies and sciences falsely so-called, or by creeds 
and theories of the Dark Ages. "They shall all be taught 
of God" is a promise which belongs to the entire Household 
of Faith; and the Word of God is "meat in due season," 
and is the strength provided for their strengthening, 
upbuilding and preparation for a share in the Kingdom. 



R5615 : page 24 

THE VOICE OF THE LORD 

-FEBRUARY 14.-1 SAMUEL 3:1-13, 19,20- 

SAMUEL DEVOTED TO GOD BEFORE HIS BIRTH, BY HIS MOTHER - 
AN OPENING FOR SERVICE-FAITHFULNESS IN SERVICE- 
CALLED TO HIGHER SERVICE-SAMUEL THE FIRST OF 
ISRAEL'S PROPHETS-JOHN THE BAPTIST THE LAST. 

"Speak, Lord, for Thy servant heareth."— 1 Samuel 3:9. 

TODAY'S Study gives a little insight into the 
family conditions of the Israelites at a 
time not long after the days of Samson 
and of Ruth. It shows us the deep religious 
sentiment prevailing amongst many 
of the people. The Tabernacle of the Lord, 
in this Study styled the Temple, was located 



at Shiloh, a few miles north of Jerusalem. 
The priest in charge was Eli. The people 
by Divine direction went annually to worship 
the Lord, to offer sacrifice, etc., at the Feast time, 
the Passover. 

The father and the mother of Samuel were of these 
annual worshipers before Samuel was born. It was on 
the occasion of one of these visits that Hannah made 
earnest prayer to the Lord for a son, vowing that if her 
petition was granted, her son should be devoted to the 
Lord's service for life. Her prayer was answered. The 
child was born and named Samuel, which signifies In 
God's Name. When he was weaned he was presented to 
the Lord through Eli, the priest— to be the latter's servant, 
assistant, in the service of the Tabernacle and the 
service of the priest's home, which was connected with 
the Tabernacle. The word weaned we may properly 
understand to signify, not the time merely when the child 
ceased to receive suck from the mother, but the time 

R5615 : page 25 

when he was able to do without his mother's care— probably 
ten years old. 

PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY TOWARD CHILDREN 

It is difficult to imagine the value to a child of being 
well-born— born of healthy parents, and particularly of 
intelligent and God-fearing parents. Few realize the 
dignity and responsibility of the parental office. Many 
are aware of the fact that vitality and constitution proceed 
from father to child— whether this be slight vitality 
or strong vitality, weak constitution or strong constitution. 
The mother indeed has to do with this also, since 
the portion assigned to her by nature is that of nourisher, 
provider, for the child, up to the time of its weaning. 

But the still more important part of the mother's responsibility 
toward the child few parents realize. The 
mother's mentality during the period of gestation stamps 
itself upon her unborn child. Her fretfulness or vacillation 
or discontent, or her peace, her joy, her high ideals, 
are affecting not only her own happiness, but stamping 
almost indelibly her offspring. In view of this, how 
serious is the responsibility of motherhood, as well as 
fatherhood! 

Moreover, we must remember that the mother's attitude 
of mind is largely under the influence and control of 
her husband. He is the provider, caretaker, of his wife. 
The responsibility is with him to place before his wife, 
at this important period of life, high ideals, noble sentiments, 
helpful suggestions, peaceful and restful surroundings. 
Thus parents co-operating intelligently might 
produce children even nobler than themselves, as their 
ideals may be better than were their own birth conditions; 
or reversely, they may produce children inferior to 



themselves, while their conditions are possibly more 
favorable than those of their parents. 

The Bible declares that we are all born in sin, "misshapen 
in iniquity, in sin did our mothers conceive us"; 
but, as we have seen, these conditions of the fallen race 
may be accentuated or diminished to a considerable degree 
by the mental conditions of the parents, their appreciation 
of their office. But how often children come into 
the world undesired and permanently marked thereby to 
their disadvantage through life! How favorable is the 
condition, in comparison, of the child that is desired, 
prayed for, prepared for, and whose mental conditions 
have been well provided for by the parents ! Samuel, the 
subject of today's Study, was such a child— such a man. 

GOD'S REPROOF OF ELI 

Our lesson opens with the declaration that the child 
Samuel "ministered unto the Lord before Eli"; that is to 
say, he was a servant of the Lord by virtue of his being 
a servant to Eli, who was the Lord's representative and 
priest. The Word of Jehovah was precious in those days; 
that is, it was seldom that God sent messages at that 
time. Perhaps that of the angel of the Lord who appeared 
to the father and mother of Samson, probably 
fifty years before, was the last direct communication between 
the Lord and any of His people Israel. "There 
was no open vision"— visions and revelations were not 
then being given. The Divine Plan was hidden. The 
Urim and the Thummim answers of the Lord to the 
inquiries of the people had ceased. 

It is supposed that Eli at this time was about seventy 
years of age— some think nearer eighty. His vision was 
dim. He was sleeping in one apartment and little Samuel, 
his servant, in another. The latter heard a voice calling 
him and three separate times went to Eli to ask what 
service he could render, only to be told that it was a 
mistake, and that he had not been called. But by the third 
time Eli the priest realized that it was God who had called 
Samuel; and he instructed the lad that if the voice should 
again be heard, he should answer, "Speak, Lord, for Thy 
servant heareth." And so it was. The voice came again, 
and apparently the angel of the Lord appeared to Samuel 
at the same time. Then the Lord gave a message to 
Samuel respecting Eli— foretelling the sad end of the 
lives of his two sons, and Eli's own death, and that Eli's 
family should nevermore serve the Lord as priests. The 
inference is given that Eli's sons misused their position 
as under priests, taking more of the sacrifices than they 
were properly allowed in the Divine arrangement, and 
besides this, practising immorality, and thus misleading 
the people into unrighteousness, whereas, as the Lord's 
servants and priests, they should have been instructors of 
the people in righteousness, both by precept and example. 

DIVINE DISAPPROVAL OF WEAK CHARACTER 



This was not the first time that the Lord had reproved 
Eli regarding the wrong course of his sons and what 
would happen. Years before a message had been sent 
him on this very subject, and although Eli himself apparently 
was faithful and loyal to God, he had not restrained 
his sons; hence he was a sharer in the penalty 
which came upon his sons. 

In the morning Eli inquired of Samuel whether or 
not the Lord had spoken any further, and what He said. 
It was a trial to Samuel to tell his friend and benefactor, 
who was like a father to him, respecting the Lord's criticism 
and pronouncement of judgment against himself and 
his family; but Eli demanded to know the full particulars, 
and we read that "Samuel told him every whit." Thus it 
is often with the Lord's faithful servants; their tenderness 
of heart, their sympathy, might prompt them to hide, 
to cover, matters which their sense of duty may require 
them to speak boldly. In every case the individual's conscience 
must be educated, and of course the Word of God 
is the educator. 

When Eli heard what the Lord had declared respecting 
his family, he answered most loyally, "It is the Lord: 
let Him do what seemeth Him good." But however faithful 
and submissive he may thus appear to be, we know 
that his character was not satisfactory to God. There 
are many like Eli, willing to take, without murmuring, the 

R5616 : page 25 

punishments which God metes out; but the Lord prefers 
characters that are stronger. Eli would have been more 
pleasing to the Lord had he had more firmness of character— 
a clearer appreciation of his duty toward the Lord 
as His servant, and toward his children as their father. 
We may be sure that strong characters are more pleasing 
to everybody. They may in some respects be more difficult 
to deal with; but, nevertheless, firmness of character 
is something that is a jewel, highly esteemed by all wise 
men and women, as well as by the Lord. 

Samuel grew in favor with God and with Eli and with 
all the people of Israel, as they came to know him; and 
they perceived that the Spirit of the Lord was with him, 
and that he would be a representative of God amongst 
them. 

All in Samuel's time could not be priests, but only 
those of the priestly tribe. All then could not be prophets, 
but merely such as God was pleased to use as His mouthpieces. 
As St. Peter says, "Holy men of old spake as they 
were moved by the Holy Spirit." But, as St. Peter proceeds 
to tell us, the prophecies were not generally understood 
by those who uttered them, but were meant to be understood 
by the Church of this Age, in due time, as the Holy 

R5616 : page 26 



Spirit would make them known— "meat in due season." 

As Samuel is styled the first of the Prophets of Israel, 
so the Lord informs us that John the Baptist was the last 
of those Prophets, and that "none were greater than he." 
It astounds us perhaps to find the Bible clearly teaching 
that while the offices of prophet and priest were restricted 
in olden times, as we have seen, yet, during this Gospel 
Age, all who come unto God through Christ may become 
priests, and every priest of this New Order may be a 
prophet of the Lord. 

Failure to discern the change from the Jewish Dispensation 
to the Christian Dispensation, which began at 
Pentecost, leaves many Christian people in confusion of 
mind. Jesus clearly presents the matter, saying, "Verily 
I say unto you, There hath not risen a greater Prophet 
than John the Baptist; notwithstanding, he that is least 
in the Kingdom of God is greater than he." 

The Church is the Kingdom of God in embryo. It is 
to be the Kingdom of God after being set up at the Second 
coming of Christ, by the power of the First Resurrection, 
but even now it is God's Kingdom class in preparation, 
being educated, tested, in respect to faith, obedience and 
loyalty. The overcomers will be the Church of Glory, 
the Kingdom of Glory; but even in the embryo state, 
these are styled by St. Peter a Royal Priesthood. He 
is not in this speaking of any clerical class as a priesthood, 
but speaking of all who become united to Christ, of every 
faithful believer anointed with the Holy Spirit, as such a 
priest in things pertaining to God. He is a priest in the 
sense that he is counted in as a member of the Body of 
the great High Priest. As a member of Christ he is 
associated in the work of sacrifice, "presenting his body 
a living sacrifice" daily. 

Additionally, all of the Royal Priesthood class, even 
at the present time, are God's prophets, God's mouthpieces. 
These, and these only, are authorized to speak 
in the name of the Lord. Their ordination, or authorization, 
does not come by any laying on of hands of bishops 
or anybody else; but, as the Scriptures declare, it comes 
directly from God— through the anointing of the Holy 
Spirit. Hearken to St. John speaking to the whole 
Church. He says, "Ye have an unction [anointing] 
from the Holy One, and ye all know it." Whoever has 
this anointing of the Spirit should be able to discern its 
influence in his heart and life, and should recognize that 
it is his authorization to serve as a priest and as a prophet 
of the Lord; as St. Peter says, "that we should show 
forth the praises of Him who hath called us." 



R5616 : page 26 

1914-REPORTS FROM FOREIGN BRANCHES-1914 
BRITISH BRANCH REPORT 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We have pleasure in sending a summarized account 
of the work of the British Branch for the year 1914. As 
you will see by the figures subjoined, there is a good 
work to report. The sales of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
have increased by more than 20,000 copies, our 
total British circulation for the year being 131,984. Besides 
this number we sent out to Australia over 26,000 
copies, or a total British output of 158,264 STUDIES. The 
circulation of free literature is also considerably in excess 
of last year's figures. We sent out of London for Volunteer 
work, for the Class Extension service and for the 
PHOTO-DRAMA work a total of 15,787,950 items, representing 
in tract pages 262,770,280, a huge figure. However, 
our report does not increase all the way; for the war 
came in the midst of our work, and immediately began 
to restrict it— but not to a great extent. 

The general Colporteur work suffered first, and then 
the Brethren, as well as ourselves here, were hindered 
from obtaining halls for public witnessing, because so 
many were required by the military authorities. But the 
war helped as well as hindered; for many were much 
more inclined to hear what we had to say, so that both in 
the public meetings and to the Colporteurs there was a 
preparation for the message of Truth. Also the people 
more able to buy the sets of the STUDIES were more 
attentive, and many of these have shown a warm interest 
in the Truth. It must be said that the Colporteur 
work has been very much helped by the recent methods 
of furthering their work. Brother Rutherford's extended 
tour resulted in the selling of over 10,500 volumes of 
STUDIES, and the follow-up work after the PHOTO-DRAMA 
is also of very great help. It was believed that sets of 
STUDIES could not be sold here, but now this has become 
the common thing; and our output of Vols. 4, 5, 6 has 
largely increased. The war has not made an appreciable 
difference in the outward aspect of things; but it is 
impossible that such a state can continue, and no doubt 
there will be a pinch in the spending capacity of the 
people not at present keenly felt. 

There has been little outward opposition to the spreading 
of the Truth along our usual lines; the Lord has kept 
back violent opposition, and so we can report the greatest 
witness yet given here. The outlook is not bright, and 
we see other factors at work which indicate that our 
freeness of service cannot long continue. We rejoice 
in whatever is afforded to us, and we hope to be faithful 
to our Head until the work is accomplished. The first 
six months of the year saw very little activity in the Class 
Extension work, but the advent of the DRAMA came about 
the time the Class Extension territory had been covered; 
and since then the brethren have been energetic in this 
newer phase of service. 

The DRAMA has now been shown in London and 97 
other cities and towns in Great Britain and Ireland, and 



has been attended by 1,226,650 people, London figures 
being 25 exhibitions with 425,000 in attendance. Outside 
London attendance 800,100. The London exhibitions were 
22 of two weeks each, and 3 others of four weeks each. 
The signed cards for further literature, etc., numbered in 
London 7,470; and so far, over five thousand books have 
been sold through these. In the country over 12,000 cards 
have been left, and the resultant sales is about the same 
proportion. In London the cloth Scenarios were in good 
demand; in two centres alone 7,966 copies were sold. 
Thus we feel that this great city has had an opportunity 
of gaining some knowledge of our loving Heavenly 
Father's character and Plan. 

The friends have everywhere risen loyally to their opportunities 
of service. The Volunteer matter has gone 
out well— you will notice that we have sent out nearly 
7,000,000 B.S.M. The work has, as you know, continued 
to make increased sacrifices upon the time and the means 
of the brethren, but the sacrifices have been made to the 
blessing of increased faith and love among the brethren. 

We praise the Lord for all the mercies of the way, and 
we will keep on with His work till He shall bid us cease. 
We are going on with such work as is at hand, hoping to 
do it to His praise. With love in the Lord, 

Your servants in Him, 

J. HEMERY, H. J. SHEARN, WM. CRAWFORD, 
British Branch Managers. 

R5616 : page 27 

SUMMARY OF OUTPUT OF "STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 

STUDIES, all kinds 158,264 

To Australia, out of above 26,280 

Total British local sales 131,984 

OUTPUT BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY AND OTHER TRACTS. 

BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY 6,932,300 

EVERYBODY'S PAPER 5,828,200 

Colporteur tracts 302,000 

Hell pamphlets 28,250 

DRAMA volunteer 1,958,000 

Free Scenarios 739,200 

15,787,950 

Or Tract pages 252,607,200 

Books (Manual, MANNA, Poems, etc.) 3,246 

Scenario, paper 18,351 

Scenario, cloth 5,717 

R5617 : page 27 

Booklets 23,679 

Letters, out 35,174 

Letters, in 31,425 



AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH REPORT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We are glad again to think that you will be pleased 
with the year's work. It has been a year of progress as 
the result of the increase of love and zeal and spirit of 
sacrifice generally among the friends. Yet we realize 
that there is much to be done here; and that it may be 
some months before the door of opportunity is closed for 
laboring and suffering for the Truth's sake. 

Last year was a record with its 30,000 volumes of 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES; but it has been exceeded 
and the output has reached over 40,000, as you will see 
from the appended statement. The Colporteurs have done 
well; and while the war has tightened money considerably, 
yet it has increased interest in the matters dealt with 
in the STUDIES, so that there is still a good work going 
on. We have about thirty Colporteurs in the field now, 
some doing moderately and some doing splendidly. Some 
have been ever so much more successful since the war 
broke out than previously. Many more volumes would 
have been put out if we had had them to supply orders; 
but, as you are aware, our shipments were stopped. 

The PEOPLES PULPITS, which have been mostly sent 
through the post, continue to bring good interest, and the 
list of subscribers has steadily increased. THE WATCH 
TOWER list also continues to grow, which will indicate to 
you best the amount of progress, although it is still so 
that one WATCH TOWER serves for may be a family or 
for one or two readers. 

While the Tract Fund shows a good increase over last 
year, yet it does not represent probably more than half 
what has been spent by the Classes in special efforts under 
the auspices of the Society. While Brother Gates has 
been used by the Perth Class for many public efforts, the 
Sydney Class have used Brother O. Walters, and the Brisbane 
Class has served many outlying small towns with 
several brethren. In this way much has been done without 
expense to the Society. Brother Nelson has traveled 
mostly in New Zealand and Queensland, and has been a 
means of blessing to the friends at those places. He is 
now in Queensland, and we hope to see him once more at 
our Melbourne Convention Christmas time. 

We still have about thirty-five Newspapers publishing 
the sermons. Some opposition has been strongly working 
against these, and has succeeded in one or two instances; 
but generally the editors have been able to take it for what 
it is worth. Some of the editors have been more than 
pleased with the matter of the sermons themselves, and 
have realized that their readers are appreciating them. 
We have heard of many cases of strangers getting quite 
interested through this service. At the same time we feel 
that the friends generally do not fully realize their opportunity 
of encouraging the papers in the good work. 



You will find a list of Extension efforts and Pilgrim 
Public Meetings, but this is by no means complete, as we 
know we have not had returns from all the classes that 
have been busy. Along this line we are glad to say that 
the visit of Brother Hollister in the early part of the year 
was very much appreciated and much good was accomplished, 
not only in encouraging the brethren everywhere, 
but also creating new interest. We do rejoice in all the 
good providences of our God. 

PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION 

The PHOTO-DRAMA has been shown in Wellington, 
N.Z., the attendances totalling about 40,000. The 
Class there nobly shouldered the whole expense, which 
amounted to about L200; but with experience now gained, 
this will not need to be so great elsewhere. We have 
evidences, however, that good will be accomplished by 
this means of declaring "the whole counsel of God" as 
revealed in His Word. We now have the films in Melbourne, 
and preparations are well advanced for the work. 
We feel sure that we are voicing the feeling of the International 
Bible Students in Australasia when we express 
gratitude for the generosity on the part of Brooklyn in 
affording us two sets of such expensive outfits. When 
we realize how much sacrifice is involved in the way of 
patient toil, as well as of substance by others in the production 
of this wonderful exhibition, it makes us feel the 
responsibility of now doing our part to our utmost with 
what is entrusted to us, in order that the work may be 
accomplished here. The Melbourne Church, though generally 
poor in this world's goods, has followed the example 
of Wellington in the spirit of sacrifice, and has promised 
eighty pounds toward the expense of the production. 

We had our Finale on Sunday and had record meetings 
both afternoon and evening. Twelve hundred were 
present and many were unable to get into the Hall. I 
took the speaking part and endeavored to follow the notes 
suggested in the instructions. The Lord was with us, and 
we believe that much good was done. Altogether we have 
over 200 names of interested. These are now being 
called upon by three of our best Colporteurs, and we feel 
sure of good follow-up meetings in the same Hall for the 
next three Sunday nights, when I am to give Chart Talks. 
We reckon that we showed to 22,850 people, or rather attendances; 
for many attended every one of the exhibitions. 

The DRAMA started in Geelong this week. Geelong is 
a City of Churches, hard to wake up. But the Lord arranged 
to stir them up. The Council of Churches made 
a strenuous effort to hinder our having the Theatre, which 
is under the control of the Town Council. 

We cannot run several cities at the same time here; 
but though it will take us a little while to get round, it is 
beautiful to see the effect and to realize that the Lord is 
directing our steps and blessing the work. 

The work all over is, we think, progressing well, not 



only in the all-important deepening of the spirit of consecration 

personally of those who have been some time 

under the hallowed influences of the Truth, but in numbers. 

These are growing, in some cases, quite rapidly. 

We hope, however, that while the door of opportunity 

remains open even greater things may be accomplished. 

It is good to realize that there never has been a time 

when it was so easy to get people to think along the lines 

of the Truth; and that the shackles of error are breaking 

and the mists of the Dark Ages are being dispelled by the 

bright shining of the glorious Sun of Righteousness. 

R5617 : page 28 

While the clouds of trouble roll over the earth in fulfilment 
of the Word, thus in accord with our expectations, 
as though the great Divine Time Clock has struck the End 
of the Gentile Times, we are resting in the promise that 
our "deliverance draweth nigh" and are seeking to 
identify ourselves with the Kingdom which is being set 
up and co-operate in its glorious work of turning "the pure 
language to the people." "How beautiful upon the mountains 
are the feet of Him that bringeth good tidings, that 
publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that 
publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God 
reigneth!"— Isaiah 52:7. 

With Christian love to yourself and all of like precious 
faith, 

Yours in the service of Christ, R. E. B. NICHOLSON. 

SUMMARY OF WORK 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 38,713 

—Magazine form 1,321 

Booklets 2,433 

Total 42,467 

Free Literature sent out: 

B.S.M. and EVERYBODY'S PAPER 1,129,800 

WATCH TOWERS 4,287 

Debates 1,000 

Hell TOWERS 3,487 

Total 1,138,074 

CORRESPONDENCE 

Letters received 4,370 

" dispatched 4,444 

A goodly amount of Pilgrim work was done by 
Brother Edward Nelson, Brother Robert Hollister and 
myself; but the exact figures are not obtainable at the 
moment. Considerable of this work was also done in 
New Zealand. 



EXPENDITURES, ETC. 

Pilgrim, Extension Work, Halls, 

Advertising, etc 280:12:- 

Postage, freight, etc 49:— :5 

Rent, gas, stationery, personal 

expenses 56:—:- 

PHOTO-DRAMA Expense, Customs 

Duty, etc 31:15:8 

Supply of Free Literature 394:17:- 

812:5:1 =$3,947.56 

Tract Fund Donations 827: 9:7= 4,021.55 

Dr. to Brooklyn 1,597:11:2 = 7,764.13 



THE WORK IN GERMANY 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I send you the yearly report, and am glad to say that 
again, by the Lord's grace, the amount of literature circulated 

R5618 : page 28 

exceeds that of the preceding year by about one-third. 
The totals are as follows: 

Volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES- 

German 24,136 

Volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES- 

other languages 1,070 

Volumes MANNA 1,079 

Volumes DIVINE PLAN in journal form 8,770 

TOWERS on Hell 31,085 

Booklets— German 12,946 

Booklets— Foreign 2,277 

German TOWERS, including 5,000 copies 

monthly to regular readers 78,040 

BIBLE STUDENTS Quarterly and Volunteer 

matter-German 5,015,200 

BIBLE STUDENTS Quarterly and Volunteer 

matter— other languages 122,900 

The Lecture and Pilgrim Service was quite extensive 
this year, with good results. A number of new classes, 
of 20 to 40 consecrated, have been started; and others 
have doubled. 

Number of Public Meetings 262 

" in attendance 52,894 

" of addresses for free literature 14,743 

EXPENDITURES, ETC. 

Printing, Lectures, Pilgrim Service, 



Rent, Household, etc 104,282.16 Marks 

Donations— German and Swiss— European 
58,704.16 " 

45,578.00 Marks 
Amount of cash from Brooklyn, plus 

proceeds from books sold to 

cover balance. 
Letters and Cards received 13,555 

" " " sent out 6,823 

We have quite a large stock of books on hand, which 
no doubt will be very much in demand in the near future, 
since the friends are zealously calling attention to the 
fulfilment of prophecy in the European or universal war. 
We hope, indeed, to be able to still circulate a number of 
million copies of B.S.M. on timely subjects before our 
work this side the veil is ended. If the six or seven 
thousand readers of the German TOWER in Europe let 
their light shine out fearlessly, as the opportunities increase 
and circumstances offer or demand, the testimony 
will surely have been given according to the Lord's own 
Word (Matthew 24:24), so far as this part of the world 
is concerned. We are glad to know that it is even more 
so the case in other parts, especially in America. 

With confidence in God and our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ, and with much love to yourself and your 
faithful colaborers everywhere, I beg to remain 

Your humble brother, O. A. KOETITZ. 



SWEDISH BRANCH REPORT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

By the Lord's grace we have passed another year in 
His blessed service, on this side of the "Veil," and it is 
accordingly my greatly appreciated privilege and duty to 
send you the usual report of the work done in this land 
during the last year, under the auspices of the Society. 

Although it has often, even from the beginning of the 
past year, been very difficult for us to understand the 
Lord's guidance and to recognize His will respecting His 
work and its interests in this part of the field, and although 
we have often been absolutely unable to see any 
part of the way before us respecting the same, we cannot 
now, as we look back and compare the past experiences 
with their already noticeable results, do anything but give 
thanks and praise to God, when we can see that it is He 
who, to a great extent through you, beloved Brother Russell, 
and also through surrounding circumstances and by 
His Word and its spirit— has directed our steps on the 
way which we did not know beforehand. It is with deep 
gratitude toward the Lord for the opportunity He has 
thus granted us to be, even during the past year, His co-laborers 
and yours, that we now present the following 



figures, etc., which we hope will help you a little to judge 
of the condition of the work here. 

Down through the year the propagation of the Harvest 
Message and the gathering together of the Lord's 
saints have continued and developed more and more all 
over the land, so that— in spite of all adverse circumstances 
and hindrances— the results of our efforts to proclaim 
the Good News in different lines have exceeded 
those of previous years; and there has never before been 
a time when we have seen a more general manifestation 
of the spirit of love and zeal, of brotherly-kindness, patience, 
humility and faith amongst the brethren in Sweden. 

Though several of our most successful Colporteur 
brethren have been kept away from the work during the 
last three months by being mobilized for war and for 
other reasons, still the circulation of the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES has not gone down, but exceeds, by 3,065 

R5618 : page 29 

copies, that of the previous year. The pressure and fear 
of the present war seem to make many people more willing 
now than at any previous time to investigate the 
Truth. The free distribution of Volunteer matter has 
also made some increase, as you will see. It may at this 
time interest you to be reminded of the fact that from the 
start of this little Branch of the great Harvest work until 
now, there has through it been circulated 200 thousand 
copies of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and more than 
5 millions of the Society's good tracts. 

The number of subscribers to the Swedish WATCH 
TOWER has grown from 2,174 to 2,344, who have paid 
kronor 5,636 in subscriptions, against kronor 5,244 the 
previous year. Regular subscriptions for the year to the 
Swedish Newspapers which publish your sermons weekly 
have been received through this office to the number of 
1,390. In one of these newspapers nearly one whole page 
has stood at our disposal the whole year. 

The regular Pilgrim service, in which six Swedish 
brethren have taken part during the year, has been richly 
blessed by the Lord; and besides this, a large number of 
mass meetings have been held in all parts of the land, 
attended by tens of thousands of attentive listeners, who 
have demonstrated their interest in the Message by purchasing 
thousands of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
when departing from these meetings. We have also had 
the pleasure of meeting together with others of "like 
precious faith" in Conventions, on a larger scale than 
ever before, as not fewer than 18 Conventions have been 
held in different parts of the country during the year, 
most of them in the summer time. Those conventions 
were attended by from 30 to 350 Truth friends, and every 
one of them has been successful and spiritually helpful. 
The number of meetings held here under the auspices of 
the Society has grown from 1,576 to 1,820. 

One of the surest proofs of increasing appreciation 



and love for the Truth is the fact that the absolutely 
voluntary contributions for the propagation of the Harvest 
Message received at this office exceed the preceding 
year's large sum by not less than 20,000 kronor, and this 
in spite of the poverty of nearly all the friends here and 
the hard times. 

After all the difficulties and disappointments (caused 
to a great extent by the European war condition) in connection 
with the preparation for the presentation of the 
PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION to the Swedish people, we 
finally succeeded, as you already know, so that the DRAMA 
was shown here for the first time on September 25. From 
that day the DRAMA has been presented to overcrowded 
houses twice every day in from one to three Swedish 
cities. The interest in this DRAMA is remarkable indeed. 
We have seen many people standing in the street in bad 
weather for fully two hours in order to secure a seat; and 
in the evenings usually from 1,000 to 2,500 people are 
turned away from the halls in the different places. Up 
to date we have given 184 DRAMA presentations of two 
hours each, with a total attendance of 89,650 people in 
seven of the largest cities of Sweden. As far as has been 
possible to ascertain, probably twice that number have 
had to be turned away for want of room, although we 
have everywhere had some of the largest halls obtainable. 
Additionally, preparations have already been made for 
showing the DRAMA in a good many more places before 
the holiday season. 

The 10,000 edition of the Scenario of the PHOTO-DRAMA 
in book form, which you authorized us to begin 
with, is nearly gone, so that we have already been compelled 
to prepare for publishing a new edition. Of the 
free Scenario in paper form we have sent out 1 10,000 
copies, and it looks as if we should soon need a new large 
edition of this also. All this seems to us as an illustration 
of the Lord's words by the Prophet: "Behold the 
days come, saith the Lord God, that I shall send a famine 
in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, 
but of hearing the words of the Lord."— Amos 8:11. 

As the work grows rapidly all over the field where we, 
by the Lord's grace, have been placed, the Office work 
grows accordingly; and still the office force here has not 
increased in number, but has really decreased since the 
starting of the DRAMA work, in that some of its noble 
members have been wholly taken out in that new Branch, 
as operators, instructors, etc. The regular DRAMA force 
here contains more than twenty members, fully engaged 
in that Branch. We are all very glad indeed for the 
privilege given to us of having a share with you in the 
"afflictions of Christ for His Church," and also in your 
sacrifices and sufferings for the Truth's sake in preparing 
the "groaning creation" for the coming "Times of Restitution 

R5619 : page 29 

of all things." More and more do we realize that 



our present opportunities are wonderful and precious indeed, 
more so than any words can say; and as we see how 
the big clouds gather above us, and how men's hearts are 
trembling in fear of the approaching storm, which already 
has begun the shaking of the present order of things with 
its institutions and governments, we cannot but "lift up 
our heads and rejoice," knowing that "our redemption 
draweth nigh."— Luke 21:28. 

You yourself, dear Brother Russell, are always included 
in our ardent prayers before the Throne of 
Heavenly Grace; and we pray that we also may continually 
have a place in your prayers and supplications 
on behalf of "all the saints," that we all with you may be 
kept faithful until the end of our race-course and then be 
granted an "entrance abundantly into the everlasting 
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." 

Asking you, on account of all the Swedish Brethren, 
and especially each member of the Bible House family in 
Orebro, to kindly accept their warm Christian love with 
thanks and gratitude for all that you, as the Lord's messenger 
and representative, have been to all of us during 
the past year, I am 

Your brother and colaborer in Christ, 

AUG. LUNDBORG. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Copies of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, circulated 

at cost 43,526 

Various other books and booklets— MANNA, 

TABERNACLE SHADOWS, etc 15,678 



Total 59,204 

Eko fran talarstolen (PEOPLES PULPIT), 

issued free 681,300 

Other free tracts, free DRAMA Scenarios and 

copies of the Swedish WATCH TOWER 135,023 



Total 816,323 

Amounting in tract pages to 16,221,056 

Number of subscribers to the Swedish 

WATCH TOWER 2,344 

Number of sermons in newspapers, about 200,000 

Number of meetings held under the auspices 

of the Society 1,820 

Number of miles traveled in preaching tours 1 17,837 

Letters and cards sent out 8,745 

Letters and cards received 6,987 

Total number of various shipments, by mail 

and by railroad 63,505 

EXPENDITURES 
Pilgrims, Conventions and other Kr. 



meetings 21,621.52 = $5,843.65 

Translations, printing, binding, 

paper, etc 27,311.96 = 7,381.61 

R5619 : page 30 

Freight and postage 4,527.56 = 1,223.67 

Helps to poor Colporteurs 4,211.95 = 1,138.37 

The newspaper service 2,166.28 = 6,092.43 

Office expenses, rent, light, heat, 

etc 7,108.38 = 1,921.18 

The PHOTO-DRAMA service 22,541.99 = 6,092.43 



Total Kr.89,489.64 =$24,186.39 

RECEIPTS 

Voluntary donations to the Tract 

Fund 38,954.43 =$10,528.23 

Voluntary donations to the DRAMA 

service 15,056.83= 4,069.11 

Swedish WATCH TOWER subscriptions 

5,636.55= 1,523.39 

Sold books, pamphlets, etc 29,901.04= 8,081.36 

Total Kr.89,548.85 =$24,202.09 

Balance on hand Kr.59.21 = $15.70 



SOUTH AFRICAN MISSION 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is with mingled feelings that I present the report of 
our labors in the Harvest Field for the past twelve 
months. We are deeply grateful to God that October, 
1914, finds us still busy in the Lord's Great Service, and 
that the year that has gone has been the busiest of our 
office existence. The Lord has been very good to us, opening 
doors of opportunity, and we have sought ever to 
be on the alert to enter in. And now we realize that we 
stand on the threshold of the Kingdom, and that possibly 
our next report will not be to Brooklyn, but to Headquarters 
beyond the veil. We are conscious, however, 
that there is work still to be done here below, and are determined 
by God's assisting grace not to slacken our 
efforts (though we long for the homecoming), but to 
work with all diligence as long as the day lasts. Pray for 
us, dear Brother, that the blessing of God may rest upon 
our humble efforts to serve Him and that we may be used 
abundantly here in gathering in the last grains of ripe 
wheat for the Lord's Garner. 

From the accompanying report you will see that our 
output of volumes has been largely increased, and that a 



greater quantity of literature of all kinds has passed 
through our hands. Everywhere throughout South Africa 
we find an increased interest in the Truth since the beginning 
of the present strife of nations. Men who formerly 
looked upon the subject as a huge joke, are now 
asking with scared faces, "What does it all mean?" We 
have neither time nor inclination for the inevitable "I 
told you so," but are only too glad to explain the significance 
of current events to all who are now ready to 
listen to Present Truth. 

The meetings of the Ecclesia at Durban are well sustained 
and the average attendance is larger than ever 
before. During the year I have made three Pilgrim 
journeys, covering nearly 3,000 miles, and have lectured 
in many of the large towns and some of the smaller ones 
in the Union. On these visits I have been much impressed 
with the growth in grace of the dear brethren throughout 
the country, some of whom, in comparative isolation, have 
been growing like calves in the stall. I have been twice 
to the Transvaal and once to Cape Colony, and am just 
about to embark upon another tour of the Cape, right 
down the coast to Capetown, returning by the Western 
Province. 

The Native work continues as interesting as ever, and 
under the able guidance of our two native teachers, 
Brothers Jordan and Tshange, this work is spreading considerably 
in this part of the Continent. A dear Brother who 
has been Colporteuring in Cape Colony reports considerable 
interest among the natives there, and at their request I 
am taking Brother Jordan down to establish classes in 
various centres, and otherwise to assist the interested 
ones. In Nyasaland the work continues to develop, 
especially in the Northern Province. I am sending to you 
an interesting letter from a leading Brother there. The 
Nyasaland brethren have had their faith much strengthened 
by the fact that a fight took place in their own land, 
at Karonga, between the British and the Germans, a tangible 
evidence that we are in the beginning of the Time of 
Trouble.— Daniel 12:1. 

During the year we have had two Conventions in 
South Africa, one at Johannesburg, already reported, and 
the other at Durban. At both of these we received much 
blessing from the Lord, and the spiritual life of all present 
was greatly stimulated. Our one regret, dear Brother, 
was that we were so far removed from Brooklyn that we 
could not have you with us in person. We know, however, 
that you were with us in spirit and we spoke of you 
and joyfully anticipated the great meeting at the end of 
the way, now so close at hand. 

The newspaper work continues normal. We have 
added two papers to our list during the year, but some 
others have dropped out. The scarcity of material, due 
to the war, has made the newspapers here very jealous 
of their space. All over we have much to thank God for, 
and are inspired by past experience to a still larger confidence 
for the future, whether long or short. 



Permit me here, dear Brother, to express the gratitude 
to God felt by all the dear friends in Africa, both black 
and white, for your faithful ministrations, and to assure 
you of their entire confidence and loving devotion. Our 
prayer is that He who has brought you through many 
difficulties may sustain you in the special trials that necessarily 
pertain to the end of the way and that we all, with 
your well beloved self, may appear before God in Zion. 
With much Christian love, I have the honor to remain, 
Your brother and colaborer, WM. W. JOHNSTON. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Free literature circulated— 

English 67,650 270,600 Pages 

Free literature circulated— 

Hollandish 38,380 135,520 " 

106,030 406,120 " 

Newspaper sermons sent out 7,720 

Parcels dispatched 165 

Letters dispatched 1,257 

P. R. L. B. wrappers 1,316 

New TOWER subscribers 30 

Meetings held 380 

Pilgrim journeys 3 

Miles traveled 2,986 

R5620 : page 30 

FINANCIAL SUMMARY 

Cr. Dr. 

ce s. d. ce s. d. 

Tract fd. donations 13 12 Office expenses.. 109 7 4 

TOWER subs 7 4 P.R.L.B. exp 78 6 8 

Sales 87 12 7 Pilgrim expenses 60 17 11 

Grants to native 

workers 21 5 

Bank charges 2 16 5 



108 8 7 315 3 1 

CASH STATEMENT 

ce s. d. ce s. d. 

Cash on hand, Total expenses.. 315 3 1 

Nov. 1, 1913 43 14 1 Repayment loan.. 32 

Local receipts 108 8 7 Cash on hand.... 72 16 

Loan 7 

From Brooklyn 260 16 5 

419 19 1 419 19 1 

R5620 : page 31 



REPORT FROM FINLAND 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I send you a short report of the Harvest work in Finland 
for 1914. God's grace toward us during the past 
year has been exceedingly great. God has opened doors 
all over; and we have tried with our feeble powers to use 
the opportunities, although we have felt that "the Harvest 
truly is plenteous, but the laborers are few." 

In the beginning of the year we finished the publishing 
of the six volumes of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
in Finnish; and since then we have rejoiced with our 
Finnish brethren and sisters, as they have the whole light 
of Present Truth set forth in these blessed books. Six 
newspapers have during the year published "Pastor Russell's 
Sermons," one of the papers having a circulation 
of more than 30,000. 

The interest in Present Truth has been growing 
amongst the friends, and they have tried to do their very 
best in spreading the Glad Tidings. A very beautiful 
opportunity was afforded in THE PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION. 
The glorious Message went out during two months 
in the nicest form; and every day was a festival. 

Up to the last of September the work was going on 
with very great force; but on October 1 everything was 
changed, and since that day it has been very difficult to 
do anything. We have tried to do, but we have had only 
few possibilities. We see how the night is coming. You 
know that the sun is going down in the "East." Nevertheless 
we are in good condition, filled with the best 
hopes, because we see the New Day and how the Sun of 
Righteousness is rising. We are therefore very happy 
and thankful toward God, who has used you as a channel 
to bring us the knowledge of His plan and prospects. 

As I think it will interest you, I send a report of the 
Harvest work in our country: 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Output of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 22,409 

Output of various books and booklets 27,622 



Total 50,031 

Number of subscribers to the Finnish TOWER.. 1,124 
Number of subscribers to the Swedish TOWER.. 1 17 



Total 1,241 

Bibles sold 130 

Volunteer Tracts 479,602 

Sample TOWERS 46,573 

Scenarios 70,478 

596,653 



Number of Meetings held 862 

" " PHOTO-DRAMA Entertainments 

218 

1,080 

Number of Miles traveled in Preaching Tours 29,986 

Attendance at Meetings 130,294 

" " Entertainments 80,500 

210,794 

Letters and Cards sent out 4,962 

" " " received 3,892 

Total number of various Shipments 47,751 

Total Expenditures Fmk. 80,319:61 or $15,477.00 

" Receipts " 74,461:00 " 14,348.21 



Shortage " 5,858.00 " 1,128.79 

I assure you of our deep love, and that we daily ask 
God's blessing upon you, 
Your brother and servant in the Lord, 

KAARLO HARVETA. 



REPORT FROM SUISSE-GERMAN WORK 

Following is the I.B.S.A. annual report of distribution 
of literature in German Switzerland from November 
1, 1913, to November 14, 1914: 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. 

I., German 1,694 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. 

II., German 308 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. 

III., German 303 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. 

IV., German 308 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. 

V., German 224 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. 

VI., German 287 

Total 3,124 

Volume I., in journal form, German 1,944 

MANNA, German 182 

Bible Helps, German 42 

Booklets, German 8,344 417,401 

German WATCH TOWER (600 

Monthly) 7,200 360,000 

Total number Tract Pages 777,401 

Hell TOWER in German, etc 6,442 358,700 

B.S.M. and Tracts 314,297 7,983,500 

Total number Tracts Pages 8,342,200 



Respectfully submitted, SAMUEL LAUPER. 



"GOULD FREE LIBRARY FOR THE BLIND" 

Chapters of SCRIPTURE STUDIES and Pamphlets 
(WATCH TOWERS, Tracts and Special Sermons), in Braille 
type, loaned by mail: 

Chapters 8,372 

Pamphlets 2,811 

Weekly sermons mailed 3,728 

Letters received 2,476 

Letters dispatched 2,302 

Expenses $1,106.51 



R5620 : page 31 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
EUREKA DRAMA BLESSINGS 

DEAR BRETHREN IN CHRIST:- 

We are sending weekly reports of our EUREKA DRAMA 
exhibitions, but we feel sure you will be glad to hear from 
us, though it be but a greeting. 

The year 1914 has been a momentous one to almost all the 
dear children of God. While we were late getting a complete 
outfit of the DRAMA, yet after a brief season of rehearsal we 
put six teams in the field, each team serving in rotation. 

We started about November 15 and have been quite busy 
since. Eleven places have been served thus far, which means 
thirty-three exhibitions. At these the total attendance of 
adults was 4,159, making an average of 126 at each exhibition. 
The cost of hall rent was $105, or $3.18 per exhibition. 

It makes our hearts rejoice to have been able to serve 
4,159 people with the Message of the Ages at so small cost! 
May God bless you and all in the service of the Truth is our 
prayer, with hearty New Year greeting. 

MARSHALL G. ELLIS. --Washington. 

page 3 1 

APPRECIATES MORE THAN TONGUE CAN TELL 

DEAR FRIENDS :- 

In reply to your kind letter received this day, would say 
I have secured all of the six volumes of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, have subscribed for THE WATCH TOWER and purchased 
a Bible Students' Edition of the Scriptures with the 
notes. I am now well into the fifth volume of the STUDIES 
and appreciate more than tongue can tell the wonderful unfolding 
of God's Plan as given therein. 



For twenty-five years I have been reading everything on 
the Advent doctrine, but have never grasped its full significance. 
While I still wonder on some points, no doubt the 
Light will break in further as I study and pray for Divine 
guidance. If you have the time some day, tell me how I can 
enroll myself more fully with you; and how, in the practise 
of my profession, I can help in the work of spreading this 
glorious Message. I have met the few who are in the Truth 
here, but have not had the time to meet often with them. 

Faithfully yours, E. A. GUYTON.-Wis. 



page 32 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 33 

VOL. XXXVI FEBRUARY 1 No. 3 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

Imputation and Application of Our Lord's 
Human Life-Rights 35 

Right to Life on Two Planes 35 

Restitution Imputed to the Church 35 

The Church No Part of the Ransom 36 

"Your Father Knoweth" 38 

The Father of the Church 38 

The Everlasting Father of Humanity 39 

Proper Mental Attitude for Prayer 39 

More Convincing Evidence Demanded 40 

St. Thomas Not Reproved 40 

Two Great Facts Established 41 

God's Ark in Wicked Hands 42 

A Present-Day Parallel 42 

Israel Different from Other Nations 43 

Confession of Sin, Forgiveness, Victory 43 

A Lesson for Spiritual Israel 44 

Return of the Church from the Wilderness 45 

Interesting Letters 46 

Reply to a Critic of Present Expectations 46 

page 34 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



MEMORIAL SUPPER -MARCH 28th 

For the benefit of friends at a distance we note the fact 
that the anniversary of our Lord's last Supper with His 
disciples will this year be on Sunday, March 28th, after 6 
P.M. In due time we will have an article upon this subject. 



NEW VOLUNTEER PLAN FOR 1915 

The Lord willing, the Society hopes to supply a series of 
Volunteer issues this year instead of merely one number as in 
the past. Our thought is to cover the territory in quick succession, 
a few weeks apart, thus giving the public time to read 
each issue separately, but not allowing their minds to grow 
cold concerning the Kingdom Message. This plan will surely 
prove quite effective, increasing also our own privileges as 
Christ's ambassadors. Ask for B.S. MONTHLY, No. 67, "Why 
Financiers Tremble"; No. 68, "Clergy Ordination Proved 
Fraudulent"; and No. 69, "Church of the Living God." 



A GIFT FOR YOUR FRIENDS 

We have a special edition of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
Vol. I., to which we have added the Pyramid Chapter from 
Vol. III. It is bound in the same style as our regular editions, 
except the covers are embossed with a gold Pyramid. 

The Pyramid feature makes this volume specially attractive 
to beginners who are difficult to interest otherwise. After 
reading about the wonderful Pyramid of Egypt (which is the 
introductory chapter of this edition), their mental appetite is 
sure to be whetted enough to read with interest the "DIVINE 
PLAN OF THE AGES"; and whoever reads this, if he has a 
spiritual appetite, is pretty sure to go on as a Bible student. 

The price of this special edition is 50c. per copy, which is 
less than half what such books would ordinarily sell for. We, 
however, offer these to our readers as gifts, or for loaning to 
friends and neighbors, at 30c. per copy, postpaid— in any quantity, 
but preferably in lots of ten or multiples thereof. 



BEREAN QUESTIONS IN "SCRIPTURE STUDIES" 

The classes of Associated Bible Students throughout the 
world are very generally adopting our suggestion of using the 
"Berean Questions." These are furnished separate as pamphlets- 
one each for the six volumes of STUDIES, also for 
TABERNACLE SHADOWS at 5c. each. 

For the great convenience of Bible Students we have now 
added these "Berean Questions" as an appendix to the cloth-bound 
volumes. Note also that STUDIES Vol. V. now contains 
TABERNACLE SHADOWS and Questions on same. We are 
making no extra charge for this additional matter. 

Some of our readers may choose to use their present copies 
for missionary work, replacing them with the new edition containing 
the "Berean Questions." 



INDIA PAPER EDITION STUDIES 

Noting the growing desire for small, light weight books 
that can be carried conveniently in the coat pocket for reading 
on trains, etc., we have prepared the SCRIPTURE STUDIES in this 
most up-to-date form, and now have a good supply. Full 
leather binding, India paper, gold edges, round corners, the six 
volumes neatly packed in a cloth carton, thickness of the entire 
set only 2-3/4 inches, and weighing only 1-3/4 lbs., price $5. 

We are unable, on this edition, to give our Colporteurs 
their usual allowances. Nevertheless, in view of the fact that 
this edition specially appeals to a certain class of people who 
want something good, we are making the Colporteurs an allowance 
of $1 per set to permit them to handle them. 

This edition does not contain the "Berean Questions," because 
designed to be as small, light and portable as possible. 



KARATOL STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

By the word "Karatol" we indicate an edition of the 
STUDIES on thin Bible paper, with round corners, red burnished 
edges, flexible cloth covers, to take the place of the 
India paper edition with those who cannot afford the best, but 
who yet desire something convenient for carrying in the pocket 
for reading on journeys. These do not contain the Berean 
Index because they are kept in as small a size as possible. 
The entire set of six volumes, in cloth carton, $2, carriage pre-paid. 
Colporteurs may handle this edition on the same terms 
as the regular cloth -bound editions. 



R5621 : page 35 



IMPUTATION AND APPLICATION 
OF OUR LORD'S 
HUMAN LIFE-RIGHTS 

APPARENTLY a great many of God's people 

have difficulty in discerning just what 

is signified in the expression, "Gave Himself 

a Ransom for all." They ask, If 

our Lord Jesus gave His human life a 

Ransom for Adam and his race, where 

has He now any right to human life to 

give in justification to those who accept 

His favor, in view of the fact that we 

read, "He that believeth on the Son hath 

everlasting life"?— John 3:36. 

To appreciate the answer to this question, we must 
realize that the giving of the Ransom has various features. 
First of all, our Lord's consecration when He 
was thirty years of age, which He symbolized by water 
baptism, represents the giving up, the surrender, of His 
life to God. The life which He surrendered was a perfect 
human life, one to which He had a full right. St. 
Paul tells us that He was "holy, harmless, undefiled, 
separate from sinners." Our Lord was not a member 
of the Adamic race in a direct sense— in the sense of 
having received His life from a human father; therefore 
His was not a condemned life, like that of the rest 
of the world. Nothing more was needed. He surrendered 
the full equivalent of Adam's life and perfection. 
But He did not surrender His life to Adam; He merely 
put it into the Father's hands without giving it to 
anybody. 

During the three and a half years of His ministry 
our Redeemer laid down His life. He completed that 
work at Calvary, saying there, "It is finished!" He 
there finished His Baptism into death; He continued 
His self-surrender to the end. But He has not yet 
made any application of this human life to Adam and 
His race. He has merely put it into the Father's 
hands. It was a life that had not been forfeited, that 
had not been mortgaged, that had not been embargoed. 
He simply surrendered His life in harmony with the 
Father's Plan— Luke 23:46. 

RIGHT TO LIFE ON TWO PLANES 

When the Father raised Him up on the third day, 
He made Jesus a spirit being. He was put to death in 
the flesh and was raised a spirit— quickened in spirit. 
(1 Peter 3:18— Diaglott.) This quickened One of the 
new nature had this new life as a reward for His obedience 
in permitting His earthly life to be taken from 
Him. But he had not forfeited His right to the earthly 
life; hence as a New Creature He still retained this 
right to perfect human life. Everything that belonged 



to a perfect life belonged to Him. He had permitted 
the Jews to take away His life, but he had neither 
surrendered nor forfeited His right to life. So when 
He was raised to life by the Father, He had not only 
the right to the spirit nature, but also the right to the 
earthly nature— not that He would have use for this 
for Himself; for any one having the Divine nature 
would have neither use nor desire for the earthly nature. 
The specific right that He had was the right to 
give, to bestow freely upon Adam and his race, human 
life— the very object He had in mind when He came 
into the world. 

So when the Lord Jesus arose from the dead and 
ascended up on High forty days later, He retained all 
the rights that He ever had. He had the right to human 
life, never having forfeited it; He also had the Divine 
nature, the reward of His obedience— a superior right, 
a superior nature. But when He ascended up on High, 
He did not apply the merit of His sacrifice for the 
world of mankind; otherwise the whole world would not 
now lie in the Wicked One. (1 John 5:19— Diaglott.) If 
our Redeemer had made an application of His merit 
for the world when He ascended, it would have taken 
away the sin of the world; but He did not do this. The 
Scriptures tell us that the Church alone has escaped 
from the condemnation upon the world. (Romans 8:1.) 
Evidently, then, the world is still in the Wicked One. 
The only ones who have escaped from this condemnation 
are those who have accepted the arrangement of 
this Gospel Age. Nobody else except the consecrated 
class has had merit and justification from Christ. 

RESTITUTION IMPUTED TO THE CHURCH 

How, then, does our Lord apply the merit to the 
Church? We answer, Not directly. If He were to apply 
His merit directly, it would give the Church human 
life, human perfection. God has some better thing for 
the Church— that the Church might attain to the same 
Divine nature to which Jesus attained. The Church 
attains this by following in the footsteps of Jesus. This 
signifies that as He sacrificed His human life, and laid 
down His earthly rights according to the will of the 
Father, so all who would become members of His Bride 
class must do the same, must surrender their earthly 
life, in order to be associated with Him. Only if we 
suffer with Him shall we reign with Him.— 2 Tim. 2:11,12. 

"If any man would be My disciple, let him deny himself, 
take up his cross and follow Me." (Matthew 16:24.) 

R5621 : page 36 

Then, "Where I am there shall My disciple be." 
(John 12:26.) Whosoever will so do during this Gospel 
Age will attain to the same Divine nature, the same 
glory, the same immortality— the difference being that 



our Lord will always be Head over all, the Chief over 

the Church, which is His Body, and that they will 

always be His members in particular, the Church in Glory. 

The question, then, comes up, if it was necessary for 
Jesus to be pure, holy, how could the Church be acceptable 
to the Father, when they are of the depraved 
human nature? The answer of the Bible is that to this 
class who become His disciples Jesus imputes the merit 
of His sacrifice to the extent of covering their blemishes, 
their imperfections. We are to discern between give 
and impute. He will give His merit to the world by and 
by. But now He is making an imputation to the Church. 

By this term imputation is signified, that if the Church 
had remained of the earthly nature the same as the world, 
they would by and by have the right, the same as the 
world, to come up out of degradation to human perfection. 
Jesus secured by His death the privilege of giving 
all those rights to the Church as well as to the remainder 
of Adam's race. But this class, the Church, forego all 
those rights to human perfection. When we consecrated 
ourselves to God, we gave up our right to become inheritors 
of the earth and earthly things; we gave up all our 
rights in the sense of merely surrendering them. By 
faith we believe that Jesus would in due time have given 
us those blessings of Restitution the same as to the whole 
world of mankind. By faith we accept those blessings 
and by faith we surrender them. The only thing left for 
the Church to do is to surrender their earthly lives. Some 
may have more vitality, and some may have less; some 
may have more talents, and some less; some may have 
more years, and some less; but whatever each has it is 
to be given up, surrendered. 

So, then, at consecration the Church class voluntarily 
surrender their earthly nature. They surrender all the 
earthly rights that they have of the present time, and also 
those rights that would have been theirs had they remained 
part and parcel of the world. Jesus does not give 
to the Church at the present time any part of the Ransom-sacrifice, 
but merely imputes to them, counts to them, that 
part which they might have had if they had remained a 
part of the world. 

When Jesus died, He did not pay over a ransom as an 
offset for Adam. When Jesus was raised from the dead, 
He had not paid a ransom; and when He ascended to 
the Father He did not pay over a ransom for the world. 
But He laid in the Father's hands the merit of His sacrifice. 
He has been imputing of this merit down through 
the Gospel Age to the Church only, but now He has about 
finished the imputing to the Church, and the work of 
giving to the world Restitution is about to begin; and before 
it begins the merit imputed (loaned) to the Church 
must be actually paid over to Divine Justice as the basis 
for human Restitution. 

WORK OF THE GOSPEL AGE TYPIFIED 



On the Jewish Atonement Day the High Priest, first 
of all, killed the bullock. That bullock represented our 
Lord Jesus, the perfect man, and the priest represented 
our Lord, the New Creature. Thus He typified the consecration 
of the human nature and also the condition of 
the New Creature, still in the fleshly body, typed by the 
priest in the first Holy. 

Our Lord was in this condition of the Holy during the 
three and a half years of His ministry. During that time 
He had the privileges of the Golden Altar, and the light 
from the Golden Candlestick (representing the light of 
God's Truth), and the blessings represented by the Table 
of Shewbread (the spiritual food). At the end of the 
three and a half years, having finished the work of sacrificing 
Himself, having burned the antitypical incense, He 
passed under the Second Veil. 

On the third day our Lord arose on the other side of 
the Second Veil— on the spirit plane— fully perfected as 
a New Creature, no longer in any sense of the word a 
man. He could go and come like the wind. He remained 
with His disciples to convince them that He was no 
longer a man— going and coming like the wind, and appearing 
in various bodily forms. Then, when He ascended 
up on High, as the great antitypical High Priest 
He took with Him the blood. The blood signifies the 
life of the sacrifice. He appeared in the presence of God, 
and there He sprinkled of the blood on the Mercy-Seat. 
This sprinkling of the blood on the Mercy-Seat was to 
make atonement for a certain class. That atonement we 
see was made only for the priests and the Levites— not 
for the world.— Leviticus 16:6. 

After the High Priest had finished making the atonement 
for the priests and the Levites, he went out into the 
Court again and there began a different work. Our 
Lord made application of the blood for the antitypical 
priests and the Levites during the ten days between His 

R5622 : page 36 

ascension and the descent of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost. 
He made application of His merit for the Church. We 
know this; for this satisfaction for sins was followed by the 
pouring out of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost, the evidence 
that Divine mercy had come to them.— Hebrews 9:24. 

In the type, after the priest had offered the bullock, he 
then proceeded to the next part— the killing of the Lord's 
goat. A goat is inferior to a bullock. The Lord Himself 
was typified by the bullock. The Lord's goat symbolized 
the faithful members of the Church, His Body. It has 
been the work of the Gospel Age to offer up the Church. 
Not that they were able to offer up themselves; for being 
naturally the members of the condemned Adamic race, 
they were not fit to be priests, and could not be priests 
until the great High Priest had made an imputation of 
His merit for them. Therefore, the great High Priest 
who offered the bullock also offered the goat. 



Then we see the conclusion of the matter. In the type 
the blood of the goat was taken into the Most Holy and 
was applied, not for the priests, not for the Levites, but 
for the people. The blood of the bullock was applied only 
for the priests and the Levites; the blood of the goat, for 
the people. (Leviticus 16:6,15.) These two sacrifices 
represent all the sacrifices of the Gospel Age; the superior 
sacrifice was that of the Lord Jesus, the inferior 
sacrifice was that of the Church. 

THE CHURCH NO PART OF THE RANSOM 

There was a sufficiency of merit in the antitypical bullock 
to have been applied for the sins of the whole world. 
But it was God's arrangement that the Church might be 
permitted to share in the sacrifice. Only those who have 
the privilege of sharing in the sacrifice have the privilege 
of sharing in the glory. It was not necessary for the 
satisfaction of Justice that any of the Church should die; 
but it was necessary in order for them to partake of the 
promised glory. Therefore, while it was a sacrifice for 
our sins on the Lord's part, it was necessary on our part, 
in order to share in His glory. He makes the sacrifice; 
it is not our sacrifice. As the Apostle Paul points out, we 
merely present our bodies. (Romans 12:1.) God would 
not accept our sacrifice except through Christ; we are 
accepted only in the Beloved One. (Ephesians 1:3-6.) 

R5622 : page 37 

Thus by virtue of our Lord's acceptance of us is it that 
we have any privilege of sharing with Him in the sacrifice 
and in the glory. 

Our Lord, therefore, has still a human life ungiven 
away. He does not give to the Church human life. He 
does not part with even a particle of the right to human 
life which He had. The Lord does not need an earthly 
body; neither will His Church need earthly bodies. What 
use would Jesus make of earthly rights, or what use 
would we make of them? We never intend to become 
men again; nor does He intend to become a man again. 
The merit of Christ was imputed to us only for the purpose 
of making us acceptable sacrifices; and this merit 
becomes released again when the last member of the 
Church is glorified. Then the whole value of Christ's 
sacrifice will be ready for appropriation for the world 
of mankind; for at that time the Church will have 
ceased to be of Adam's race, having become of the Divine 
nature.— 2 Peter 1:4. 

This work, then, of appropriating the merit of Jesus 
on behalf of the world is left until the Millennial Age; 
when the Redeemer's Kingdom will make man's Restitution 
privileges a real boon. Therefore, as soon as the 
merit of Christ is appropriated for the world, He will immediately 
take charge of His purchased possession. He 
will then take His great power and reign. Then to all 



those redeemed ones for whom He will appropriate the 

merit of His sacrifice He will be ready to give the long-promised 

Restitution blessings. 

Through the Prophet David, Jehovah God said to His 
Son, "Ask of Me and I will give Thee the heathen [Gentiles, 
nations, people] for an inheritance and the uttermost 
parts of the earth for Thy possession." (Psalm 2:8.) 
This, we believe, is at the door. The Lord is about 
to take possession of the Church, which is the jewel class 
of the whole world. The blessings which He then will 
give are human Restitution to the race of Adam and the 
bringing of the whole earth, their earthly home, up to the 
grandeur of the Garden of Eden. This work He will 
share with His Body, His Bride. 

From this Scriptural standpoint the Ransom-price that 
Jesus gives has been a progressive matter, and is not 
yet completed. He began to give it when He became 
a man; He progressed in giving during the three and a 
half years of His earthly ministry; He finished the giving 
at Calvary. He has since been using that to which He 
had a right on behalf of the Church, by imputation. He 
will have all of this merit of His sacrifice to make satisfaction 
for the sins of the whole world— not a single individual 
omitted. During the thousand years He will be 
giving to mankind that which He has secured by His 
death, and which He will make applicable to them by 
sealing the New Covenant. That New Covenant will be 
sealed as soon as the Church shall have been completed, 
as soon as the Church shall have passed beyond the Veil. 

SPIRITUAL AND HUMAN NATURE NOT THE SAME 

The views of Christian people seem to be very confused. 
They acknowledge that Jesus was a spirit being 
before He came into the world, and that He experienced 
some kind of change of nature in becoming a man. But 
very inconsistently they seem erroneously and unscripturally 
to reason that, having become a man, He must 
stay a man to all eternity— "a little lower than the angels." 
We should remember that the Logos was "made flesh," 
"humbled himself," not for all eternity, but merely "for 
the suffering of death,. ..that He. ..might taste 
death for every man."— Hebrews 2:9. 

The Scriptures indicate that there is a difference in 
natures. As St. Paul points out, there is one flesh of man, 
another flesh of beasts, another of fishes and another of 
birds. And so on the spiritual plane— there are angels, 
cherubim and seraphim, just as there are beasts and birds, 
fishes and men, on the earthly plane. (1 Corinthians 15:39-41.) 
Our Lord distinctly told that He left the 
glory that He had with the Father. He said to His disciples, 
"What and if you should see the Son of Man ascend 
up where He was before?"— John 6:62. 

The expression, "Where He was before," refers to a 
difference in nature, in condition, from that He then had. 
Jesus had been in the world many times before, but never 



before was made flesh. Jesus perhaps was the Representative 
of God in the Garden of Eden with Adam. Very 
certain it is, He was the One who gave the Law to 
Moses as the Representative of the Father. And most 
assuredly He was the One who communicated with Abraham 
at the time when the Lord and two angels went down 
to Sodom, and stopped on the way to tell Abraham about 
the matter. Incidentally Abraham remembered that they 
appeared like men, ate like men, talked like men, but he 
knew not till afterward that they were angels. When 
our Lord was made flesh, it was not the first time He was 
on earth. On His previous visits He was a spirit being 
who merely assumed a flesh body as a convenience in 
communicating with men as the Father's Representative. 

We see that this same power of materialization was 
used by other angels. For instance, at the time of our 
Lord's ascension the angels said, "Ye men of Galilee, 
why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus 
shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him go." 
We remember also that the fallen angels had the power 
to assume human bodies. As the Scriptures point out, 
they desired to be men, to live on the earthly plane and 
in the earthly condition, for sensual reasons. Thus they 
abandoned their own habitation, lived as men and sought 
to bring forth a new race. 

A MUCH MISUNDERSTOOD SUBJECT 

If Jesus during His First Advent had merely appeared 
as a man, but had all the while been really a spirit being 
veiled in flesh— "incarnate"— He could not have been the 
Redeemer at all. The Scriptures say that Jesus was a 
man, "the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us" 
(John 1:14)— not that He pretended to be a man. To be 
the Redeemer of man it was necessary for Him to become 
a man, not to pretend to be one. He must be really a 
man; otherwise He could not have been a ransom-price 
for Adam; for the Divine Law required like for like— 
"life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, 
foot for foot."— Deuteronomy 19:21. 

The word Ransom (antilutron in the Greek) signifies 
a corresponding price. And so Jesus actually left the 
Heavenly glory— not merely pretended to leave it. He 
who was rich for our sakes became poor, so that He was 
truly that which He appeared to be— the Man. He was 
the perfect Man who presented Himself at Jordan— the 
only one who could be the corresponding price for Adam. 
The Scriptures represent our Lord as saying to the 
Father, "A body hast Thou prepared Me" for the suffering 
of death. (Hebrews 10:5.) Many of us have overlooked 
the fact that this body was Divinely prepared for 
a purpose— for the suffering of death, and not, as many 
think, a body for placing the Lord Jesus in a state of permanent 
humiliation before all the holy angels, as expressed 
in the old hymn, 

"Five bleeding wounds He bears, 



Received on Calvary." 
Our Lord is not parading Heaven under the disadvantages 
of a body and a nature all out of accord with 

R5623 : page 38 

His surroundings. He has already accomplished the work 
of sacrifice, and the merit of His sacrifice is in the hands 
of God. God has accepted the sacrifice that was made 
more than eighteen centuries ago; and on the books of 
Justice there are to our Redeemer's credit those earthly 
life-rights to which, as a perfect man, He was entitled. 

When God conferred upon Father Adam human life 
and human life-rights, he immediately became the great 
king of earth. And so when Jesus became the natural Man 
He became the natural Ruler. He was the One to whom the 
earth belonged; and the perfect man would have had the 
right to earth and all the fulness thereof. Instead of 
keeping these rights and becoming the grand earthly 
Potentate, Jesus surrendered all these earthly rights and 
received the reward of obedience— not the reward of 
sacrifice, but the reward of obedience. He still has these 
human life-rights, and is about to give them to the world 
of mankind, upon condition that they shall desire to 
come into harmony with God, that they shall enter into 
a covenant of obedience. By His own blood Jesus makes 
them eligible to full Restitution to all that was lost in 
Eden and to all that was redeemed at Calvary. 

The appearance of our Lord in the flesh after His 
resurrection was only similar to the appearance that was 
made by Himself and the angels long centuries before, 
and does not indicate that He was still a man. As a Man 
He never went into a room, the door being shut; as a 
spirit being He could enter, the door being shut. As a 
spirit being He could materialize, and then dematerialize, 
vanish out of their sight. This materialization, dematerialization 
and vanishing appertain not only to the flesh, 
but also to the clothing. Once He appeared as a wayfarer, 
and once as a gardener; and then He appeared as His 
former self in the upper room, the doors being shut. At 
these various times He appeared in different garments, 
each time dressed suitably to the occasion. It was just 
as easy for Him to create one style of clothing as another, 
and one form of body as another. It is hard to tell just 
where the misconceptions held by many Christian people 
have come in. It behooves us to be very kind and sympathetic 
in reproving the error, and to remember that we 
ourselves once had the errors and held them just as tenaciously 
as do others. 

OUR LORD NO LONGER HUMAN 

Our Lord Jesus was put to death in the flesh and 
quickened in spirit, or made alive in spirit; and He has 
been a spirit being ever since. This Spirit Being, Saul of 
Tarsus saw on his way to Damascus. He tells us that what 



he saw was gloriously bright. It was not the flesh of 
Jesus that was shining. The Apostle says that he caught 
a glimpse of Jesus in His real personality— "Last of all 
He was seen by me also, as of one born out of due time"; 
that is to say, born before the time, referring to the 
Church, the resurrection birth. 

We are begotten of the Spirit, and the birth will be 
in the First Resurrection. As it was said of Jesus, He 
was the First-born from the dead; just so we, the Church, 
will be born to spirit conditions. Then "we shall be like 
Him; for we shall see Him as He is." (1 John 3:2.) 
We will not be in the flesh then, and it will not hurt 
our eyes to see our glorified Lord. We shall see Him 
as He is! We shall be with Him! And the Apostle explains 
that before this we shall be "changed," because 
"flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." 



R5623 : page 38 

"YOUR FATHER KNOWETH" 

"Your Father knoweth what things 
ye have need of. "-MATTHEW 6:8. 

SHORTLY after the beginning of our Lord's 

ministry, He gave the discourse commonly 

known as the Sermon on the Mount. The 

disciples had not yet become sons of God 

in the full, proper sense of the word; indeed, 

they could not be received into sonship 

until Pentecost. They were members 

of the fallen race, under the same condemnation 

as other men. The very highest 

claim that they could make was that which 

the Jews made— that of being servants of God. But 

now, as recorded in John 1:12, "As many as received 

Him, to them gave He power [privilege] to become the 

sons of God, even to them that believe on His name; 

who were begotten, not of blood, nor of the will of the 

flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God." 

This spirit-begetting was not possible in its full, 
proper sense until Jesus had made reconciliation for the 
sins of the world, or, at least, had prepared the way 
for reconciliation by His own death. In one sense of 
the word, however, His death had already occurred; 
namely, in that He had presented Himself a living sacrifice, 
and that the Father had accepted that sacrifice. 
But that death must be finished, and Jesus must ascend 
into the presence of God and present the merit of His 
sacrifice, before the Divine blessing would descend upon 
any, permitting them to be the sons of God. 

THE FATHER OF THE CHURCH 



We see, therefore, that Jesus spoke in an anticipatory, 
or prophetic, sense as to their relationship to God. Because 
they believed in Him and were seeking to do His 
will, they were in full line with God's arrangement for 
their becoming sons. Just as after a person has adopted 
a child and while the papers are in process of being 
drawn up in legal form, the child might be spoken of as 
a son, or he might address the one adopting him as 
Father or Mother; so these would have the privilege of 
addressing God as their Father and their privilege would 
depend on their faith. The majority of the Jews did 
not have this faith, and when Jesus said that He was the 
Son of God, they were about to take up stones to stone 
Him for blasphemy. But Jesus said that not only was He 
the Son of God, but that He would bring many sons to 
God; and He quoted from the Psalms in support of this 
assertion. --John 10:31-40; Psalm 82:6. 

Thus our Lord spoke to His disciples as if they were 
already New Creatures, had already become sons of 
God and had already received the Holy Spirit, even 
though both He and they knew that this was not to be 
completely accomplished, until, as He told them, "not 
many days hence" they should actually and personally 
have received it— at Pentecost. Addressing the disciples 
from this standpoint the Master said, "Your Father 
knoweth what things ye have need of." These words 
are part of His Sermon on the Mount. As we read, 
"When He was set, His disciples came unto Him; and 
He opened His mouth and taught them." The multitude 
were not to call God Father, but they were to understand 
that those who had become the followers of the Lord 
Jesus could call Him Father. 

The word Father implies a great deal when taken 
in conjunction with other Scriptures. God was the 
Father of Adam in the sense that He gave Adam his 
life. Jesus was not Adam's Father, although, as the 
Logos, He was the One particularly active in giving 
Adam life. By Adam's disobedience, this life was lost 

R5623 : page 39 

for himself and for all of his children. Not only life 
was lost, but the Spirit of the Lord was lost, and that 
included the relationship of sons. 

THE EVERLASTING FATHER OF HUMANITY 

After Adam, we find none called sons of God down 
to the time of Jesus. Jesus was the first Son of God 
after Adam; and since our Lord's time the Church have 
been called sons of God. (1 John 3:2.) The fact that 
we are called sons of God implies the begetting of a 
new life; for the old life which we inherited from 
Father Adam is gone. This new life which we have 
received is not from Jesus, but from the Father, Jesus 
being the channel through which this life comes to us. 



"The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ... 
hath begotten us." (1 Peter 1:3.) We see that the 
arrangement for the world is somewhat different. God 
does not purpose to beget the world of the Holy Spirit, 
as He has the Church. On the contrary, we see that 
Jesus is to become the Everlasting Father of the world, 
in due time. (Isaiah 9:6.) That due time will be the 
great thousand-year Day of the Messianic Kingdom. 

In that thousand-year Day Christ, as the great King, 
Mediator between God and men, will give life to 
humanity. We see that the life He will give will be 
human life. He will be the Father of humanity, because 
that human life which He will give them will be something 
that is His own. By His obedience to God's Plan 
He bought the right to give human life. Hence, in giving 
that life at His own cost, He is styled the Father of the 
human family. This will not mean that the world will 
not be considered sons of God, any more than a grandson 
would not be a son of the father and of the grandfather. 
Mankind will not receive their life directly 
from God, but indirectly through Christ— Christ is the 
Father and God the Grandfather. God does not speak 
in random terms, but with great exactness. This being 
true, we have great confidence in His Word. 

GOD'S DEALINGS WITH ISRAEL 

When Adam and his family became sinners, some of 
them went further than merely neglecting God. It was 
no fault of theirs that they were cut off from Him. But 
they did not retain God in their minds, and so God gave 
them over to a reprobate mind. They became children 
of Satan in the sense that they became obedient to him. 
He adopted them into his family, they willingly accepting 
him and becoming obedient to him. Of course, Satan 
did not give life actually to the world, but they adopted 
him as their father by accepting his terms and becoming 
members of his family. To some of the human family 
our Lord said, "Ye are of your father the Devil, and the 
lusts of your father ye will do."— John 8:44. 

When Adam was rejected, he came under the sentence 
of death. He was left to shift for himself. The 
statement, You are under a curse of death, would 
mean, You cannot avoid dying— "Dying thou shalt die." 
There will be pestilences, earthquakes and famines. You 

R5624 : page 39 

will be subject to these because you are sinners. Mankind 
could not expect God to do anything for them when 
they were under death sentence; yet God has done much 
for them, even though they are sinners. He causes the 
sun to shine and the rain to fall upon the just and upon 
the unjust.— Matthew 5:45. 

When the Jews were called of God under the Law 
Covenant, it brought them under a special relationship 



to Him as servants. "Moses was faithful over his own 
House," a servant over the House of Israel. These 
servants were subject to some care, even as a caretaker 
in a great house would look after all the servants as 
well as the sons. While the son would have the more 
particular care, yet the servant would be cared for also. 

Thus the Jews were invited to have a share in God's 
care. They were promised that everything would work 
together for their good. God would bless their flocks 
and herds, and would do them good if they would obey 
His statutes. They did not do so, and thus brought upon 
themselves chastisements. As we read the record of the 
people of Israel, we find that they were the most 
chastened people of history, passing through the most 
wonderful experiences and disciplines, through which 
they were brought to a high religious attitude. So when 
our Lord came into the world, they were of the highest 
religious sentiment, of the most devoted sentiment, of all 
mankind. Many of them were prepared to have the 
special favor that Jesus came to give; namely, the privilege 
of becoming sons of God. 

GOD'S DEALINGS WITH THE CHURCH 

The sons of God during this Gospel Age are similarly 
under special favor of God and under special Covenant 
with Him. He has engaged to treat them as sons, not as 
servants; not as opposers or enemies, but as children. 
"God dealeth with you as with sons." (Hebrews 12:7.) 
With this assurance that God will deal with His people 
as with sons, we might be surprised that the saintly 
people have not been blessed, as those who are unsaintly, 
with money, health, temporal prosperity. We inquire 
how this is. Is God neglecting His part when He has 
promised that He will deal with these as with sons? 
We are not sons of God according to the flesh, but according 
to the spirit. Having been begotten of the 
Spirit, we are sons of God according to the New Creation, 
the interests of which are often best served by experiences 
which are not favorable to the flesh. 

With these sons of God, the New Creature is the 
special thing in God's sight. The flesh matters little. 
And God wishes these sons to have the proper experiences 
that will bring them to the required development 
as sons of God on the spirit plane. This means that 
they must ultimately die according to the flesh. There 
is no other way of entering into the spirit nature than 
by dying according to the flesh. We must all follow in 
the footsteps of the Master. 

The trials of the narrow way are special tests of the 
New Creature. How will the New Creature act under 
these trials and difficulties? Will he prove loyal to God 
when things seem unfavorable to him according to the 
flesh? If so, the New Creature will grow strong; and 
the warfare between the two, the spirit and the flesh, will 
finally result in the victory of the New Creature, and in 



his birth in the First Resurrection, or Chief Resurrection, 
to the spirit nature, the Divine nature. 

PROPER MENTAL ATTITUDE FOR PRAYER 

The words of our text apply only to the New 
Creatures. "Your Father knoweth what things ye have 
need of." It is not necessary for us to use vain 
repetitions as the heathen do, asking God over and over 
again for blessings of a temporal kind. He knoweth 
what things we have need of; that is to say, whether we 
as New Creatures will be most profited in the abundance 
of wealth or in the absence of wealth; whether we as 
New Creatures will be most profited in the possession of 
health or otherwise. We are not to tell God what we 
wish. We are to give up our will in order that His 
will may be done. We are to pray, therefore, as Jesus 
prayed, "Not My will, but Thine be done"; for "Your 
Father knoweth what things ye have need of." The 
heathen do not have God as their Father, and He is not 

R5624 : page 40 

supervising their affairs. They get certain common 
blessings that God is providing for all— sunshine and rain. 

The prayer of God's people should not be for temporal 
things. We know of no Scriptural illustration where 
the spiritual sons of God asked definitely for temporal 
things and received an answer. We remember that St. 
Paul prayed three times very earnestly for the restoration 
of his eyesight. God would not give him the thing 
he asked for, but would give him that which would be 
better for him as a New Creature. And this affliction of 
poor eyesight, watery eyes, would help to keep him in 
remembrance of the fact that he was once a persecutor 
of the Lord's people. The Lord would not take away 
his affliction, but would give him the grace necessary. 
Presumably, when the Apostle learned that lesson, he 
did not pray for such things again; but doubtless it 
was to our benefit that he did not find this out until he 
had prayed those three improper prayers. We learn 
from this that we should be in the attitude to say, "Lord, 
Thou knowest what I have need of. Give what is best." 

THE MODEL PRAYER 

Some might declare that this would not be the proper 
way to offer a petition— that we should ask God for something 
definite; for instance, if one needed a coat, he 
should ask for a coat. But our Father has said that we 
need not go into particulars. God knows that we have 
need of bread. Our petition, therefore, when we say, 
"Give us this day our daily bread," is not that we think 
that God would forget about it, but rather as an acknowledgement 
on our part that all we have— our food and 
everything else— comes from God. He knows what we 



have need of, and provides these things aside from our 
asking. Nevertheless, it is the Father's good pleasure 
that we should go to Him, asking forgiveness for our 
sins, realizing that He has made provision in advance for 
that forgiveness, and that only as we are merciful to 
others will He deal mercifully with us in respect to our 
trespasses. With regard to our food, we thank our 
Father as the Giver of every good and perfect gift. 

We hallow His name— honor His name— put it first 
in our petitions, in our thoughts. The idea is not as to 
how much glory we can get; but, first of all, we mention 
our Father and His glorious name— we hallow His name, 
make it holy. It should be hallowed and revered everywhere 
in the whole world. Then we follow with the 
petition desiring that His Kingdom would come; for we 
realize that His Kingdom is the very thing that the whole 
world needs, and that He has promised that it shall come. 
This is merely to tell Him of our dependence upon Him, 
and our waiting for Him and for those things which He 
has promised and arranged for in His Kingdom. We are 
not merely saying, "Thy Kingdom come"— we are waiting 
for it, expecting it. Then comes in the mention of our 
necessities. He knoweth what things we have need of 
—whether it be a full loaf, a half loaf or a quarter loaf, 
a small ration or a large one. Then we ask for protection 
from the Evil One. 

There is no such request as, "My shoes are needing 
to be replaced with new shoes," or "My coat is getting 
glossy." The heathen, the world might pray for these 
things; but we are children of God, and are to conform 
our prayers to what He has said. We are to take for 
examples the prayers of Jesus and such prayers as the 
Apostles offered. These prayers are not so much requirements 
made of God, but telling Him we are depending 
upon Him, seeking to have no will of our own- 
merely sinking into His will, asking that His will be 
done in all our affairs. Then we are to live and act according 
to that will and according to those prayers. 



R5624 : page 40 

MORE CONVINCING 
EVIDENCE DEMANDED 

"Be not faithless, but believing."— John 20:27. 

THE words of our text are found in connection 
with our Lord's appearance to the 
eleven disciples in the upper room, St. 
Thomas being of the number. From the 
narrative we learn that just a week before 
this Jesus had appeared to His disciples, 
but St. Thomas was absent at the time. The 
ten who had witnessed our Lord's manifestation 



related to St. Thomas the things 
which they had seen; but their accounts 
seemed idle tales to him and he could not believe them. 
He said he thought they were too easily convinced, and 
that it would require stronger evidence than they had had 
to convince him. Unless he could see the print of the 
nails in our Lord's hands, and put his fingers into the 
print of the nails, and could be able to thrust his hand 
into the spear-wound in His side, he would not believe. 
To some this might seem to be an example of extreme 
unbelief, an unwillingness to receive the testimony of the 
Ten as to the experiences through which they had passed. 
Yet to other minds it would not seem so strange. Some 
of us would find it difficult to believe from any lips that 
a person whom we had three days before seen dead and 
laid in the tomb had manifested by His presence to others 
that He was again alive; and especially hard would it be 
to believe that He had appeared when the doors were 
shut, and had disappeared, the doors still being shut. We 
rather fear that had we been in St. Thomas' place we 
would have been inclined to say, "Show us how that 
could be." We would have experienced the same difficulty, 
and would likely have said, "You think you saw 
something; you believe you are telling the truth, but we 

R5625 : page 40 

think that you have been deceived." We are born with 
differences of mental qualities, and it is easier for some 
to believe than it is for others. 

ST. THOMAS NOT REPROVED 

However, on this occasion Jesus gave the desired demonstration. 
His first appearance to them as a group was, 
we believe, on the first day of the week, and the second 
manifestation was given again on the first day of the 
week; eight days later, under similar circumstances, St. 
Thomas being present, Jesus said to him, "Reach hither 
thy finger, and behold My hands; and reach hither thy 
hand, and thrust it into My side; and be not faithless, but 
believing." (John 20:27.) These were the very things 
St. Thomas had demanded, the very proof he had required. 
The words of Jesus do not convey the thought of 
any special reproof to St. Thomas. It would seem that 
the fact that the Lord gave to him the desired evidence to 
convince him, was an indication that He did not disapprove 
of his demand for more convincing demonstration 
than the others had had before believing a statement so 
marvelous as that of the other ten disciples; for if it had 
been a thing of which He disapproved He would not have 
complied with St. Thomas' wish. 

Our Lord did, however, say (though speaking of those 
of us who would live subsequently, and not of the disciples), 
"Blessed are they who do not see, and do yet 
believe." This is our position. The Lord indicates a 



special blessing upon those who, not seeing, would be able 

R5625 : page 41 

to believe. But we are to remember that we have testimonies 
and evidences that St. Thomas did not have. If 
we had heard that ten men had seen certain things one 
night, we might have wondered if they had not been in 
a vision, just as the transfiguration on the Mount was a 
vision. We might have imagined some dream or some 
hallucination coming upon them. Here, however, was St. 
Thomas, a man like a great many of us, hard-headed and 
practical; but when the proof was given to him, when 
demonstration was made, he recognized that it was not a 
phantom, but that the Lord stood there before him in a 
body of flesh. This incident has proved a strengthener to 
the faith of many of us. 

It is quite probable that St. Thomas was not permitted 
to be present at that first interview for the very purpose 
that there might be that demonstration, to the intent that 
it might be easier for some of us to believe. We can 
readily see that an established faith was all-important to 
the disciples. "Without faith it is impossible to please 
God." (Hebrews 1 1:6.) If the disciples had been in 
doubt about our Lord's resurrection, they would not have 
been able to give us clear testimony on the subject, and 
how would we otherwise have known the facts? Some 
would have believed that He ascended to Heaven, and 
others of us would have thought differently, if we had 
not the positive testimony, the proof. So the Lord purposed 
that these eleven disciples should be thoroughly convinced. 
Unless they had had absolute faith in Him as the 
ascended Redeemer and Advocate they would not have 
been prepared to receive the Holy Spirit at Pentecost. 
And unless they had received the Holy Spirit, they would 
not have been fitted for the ministry. 

These forty days, then, seem to be the most important 
part of our Lord's ministry; for on them depended all 
the success of the Gospel Message, which was to be 
launched, not by angels, but by men— these very men to 
whom He appeared— it was for them to tell what they 
saw and believed. For them to have lost faith and to 
have gone back into the ordinary affairs of life would 
have been contrary to the Divine arrangement. 

Jesus appeared four times— once to the women on the 
morning of His resurrection, once later on the same day 
to two of His disciples who were going to Emmaus; later 
the same evening to the ten in the upper room; then after 
a week, this appearance to St. Thomas and the other ten 
disciples. Some two or three weeks then elapsed, in 
which they neither saw Him nor heard of Him. Jesus 
was giving them some time in which to develop faith. 
They had these proofs, that He had spirit power to go 
and come like the wind. But He had not told them what 
to do, so in spite of all they had seen they thought it best 
to go back into the fishing business. 



This was the moment for which Jesus was waiting. 
He knew they would have doubts and wonderments, and 
was on the alert to be invisibly with them to teach them 
a necessary lesson just as soon as they returned to the 
fishing business. As a result they did not catch even one 
fish. None were allowed to go into their net. All night 
long the disciples toiled in vain. 

In the morning Jesus was standing on the shore. They 
had not seen Him for about three weeks, and at first did 
not recognize Him. He told them to cast their net on the 
other side of the boat. If there were no fish on one side, 
there would probably not be any on the other side; for a 
little distance would not make much difference. But they 
had had such a trying experience during the night that 
they were willing to do almost anything. While it did not 
seem reasonable that it would do any good to cast the net 
just a few feet further away, yet having lost all confidence, 
they were ready to follow the suggestion of the stranger. 
So they put the net down, and enclosed a great haul of 
fish. It was a great miracle; for the net was full. But 
it was nothing remarkable for a spirit being to make this 
exhibition, this manifestation, of Divine power. 

By this experience the disciples were taught two great 
lessons— that without the Divine blessing they could not 
succeed even in the fishing business, the occupation in 
which they had been engaged all their lives. The second 
great lesson was that He who had been a Fisher of men 
had the Divine power to supply all their needs; that as He 
had the power to supply the fish, so He had power to 
supply all other needs. Furthermore, when they got to 
the shore, He had fish there and had cooked them— He 
was not dependent upon the fish in the net. Of course we 
do not understand the power— it was Divine Power, unlimited 
power. This experience became to the disciples 
almost a final demonstration of Divine power. They knew 
that it was Jesus, although they did not ask Him. He 
showed them that He had all the while known just what 
they were doing, and that He had absolute power to give 
or to withhold blessings from them. It must have been a 
great strengthener of their faith to realize that He was as 
able to provide for them in one place as in another, and 
that they did not need to go back into the world and its 
pursuits; for He would be with them always, even to the 
end of the Age. -Matthew 28:20. 

TWO GREAT FACTS ESTABLISHED 

Subsequently our Lord appeared to His disciples twice 
more— seven times altogether. Then He ascended up on 
High. Later He appeared to St. Paul. By these different 
demonstrations Jesus thoroughly convinced His disciples 
of two great things; first, that He was no longer 
dead, that He was alive; secondly, that He had supreme 
power. "All power is given unto Me in Heaven and in 
earth." (Matthew 28:18.) This great Being was their 
Master. He had not lost anything, but had gained much in 



passing into death and then out of it. So they might 
have great confidence in Him, and might go forth to 
speak of His death, of the fact of His resurrection and of 
His ascension into God's presence, as manifested by the 
giving of the Holy Spirit. But they would not have been 
ready to declare any of these things had they not been 
thoroughly convinced. 

We do not think that Jesus reproved St. Thomas for 
His doubts. It is a great satisfaction to one whose mind 
happens to be of that particular kind as was St. Thomas'. 
Some minds require more proof than do others. Undoubtedly 
the whole Church has been blessed by St. 
Thomas' action at this time. If we had been one of the 
disciples and had been absent when Jesus first appeared, 
and had been told of it by the others we would have said, 
"You are dreaming, gentlemen. In your perplexity and 
excitement you are telling us a fairy tale." We would wish 
to be satisfied and to have the sense of touch to prove the 
matter. Now the Lord gave us this evidence, and it is a 
great blessing to us. 

A POWER POSSESSED BY SPIRIT BEINGS 

The evidence of the resurrection of Jesus lay in the 
fact that there was a Person there in that upper room who 
had the power to come and go like the wind and to demonstrate 
that He was not dead by any means. That body 
which St. Thomas and the other disciples saw was not the 
body crucified and buried in Joseph's tomb, but a materialized 
body— with the same facial expression, the same 
hands, the same feet, that the human body of Jesus had. 
Jesus said that it was flesh, that "a spirit hath not flesh 

R5625 : page 42 

and bones as ye see me have." He had both the flesh and 
the bones there.— John 24:39. 

St. Thomas and the others could not appreciate how 
a spirit could materialize a body. In fact, with all that 
we know, more than eighteen centuries later, we do not 
understand how it could be. We know, however, that 
angels appeared like men and could talk, eat and walk. 
We know that various evil spirit beings appeared in the 
days of Noah, and sought to dwell on earth as men. The 
disciples knew this, but they had not thought to apply this 
to the Lord. They were learning how to apply these 
things to the Lord— how a spirit being could materialize 
and dematerialize in their presence. This was a matter of 
education. Subsequently they would come to a more particular 
understanding of this— when they received the 
Holy Spirit; just as with us. When we come to a better 
knowledge, in this proportion the Holy Spirit has guided 
our understanding. 

We have come to a full ability to believe these matters, 
although we do not understand them yet; for to understand 
would be to enter into the matter in a philosophical 



way and to know how the thing is done. We do not think 
that the Apostles saw the body of our Lord in the resurrection. 
But what they saw was proof that He was no 
longer a human being, but a spirit being. To make a 
body suitable for the occasion was no more of a miracle 
than were any of the other things connected with the 
resurrection. 



R5626 : page 42 

GOD'S ARK IN 
WICKED HANDS 

--FEBRUARY 21.-1 SAMUEL 4:1-18.- 

A CORRUPT PRIESTHOOD-A DEMORALIZED PEOPLE-ATTEMPT 
TO BRING GOD INTO THE WAR-THE ARK OF THE COVENANT 
CAPTURED-PUNISHMENT AT THE HANDS OF THEIR 
ENEMIES-THE SAME PRINCIPLE IN OPERATION TODAY- 
TRAGIC DEATH OF ELI AND HIS SONS-WHICH NATIONS 
ARE IN COVENANT RELATIONSHIP WITH GOD? 

"Be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only, 
deluding your own selves."— James 1:22. 

SOME twenty years after God's prediction of 

the calamities that would befall Eli and his 

family, the tragedy related in this lesson 

occurred. In all those twenty years, apparently 

no reformations had taken place— 

the aged Eli, now ninety -eight years old, had 

not purged the servants or the service of the 

Lord. He had allowed matters to continue 

in the hands of his sons, notwithstanding 

their continual dishonesty in the things of 

God, and their immorality and pernicious example. 

Samuel, apparently, may have been absent at the time of 

this lesson, and perhaps for years before. Wherever he 

was, we may be sure he was a true servant of God, and 

more and more recognized of the people as such. 

We are not to overestimate the moral and religious 
conditions of the people during those twenty years; but 
we may assume that the evil example of the priests, the 
sons of Eli, whom he had associated with him in the 
priestly office, had an injurious effect upon the people— a 
demoralizing effect. According to God's covenant with 
the nation, He was bound to reprove them, punish them. 
A fresh invasion of the Philistines took place. The 
Israelites went out to meet them in battle and were defeated. 
In their chagrin, and groping after some help, 
they looked to God, just as all the nations of Europe today 
are looking to God for help and praying in vain. 

The usual customs under such conditions today are the 
same as then; namely, an attempt to bring God into the 



war, an attempt to invoke the assistance of religious 
symbols, etc. And, indeed, the Israelites had more ground 
for so doing than have the warring kingdoms of today; 
for God had declared Himself to be the Keeper of Israel, 
and that they were His special nation, His ward, and that 
He would protect them as long as they would be loyal to 
Him. On the other hand, the kingdoms of this world have 
no such Divine promise, have no ground for such expectations 
of Divine aid. They are falsely styling themselves 
Christian kingdoms, "Christendom"; whereas they 
have neither part nor lot with the Lord. He recognizes 
no nations except Natural Israel of the past and Spiritual 
Israel of the present. "Ye are a holy nation, a peculiar 
people, a Royal Priesthood, to show forth the praises of 
Him who hath called you from darkness into His marvelous 
light."- 1 Peter 2:9. 

The Israelites doubtless had read how the Ark went 
before them in the Wilderness journey, how it was in the 
midst of the River Jordan when the people crossed over 
dry-shod, and how it was in the procession that marched 
around Jericho when the walls fell. And so they determined 
to bring up the Ark of the Lord and put it in the 
battle with the people of Israel; and thus they thought 
they would insure victory. Their reasoning, apparently, 
was that God would not permit the Ark of the Covenant 
to be injured or to be captured; and hence they would be 
safe and victory would be bound to come to Israel. 

With our mental eye we see the pageant: Here come 
the Levites, bearing the holy Ark of God, and the two 
sons of Eli, arrayed as the priests of the Most High, the 
representatives of God's Holiness; and the people, enthused 
with the thought of victory through the Ark of 
God, shouted their usual battle-hymn, "Rise up, Lord, and 
let Thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate 
Thee flee before Thee."— Numbers 10:35. 

The people forgot that they had been living irreligiously, 
in violation of their Covenant with God; and 
that that Covenant called for punishment upon them at 
the hand of their enemies. They forgot that the two 
representative priests by no means represented God and 
His Righteousness— that they were thieves and robbers, 
garbed as the priests of God; that they were immoral, 
impure, posing as the representatives of the Divine Holiness. 
They forgot that God's blessing was not to be expected 
under such conditions. 

A PRESENT-DAY PARALLEL 

And alas! Although we are many centuries removed 
from their time, we see much of this same principle today- 
much sham, much pretense, much misrepresentation 
of God on the part of those who profess to be His representatives. 
We behold the present war, with the Kaiser 
of Germany at the head of the Lutheran Church; with 
Emperor Francis Joseph of Austria-Hungary, the chief 
son of the Papacy; with King George at the head of the 



Church of England; with the Czar, the "little father" of 
Russia, the chief representative of the Greek Catholic 
Church— all these marching out to battle, each rallying his 
soldiers with the thought of God, each treading the 
precious Name of the Prince of Peace into the dust, each 
bent on the use of the sword for the selfish purpose of 
promoting the greatness of his empire and its commercial 
prosperity, and, incidentally, upholding the traditions of 
the past respecting his authority to establish the Kingdom 
of God upon earth. 
Today, as in the days of Eli's sons, the people give a 

R5626 : page 43 

shout as they couple the Cause of God with their national 

projects. Again they forget that the two are entirely 

separate; that God's Cause is under Divine direction; and 

that His Cause will prosper best by the permission of a 

great defeat to all these systems of men, preparing incidentally 

for the establishment of Messiah's Kingdom, 

after the Armageddon of the Bible shall have humbled 

the world and made them ready to acclaim the new King 

Immanuel and His Kingdom "the desire of all nations." 

Calling upon the Name of the Lord and having the 
Ark of God in the battle did not help the Israelites, even 
as the carrying of the ikons by the Russian soldiers will 
not give them the victory, or the wearing of the name of 
God upon their belts give the victory to the Germans, or 
the carrying of the Cross of St. George give victory to 
the armies of the British. 

There was a great slaughter and a scattering of the 
forces of the Israelites. The two sons of Eli were slain. 
The Ark of God was captured. A swift runner from the 
army brought the sad intelligence to Shiloh, where Eli 
as judge sat upon his high seat in the gate, anxiously 
wondering, fearfully remembering the twenty-year-before 
prediction of disaster. The runner reported to Eli that 
the battle had gone against the Israelites, that his two 
sons were slain, and concluded by telling that the Ark of 
the Lord had also been captured by the Philistines. 

ISRAEL DIFFERENT FROM OTHER NATIONS 

Eli heard all with equanimity until the last sentence. 
When he learned that his precious treasure, for which he 
was the guardian by Divine appointment, had been taken 
by the Philistines, the poor man fell over in a faint, his 
chair toppled, his neck was broken. Although faithful at 
heart until death at ninety-eight, he, nevertheless, is not 
without reproof in that he neglected his family and neglected 
to see that the work entrusted to him was not interfered 
with by those of his own household. His loyalty 
to God was not sufficiently great to hinder him from shirking 
his responsibility. In his character was too much of 
the spirit of "peace at any price," not enough of that 
courage which is prepared to die for righteousness' sake. 



The lesson taught to God's Covenant people, Israel, the 
Lord next sent chastisements upon the Philistines, so that 
they were glad to return the Ark to the people of God. 
Some are inclined to make light of the declaration that 
the Philistines were plagued with mice and with hemorrhoids 
so long as they had the Ark with them; and that 
when the Ark had been restored to the Israelites, these 
plagues were removed. We have no reason, however, to 
doubt that the Philistines had cause for the realization 
that these were special plagues, and the Scriptures seem 
to uphold the thought that they were of the Lord. 

This does not authorize us in supposing that every kind 
of plague today is of the Lord— that pestilences, etc., are 
special punishments of God. We must remember, when 
considering this matter, that the nation of Israel, and 
everything appertaining to it, was in a special covenant 
relationship with God and under Divine supervision. 
Whoever touched Israel or any of the things pertaining 
to the typical system was to that extent adverse to the 
Lord, His Cause, His interests, and this could be done 
only by the Lord's permission; and when the Lord wished 
to bring back the Ark, or deliver His people from such 
circumstances, it was for Him to bring to pass conditions 
necessary to that end. 

There is no such condition of things prevailing today. 
The nation of Israel is temporarily cut off from the Divine 
protection which was with them— until the full number 
from the Gentiles shall have been brought into Spiritual 
Israel. Then all Israel will be recovered from their blindness 
and their alienation from God, as it is written: "This 
is My covenant with them when I shall take away their 
sins."— Romans 11:26-32. 

The only people or nation now in covenant relationship 
with God, according to the Bible, is Spiritual Israel, 
"a holy nation, a peculiar people." And, as respects 

R5627 : page 43 

Spiritual Israel, their interests are spiritual; and the 
Divine promises do not guarantee them earthly blessings 
and protection, but rather the reverse— persecution and 
opposition. God's guarantee to Spiritual Israel, however, 
is that all the adversities of the present life which He 
permits to come to them will work out to their eternal 
spiritual welfare, if they are rightly exercised thereby. 



R5627 : page 43 

CONFESSION OF SIN, 
FORGIVENESS, VICTORY 

-FEBRUARY 28.-1 SAMUEL 7:3-17.- 

SAMUEL, PROPHET AND JUDGE-HIS INFLUENCE FOR GOOD- 



ISRAEL BECAME PENITENT--A CONVENTION AT MOUNT 
MIZPEH--THE WATCH TOWER-FASTING AND PRAYER- 
GOD'S FAVOR RETURNED-PHILISTINES REBUKED-ISRAEL 
BLESSED UNDER SAMUEL'S JUDGESHIP-A CIRCUIT JUDGE. 

"Hitherto hath the Lord helped us."— 1 Samuel 7:12. 

SAMUEL the Prophet might serve Eli the 

Priest, but he could not become his successor, 

because not of the priestly family. 

It is probable therefore that, as he reached 

maturity, he found other service; but there 

is a blank in the record of twenty years at 

least. The intimation, however, is that he 

was faithful to God and to the interests of 

his people, and that the people trusted him 

as a servant of God. We may be sure, 

therefore, that he was not idle, but engaged in some good 

work. Quite possibly he engaged himself in instructing 

the people respecting their wrong conditions, the permission 

of idolatry amongst them, their neglect of God, etc. 

Our lesson introduces him to us as the leader of the 
hour, when the people had become thoroughly aroused 
to a sense of their unholiness, their need of God, and 
their need of mutual help if they would come back into 
relationship with God. Having brought the people to this 
proper condition of mind, the Prophet Samuel appointed a 
general meeting at a small mountain called Mizpeh; that 
is, Watch Tower. They came in considerable numbers 
and with hearts bowed down with grief in recognition 
that they were sinners, and that therefore they had been 
foreigners— out of Divine favor. They came seeking 
God, and He was found of them. 

A GREAT REFORMATION EFFECTED 

The Prophet Samuel put the matter before the people 
in plain, distinct terms, saying, "If ye do return unto the 
Lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange 
gods and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your 
hearts unto the Lord, and serve Him only; and He will 
deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines." Samuel 
was warranted in telling the people that they would be 
delivered from the power of the Philistines; because this 
was God's standing agreement with them by the Covenant 
He entered into with them; namely, that if they would 
obey His Laws and be loyal to Him, He would be their 

R5627 : page 44 

God and they would be His people, and He would guide 
their interests to their highest welfare, both as a nation 
and as individuals; but if they would not obey His statutes 
and be loyal to Him, then He would deliver them into the 
hands of their enemies and punish them Seven Times. 
God was keeping His part of the Covenant; it was Israel 



that had failed, and Samuel was properly bringing the 
matter to their attention and urging repentance. 

"Then the children of Israel did put away Baalim and 
Ashtaroth, and served Jehovah only." Baalim was the 
plural name for Baal. The word Baal signifies overseer, 
caretaker. The Israelites had been distinctly forewarned 
not to make any kind of idols, and to keep themselves 
separate from all idols to such an extent that they might 
not even make an image of their own God, Jehovah. He 
would not have any symbols before His people, but have 
them worship Him in spirit and in truth. But all around 
them were the Canaanites, whom they had not had faith 
and obedience to drive out of the land. These Canaanites 
had the Baal idols in all their towns, and some had them 
in their homes and trusted in them as protective genii. 

Ashtaroth is the plural for Ashtoreth, a female deity 
—the same known to the Babylonians as Ishtar and to the 
Greeks as Astarte. She was the goddess of fertility and 
the sexual relations; and connected with her worship 
were many licentious services supposed to promote fertility— 
the propagation of the human species. If Samuel's 
work of twenty years reached this harvest where the 
whole people of Israel decided to put away their Ashtaroth 
of gods and to worship and serve Jehovah only, he certainly 
accomplished much. We may be sure also that 
some human agency was connected with so great an outward 
manifestation. Such reformations do not come by 
chance, nor are they miraculous. 

Samuel prayed for the people of Israel; "and they 
drew water and poured it out before the Lord, and fasted 
on that day, and said there, We have sinned against the 
Lord." The confession of sin was not only creditable to 
the people as a manifestation of their honesty and sincerity, 
but it was appropriate that they should do this 
when asking the God whom they had offended to receive 
them back again into covenant relationship with Himself. 
The poet has said that confession is good for the soul, and 
surely all have proven it so. It served to commit them. 
The humility which was necessary to the making of such 
confession would be profitable in respect to their 
character-building . 

The water poured out may be viewed from various 
angles. One suggestion is that it represented the Truth 
which they could not gainsay, could not take back, even 
as water spilled upon the ground cannot be recovered. 
Another suggestion is that as the water was drawn from 
the depth of the earth, so their confession came from the 
depths of their hearts. Another is that it represented 
their vows of faithfulness to the Lord, which would be as 
irrevocable as water poured out. 

A LESSON FOR SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 

"And Samuel judged the children of Israel in Mizpeh." 
That is to say, as a judge, a counselor, he gave advice, 
gave decision in respect to their affairs, disputes, proper 



course of conduct, right and wrong on any subject, etc. 

Thus the nation of Israel was making a new start; and 

as a people they were more drawn together than at any 

time in their history from the days of Joshua onward. 

But, as though it were a trial of their faith, at this very 

time, while they were resolving on the course of righteousness, 

their enemies, the Philistines, having heard of the 

gathering, sought to nip the rebellion in the bud, and 

came against them with an army of considerable size. 

The Israelites had not come together for battle, but 
for prayer; nevertheless they were probably more or less 
armed. But they felt themselves quite unprepared to 
meet the Philistine hosts. And they said unto Samuel, 
"Cease not to cry unto Jehovah our God for us, that He 
save us out of the hand of the Philistines." They were 
learning to look for help in the right direction. This cry 
coming to the Lord after they had abandoned their idols 
and had vowed to be loyal to Jehovah, put them in a 
very different attitude toward Him from that of twenty 
years previous, when they called for the Ark of God to 
lead them in battling against the Philistines without any 
reformation of character, without repentance for sins. 

Is there not a lesson here for all of God's people? Is 
it not as true today as it ever was that it is vain for the 
Lord's people to call upon the Lord for assistance and 
blessing while they are living in sin, in violation of their 
Covenant and its obligations? The first lesson of all, 
then, for those who realize their being in sin is repentance, 
and definite vows to the Lord respecting faithfulness in 
petition to Him for His mercy unto them. Those who 
thus come to the Lord now, as Christians, under the 
Headship of our Lord Jesus Christ, are sure to have 
Divine mercy and "grace to help in every time of need." 

Our Philistines that come upon us and enslave us are 
our passions and weaknesses, and the oppositions of the 
world and the Adversary. These are our foes, and 
against these only Divine Power can enable us to fight a 
good fight and come off victorious. 

In response to the cry of the people, Samuel the 
Prophet offered to the Lord a sacrifice— a lamb of the first 
year. He knew it not, but it was a type of "the Lamb of 
God, which taketh away the sin of the world." Beside 
this typical sacrifice, Samuel cried to the Lord on behalf 
of his people, and the Lord heard him. So with all that 
stand beside the great Antitypical Sacrifice, and in the 
name and merit of that Sacrifice, as people of God in 
covenant relationship with Him— having put away sins 
and weaknesses to the best of our ability, we may be sure 
of Divine help, deliverance. 

SIGNAL MANIFESTATION OF DIVINE FAVOR 

While yet the offering was upon the altar, the noise of 
the approaching hosts of the Philistines was heard. How 
would God assist His people? How could they hope for 
deliverance against the Philistine hosts? Would they in 



fear scatter or would God's power to help be manifest? 
The deliverance came in the shape of a great, violent, 
sudden storm. Going hastily, it swept down the hill 
Mizpeh, in the faces of the approaching hosts. They 
turned their backs against the violent storm; and the 
Israelites perceiving the opportunity, rushed onward with 

R5628 : page 44 

the storm, pursuing the Philistines and driving them before 
them, and thus gaining a great victory. The place of 
the victory was the very spot where, twenty years before, 
the Ark of the Lord had been captured by the Philistines. 
Samuel there set a stone as a pillar and monument, and 
called it Ebenezer, saying, "Hitherto hath the Lord 
helped us."— Verse 12. 

So with Christians in their victories under the Lord's 
assistance; when by the Lord's grace they gain victories 
they should set up memorials or monuments in their 
minds, in their hearts, and not pass these blessings by or 
forget that the victories were gained by help from on 
High. Every Christian, therefore, should have his 
Ebenezers, his monuments of victory, as it were, of Divine 
assistance over his foes, the world, the flesh and the Adversary, 
and he should rejoice in these. This sentiment 

R5628 : page 45 

has come down to us in the words of a beautiful hymn, 
familiar to nearly all who read the English language: 

"Here I'll raise my Ebenezer, 

Hither by Thy help I'm come; 
And I hope by Thy good pleasure, 

Safely to arrive at Home." 

PROPER AND IMPROPER JUDGMENTS 

The record is that Samuel continued to be a judge, an 
interpreter of the Divine Law, a counselor to his people, 
"all the days of his life." The Israelites had accepted 
God's Law, and had agreed to abide by its decisions. 
Whoever, therefore, they would have confidence in as an 
interpreter of the Divine Law, they, in proper condition 
of heart, would be ready to obey his rulings, his judgments. 
Spiritual Israelites similarly have come into 
covenant relationship with God, and have bound themselves 
to seek to know and to do the will of God and not 
their own wills. Hence whoever may be the person of opportunity 
who can show "an Israelite indeed" the mind of 
the Lord in any manner, he becomes his counselor, the 
Lord's mouthpiece to him; thus all the people of God 
assist one another to judge themselves, to build each other 
up in the most holy faith, to guide each other to know 
and to do the will of the Lord. 

This office is not left to ministers, to priests, but is 



open to all the Lord's people; for St. Peter declares all 
the Lord's people are priests— "Ye are a Royal Priesthood." 
True, these priests have not entered into their 
royalty, nor yet have they entered fully upon their priestly 
office. These glorious offices belong especially to the 
future, when by virtue of the resurrection change, these 
priests, who are now sacrificing, will be Priests in glory, 
reigning with Christ and judging the world— assisting the 
world, counseling the world, instructing the world regarding 
God's will and helping them to know and do that will. 

The Royal Priesthood are to remember that their judging 
in the present time is not a judging of the hearts, but 
merely a judging of the conduct. As respects the hearts, 
they are informed of the Lord that they are not competent 
to judge; and hence the words of the Apostle Paul, 
"Judge nothing before the time." The time for the judging 
of the hearts, when this work will be committed to the 
Church, will be after that which is perfect shall have 
come, after the resurrection change shall have made us 
like our Redeemer and qualified, therefore, to read the 
hearts of mankind and to judge a righteous judgment, a 
merciful judgment, a sympathetic judgment, a helpful one. 

The only judging which the people of God may now do 
for and toward each other, is that which the Lord represented 
when He said, "By their fruits ye shall know 
them." Men do not gather grapes off thorn bushes or 
figs off thistles. A good spring will not send forth bitter 
water. We are, therefore, to judge ourselves as to whether 
or not our conduct is in harmony with the principles of 
righteousness; and we may similarly assist in judging one 
another as respects outward conduct, leaving the judgment 
of the heart to the individual himself and to the Lord. 

The Prophet Samuel established a new order of things, 
which we see was the outgrowth of his reformation work 
amongst the people of God, his nation. He did not do as 
others before him had done— have his place of residence, 
to which all the people must go to ask his advice, his 
counsel, his judgment; but he introduced the circuit judge 
system, and went from place to place holding a court, not 
so much to condemn anybody, but rather to advise those 
who desired advice. Thus the nation of Israel began to 
be cemented as one people, and to realize that their interests 
were in common; and that all of their interests were 
bound up with God, His Law, His Covenant with them, 
and the interpretation of these through such agents as the 
Lord might send to them— Samuel the Prophet being one 
of these. 



R5628 : page 45 

RETURN OF THE CHURCH 
FROM THE WILDERNESS 

A WILDERNESS condition is one of separation 



from the blessings of civilization; it 
is a cut-off condition, a separation from 
the world. In the case of the Church, we 
read that the Lord provided her with two 
wings, that she might go into the wilderness 
1260 symbolic days, or years. Apparently 
she went into the wilderness condition of 
her own accord, and became voluntarily an 
outcast from the privileges and advantages 
of the world's society; she underwent a general 
ostracism or separation. 

In the account of the typical Atonement Day sacrifices 
we read that the scapegoat went into the wilderness, but 
it did not go voluntarily; it was sent away. In the antitype 
the faithful, consecrated class go into the wilderness 
voluntarily, while the others will go into it of compulsion. 
The two classes will have similar experiences, however. 
The experiences of the Church have been tribulations, 
brought on by reason of their loyalty to the Lord and the 
Truth. The Lord's people can be in this wilderness condition 
even while surrounded by all the affairs of the 
world. We are separate from the world; we are in the 
world, but not of it— isolated. 

In the Book of Revelation we read that the Church 
fled for 1260 years into the wilderness, and that during a 
similar period of time a great system had control of affairs. 
This period, we understand, began in 539 A.D. 
and ended with the year 1799. It was a period of 
ostracism, called the wilderness condition, but not necessarily 
of persecution. One might go into the wilderness 
condition and not receive persecution— not be shot, not be 
hanged, or anything like that. Hence the wilderness condition 
does not include the thought of persecution, but 
merely of separation. 

In figurative language the city represents honor, distinction 
and prominence in the world, while the wilderness 
signifies the reverse condition— that of being ignored, 
ostracized, etc. During the 1260 symbolic days the 
Church was in the condition of ostracism. The governments 
paid no attention to her; but on the other hand, 
they gave a great deal of attention to the great system 
which exalted itself and became "that great city which 
reigneth over the kings of the earth"— Mystic Babylon. 

THE RETURN FROM THE WILDERNESS 

At the end of this period, beginning with 1799, the 
proper conception of the Church was more nearly recognized 
by the world in general, when the power of Papacy 
was broken, when the Pope was carried a prisoner to 
France. Then the nations realized that they had been 
more or less mistaken as to the Pope being Christ's representative. 
From that time on the Papacy, as a great 
system, has not had the persecuting power, but has been 
compelled to vie with others. The Baptist denomination, 
the Methodist denomination, and others, have prospered 



during this period, and the world has recognized them in 
the same degree as it has recognized Papacy. 

The Papacy did not go into the wilderness, however; 
but Protestantism stepped out of the wilderness condition, 
to be more particularly recognized by the people and 

R5628 : page 46 

by the government. This has continued for quite a while 
and the Bible has been more generally recognized than 
before. Shortly after 1799, Bible Societies began to be 
organized. The Bible was brought into great prominence. 
Old and New Testaments, God's two witnesses, were exalted 
to Heaven. Those who advocated the Bible came 
out into the full light. Bible students and Bible study 
became more approved than ever before. Bibles were 
printed and everybody favored Bible Study. 

There is no Scriptural declaration that the Church 
will go back into the wilderness condition. Our reference 
to a second wilderness experience is founded upon the 
symbolic picture of our day that is given to us in the 
experiences of Elijah the Prophet. Elijah, representing 
the true Church of God, had been a true Prophet for some 
time. He was unpopular with Queen Jezebel, who had 
influenced King Ahab against him. The King threatened 
Elijah's life and he fled to the wilderness for 1260 days, 
or three and a half years. This was symbolical of the 
1 260 years during which the Church remained in the 
wilderness condition. 

At the close of the 1260 days in Elijah's experience, he 
returned from the wilderness, and made a great demonstration. 
He made an exhibition of the priests of Baal, 
who had been favored by Queen Jezebel and by King 
Ahab. This manifestation resulted in a great exaltation 
of the Word of God, and a great downfall of the priests 

R5629 : page 46 

of Baal. From that time they were obliged to hold themselves 
in seclusion. The people said, "Jehovah is God." 

We understand that all this particularly represents how 
the true Church, in 1799, manifested itself before the 
kings of the world, and stood up for God and the Bible. 
Elijah represented the true Church; Jezebel represented 
the Papal System and other systems closely related to 
her; Ahab represented the government; and the people of 
Israel represented the world. The Bible was forced upon 
Jezebel and Ahab, and everybody. The two witnesses 
were exalted because the people took notice of them. 

ELIJAH'S SECOND WILDERNESS EXPERIENCE 

Coming back to the picture: Queen Jezebel represented 
her daughters, her kind, her family. The Prophet Elijah 
represented the true people of God in the present time. 
The Queen did not persecute him, but threatened him; 



and again he fled into the wilderness— not for a specified 
time, however. The people in general were not under the 
same kind of restraint as previously. The priests of Baal 
never regained their influence. Elijah went again into 
the wilderness and was there nourished for a time; it was 
not the previous nourishment of the 1260 days by the 
ravens, but an especially provided food for a time. 

To our understanding this food especially provided for 
Elijah, after his experience with the priests of Baal and 
after his fleeing from Jezebel, represents the special Message 
that is now feeding the people of God. After Elijah 
had reached the wilderness, there was an inclination on 
his part to feel discouraged; and he said, "Ah, Lord God! 
..."—this signifying his discouragement. But the Lord 
strengthened him and gave him a special food, in the 
strength of which he went to Mt. Horeb. This mountain 
represents the Kingdom of God, the Messianic Kingdom. 
And we believe that by this spiritual food we are now 
brought to the time when the Kingdom is to be established. 

When Elijah got to Mt. Horeb the Lord gave him 
three witnesses. (1 Kings 19:1-18.) The wind rending 
the mountains represents the present war. The great 
earthquake symbolically represents a social revolution, the 
like of which was never before in the world, and which 
we believe is due to come very soon. This will not come 
as soon as the war begins, but the war might continue 
while the earthquake is on. This was not all. The third 
demonstration was a great fire, which consumed everything 
before it. This represents wide-spread anarchy, 
which will prevail in the world, following the social revolution. 
Then after the fire Elijah heard the "still, small 
voice," representing the Divine Power, which will bring 
the blessings to the world. 



R5629 : page 46 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
REPLY TO A CRITIC OF PRESENT EXPECTATIONS 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Your first letter was unanswered, not because of any discourtesy, 
but through pity. But now that you have written 
again respecting the disappointment of my expectation mentioned 
Nov. 29, 1911, that "within three years I shall have 
been joined to the Bridegroom," I have concluded to answer 
your letter, conceiving that after you have read my reply, my 
past, present and future faith may not seem so distressingly 
funny to you. 

Twenty years ago you and I believed in infant baptism; in 
the Divine right of the clergy to administer that baptism; that 
baptism was necessary to escape eternal torment; that God is 
love; that God created and continues to create billions of beings 
in His likeness who will spend the countless ages of 



eternity in the strangling fumes of burning sulphur, pleading 
in vain for one drop of water to relieve their agonies; we 
believed in the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of 
man; we believed that we should be followers of God as dear 
children; in baptizing our infants we believed that God saved 
some and did not save others, or else we believed in the salvation 
of all infants, except those poor unfortunates to whose 
parents the Gospel had not been preached; for such, we believed, 
no salvation was provided outside of baptism into some 
one of the hundreds of sects into which Christianity is divided. 

We believed that after a man dies, he is alive; we believed 
that Jesus Christ never died; that He could not die; that no 
Ransom was ever paid or ever will be paid; that Jehovah God 
and Christ Jesus His Son are one and the same person; that 
Christ was His own Father; that Jesus was His own Son; that 
the Holy Spirit is a person; that one plus one, plus one, equal 
one; that when Jesus hung on the cross and said, "My God, 
My God, why hast Thou Forsaken Me," He was merely talking 
to Himself; that He was raised in the flesh; that He still 
bears, and will forever bear, His scars; that He alone of all 
mankind will have to go scarred and marred throughout 
eternity; that He will come again in the flesh; that the Day of 
Judgment is a Day of horror; that the literal earth is to be 
burned up with literal fire; that all human beings who are 
saved become angels; that Paradise is Heaven; that the crucified 
thief became an angel the day he died and went to 
Heaven; that Christ did not become an angel, but was raised 
from the dead as a man three days later than the thief, but 
did not ascend to Heaven until forty days afterward; that all 
the Ancient Worthies went to Heaven when they died, including 
David; that present kingdoms are part of Christ's Kingdom; 
that the Devil has been away off somewhere in an unlocated 
Hell, instead of exercising dominion over the kingdoms 
of this earth; that the Antichrist is to be a literal man; 
that sectarianism is a good thing and will be perpetuated forever; 
that one can be born of the Spirit while he is still in 
the flesh; that a resurrection from the dead is impossible 
because none are dead; that it merely means in the case of 
the saints the taking back of the poor bodies that they had, in 
place of the perfectly good ones they secured when they died. 

We believed that sanctification means sinlessness, not self-sacrificing 
devotion to the will of God; that the expression 
"Bride of Christ" means nothing; because everybody who is 
saved will be the Bride of Christ; that the expression High 
calling means nothing, because everybody who is saved, will 
be saved to the High calling; that the "prize of the High 
calling," therefore means nothing; that the Time of the End 
will never come in your day, in my day, nor in anybody else's 
day; that present running to and fro, means nothing; that 
there will never be any end of the "Times of the Gentiles"; 
that there will never be any special "Time of Trouble such 
as never was since there was a nation"; that there will be no 
"Restitution of all things"; that the Jubilee arrangements 
signify nothing; that the "abomination of desolation" signifies 
nothing; that there never was and never will be a great 



R5629 : page 47 

falling away; that there never was and never will be a great 
Mother Apostate Church, and she never had and never will 
have any daughters; that the expression "Royal Priesthood" 
means nothing, because everybody who is saved will be of 
the priesthood; that there can never be a Second Death, not 
even a first one; that a human soul once born, lives on forever; 
that the Tabernacle signifies nothing; that there is no 
witness to the Lord in the land of Egypt; that the Memorial 
Supper can be properly observed any old time; that the 
Christian Sabbath is not a rest of faith, but merely a formal 
observance of one day in seven; that the literal heavens will 
be literally rolled together as a literal scroll; that at that time 
men will pray for literal mountains to fall on top of them. 

I praise God for the day that brought Present Truth to 
my door. It was so wholesome, so refreshing to mind and 
heart, that I quickly left the humbug and claptrap of the 
past and was used of God to also open your blinded eyes. 
We rejoiced in the Truth together, working side by side for 
fifteen years. The Lord greatly honored you as a mouthpiece; 
I never knew anybody who could make the follies of 
Babylon look so ridiculous. In your letter you ask, "What 
next?" Ah, now comes the pity of it! The next thing is 
that you permit your heart to become embittered against the 
one whose labors of love and whose blessing from on High 
brought the Truth to both our hearts. You went out, and 
took several of the sheep with you. 

I am reliably informed that when Billy Sunday was in 
your city you were one of the most prominent workers for 
"the cause." I am reliably informed also that you are now 
serving as superintendent of a Sunday School in the denomination 
from which you withdrew when you accepted Present 
Truth. You either believe the foregoing "confession of 
faith," or you don't believe it. If you don't believe it, and 
are helping to boost the organizations that do believe it, then 
Doc. Cook, the discoverer (?) of the North Pole, should 
enlist as your pupil. If you do not believe it, and admit, as 
you must, that you got all your light on these and thousands 
of other subjects from Brother Russell, then, by comparison, 
the boy who wished that his father would die so that he 
could have his jack-knife, should be considered a model of 
gratitude and loyalty and faithfulness; and his name should 
be handed down to posterity as a shining example of the way 
we should act toward our benefactors. 

On the contrary, if you have returned to your belief of 

R5630 : page 47 

the foregoing "faith," you must admit that it is something 
you once believed and once vomited forth, and like the 
Scriptural dog, you have returned to your vomit; I hope you 
like it.— 2 Peter 2:20-22. 

Probably I look ridiculous to you because I did not go to 
Heaven, October 1st, 1914, but you don't look ridiculous to me 
—oh no! 



With ten of the greatest nations of earth writhing in 
their death agonies, it seems to me a particularly inopportune 
time to seek to ridicule the man, and the only man, who for 
forty years has taught that the Times of the Gentiles would 
end in 1914. 

If you believe these stupid and worse than childish 
blunders of the past and seek to revivify them, you have a 
worse job on your hands than Christ had when He raised 
Lazarus. Pastor Russell's teachings have killed them so 
completely that they are in a far worse condition than 
Lazarus was when he had been dead four days. 

I presume that when Zedekiah struck Micaiah upon the 
cheek and ridiculed the latter's confidence in the Lord's Message, 
he thought it was really funny, and still more so when 
Micaiah warned him that he would soon attempt to hide 
himself unsuccessfully from the Syrians in his inner chamber. 
I doubt, however, whether Zedekiah considered it so funny 
shortly afterward when he saw the armies of the Syrians in 
front of his house, and especially when he heard them coming 
up stairs.— 1 Kings 22. 

If this letter shall awaken you to your true condition, I 
shall be glad. If it does not, it will not be necessary for you 
to write to me again; for I shall consider it a hopeless task. 

With best wishes, I remain, C. J. WOODWORTH. 



MANY HEARTS RECEIVING COMFORT 

W.T.B.&T. SOC'Y, DEAR FRIENDS :- 

I think you should know of the blessing of the Lord on 
the service last week, and in making calls on those who 
handed in their names at Brother Rutherford's meeting. I 
never saw such interest! The sale of books was reasonably 
good— 450 (all but 50 of which are delivered)— sold in four 
days. The fine class of business men represented was quite 
exceptional, although every week there are some. 

Three young ladies from the Y.W.C.A. bought the books, 
and one gives good evidence of coming fully into the Truth 
in a very short time. A piano dealer said, "This is no denominational 
work, is it? I have no use for denominations. This 
man's theory is worthy of investigation." A lawyer said, 
"That man is a wonder! I never read my Bible, but I am 
going to begin now. Every reasoning person ought to have 
those books— I am going to read every word in them." 

A merchant remarked, "This is the greatest reformation 
movement we ever had; we must keep it going." He sent to 
me twice for more books for his friends; and he is a man 
who had thrown all religion aside. 

A Doctor I called on said, "I was interested to hear he 
was a Baptist; so was I, and I had the same experience he 
had— threw the whole thing over in disgust— and I was a 
preacher." He was glad to examine the work. The cloth 
books were not fine enough for him; he got the leather-bound. 

A very fine office man said, "I will read every moment I 
can get. Of course, I take it for granted that these books 



are along the lines of that lecture." He ordered a set. 

It would take a book to tell the rest! But it is such a joy 
to see some of the "refuge of lies" being swept away, confidence 
in Babylon on the wane, and many hearts comforted. 

With love and prayers for you all, and asking a continued 
interest in your petitions, I am, by His grace, 

Your Sister, CHARLOTTE WHITE. 



"NOT SLOTHFUL IN BUSINESS" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I believe many of us would work with greater zeal if we 
could better realize the opportunities for presenting the Truth 
among those we know. We are apt to think that many have 
no ear for the Message. 

Recently I resolved to be more diligent in searching for 
those who might be hungry for the Truth. Accordingly I 
carried in my produce wagon a supply of BIBLE STUDENTS 
MONTHLY, displayed more conspicuously than usual. 

One thanked me very kindly for a copy. I had known 
him to be somewhat friendly to the Truth. Another came to 
the wagon with Bible in hand, and when asked whether a 
Baptist or a Methodist replied Presbyterian, but had lately 
begun to read Pastor Russell's SCRIPTURE STUDIES and was 
greatly interested in them; adding, "I have gone to my Pastor 
with some Bible questions that he has so far failed to answer." 
Another asked my purpose in displaying the papers, and said 
he had two little books which were very interesting that he 
wanted me to read. They were TABERNACLE SHADOWS and 
the HELL booklet. He asked me to bring him Vol. I. 

In our daily petitions we remember you and the Harvest 
work. Pray for me that I may never look back. 

Yours by His grace, F. M. MORRIS. --Florida. 



"A PRAYER OF CONSECRATION" 

Realizing that I must draw nearer to God to be kept in this 
hour of trial now upon the whole world, I have prayed more; 
and I find the following form very helpful; I therefore call it 

"THE PRAYER OF THE CONSECRATED": 

"Dear Heavenly Father, reverently, and in the name of 
Jesus, I approach Thy Throne of Grace to renew my consecration 
vows today. Not content with having made my consecration 
years ago, nor even yesterday, I renew it today, and 
present to Thee my body and all its powers, my heart and all 
its affections. I give to Thee, willingly and gladly, everything 
I possess, to be wholly Thine— today. I would not withhold 
from Thee one single thing. 

"Gracious and loving Father and dear Lord Jesus, come 
in all Your fulness into my heart and life; take full possession 



and reign there supreme, without a rival today. Dear 
Lord Jesus, my glorious High Priest and Head to Thy Body, 
the Church, continue to offer me today upon God's holy altar 
of sacrifice, and until the sacrifice is completed in death." 

I have found that doing this daily I have been greatly 
enriched and blessed spiritually. 

Yours, in His love and service, W. J. THORN. 

Isa. 41:10; Num. 6:24-26. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR MARCH 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
March follow: (1) 153; (2) 105; (3) 143; (4) 108; (5) 119; (6) 
99; (7) 95; (8) 83; (9) 1; (10) 53; (11) 145; (12) 188; (13) 
211; (14) 240; (15) 307; (16) 23; (17) 281; (18) 155; (19) 221; 
(20) 22; (21) 16; (22) 114; (23) 107; (24) 113; (25) 212; (26) 
192; (27) 78; (28) 235; (29) 4; (30) 303; (31) 173. 



page 48 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 49 

VOL. XXXVI FEBRUARY 15 No. 4 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

Present Duty and Privilege of the Saints 51 

Patent Facts in Christendom Today 52 

Kingdom of God Set Up 53 

Financial Shakings 53 

The Ministry of Angels 55 

Our Lord Jesus the Chief Messenger 56 

Each Saint Has His Ministering Angel 57 

Holy Angels Not Manifest to Our Senses 57 

Preferred Monarchy to Republic 57 

A National Step Backward 58 

Evil Occult Powers in Operation 58 

The Psychological Moment 59 

The Divine Character Vindicated 60 

A World Full of Kings 60 

Lessons from Saul's Failures 61 



Craving for Another Chance 62 

The World in the Future 62 

The Tone of Voice (Poem) 63 

Interesting Letters 63 

The Tract Still Doing Good 63 

page 50 



PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5640 : page 50 

EXTEND THE VOLUNTEER WORK 

The brethren everywhere are remarkable for their loving 
zeal for the Lord, His Truth and the brethren. In no way is 
this better shown than in what we term the Volunteer Work— 
the voluntary distribution of the Society's free literature. No 
other Society on earth ever manifested so much self-denying 



zeal in such a manner. We feel disinclined to advise any increase 
along this line. Nevertheless, it is ours to offer suggestions 
and indicate possibilities and supply the free literature, 
and yours, dear brethren, to determine the extent of 
your reasonable and possible service for the King of kings. 
We do know that there are millions of people in our home 
land who have never yet had a taste of the spiritual food, 
"meat in due season," which has so greatly refreshed and 
strengthened us. Hundreds of cities and towns and villages 
have received no volunteer attention. It is for you to decide, 
individually and as classes, what you can do for these. One 
of our very best free papers has been widely distributed except 
in such places as suggested. It contains a most interesting 
article on "The True Basis for Human Equality," another 
on "Battering Down the Walls of Hell," and another showing 
that neither Pastor Russell nor the I.B.S.A. taught "The 
End of the World in 1914," but on the contrary that "the 
earth abideth forever." 

We have 400,000 of these on hand for use in such previously 
unserved places. We will be glad to hear from all 
who are able and willing to join in this volunteer work. State 
the quantity desired and give shipping particulars. All charges 
will be prepaid. Mention No. 61, BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY. 

R5639 : page 50 

CLERICAL CONSPIRACY LITERATURE 

In various quarters the Adversary is stirring up opposition 
by the publication of the slanderous statements which, as our 
readers know, have been answered long ago. We advise that 
when such an attack is made our friends meet it quickly, if 
possible, in the next issue of the daily press. Do not render 
slander for slander, but calmly, kindly point out the unscriptural 
course. Remind the transgressor of the golden rule and 
of the Divine command, "Speak evil of no man." Remind the 
public that evil speaking has for centuries been the method of 
those worsted in argument. Amongst those slandered was 
our Savior Himself; slandered as a friend of publicans 
and harlots; charged with being a glutton and wine bibber, and 
called the prince of devils. And so it has been with many of 
His followers since. Assert your better acquaintance with the 
facts and offer to anyone interested true particulars. 

Then, while the subject is warm, embrace the opportunity 
for extensive Volunteer work. We have one number of the 
BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY which, besides other valuable articles, 
contains one under the title, "A Clerical Conspiracy to 
Injure Pastor Russell." This article discusses the various 
slanders briefly and to the point; and if anybody is interested 
further we can supply other printed matter giving details in 
full. However, almost universally this one little tract sets the 
matter straight and convinces the people that the clergy are 
really fighting the Truth of the Bible which they cannot answer. 
In writing for this number designate it "The Conspiracy 
Special." We will have them in good supply and make prompt 
shipments free of all charge on receipt of letters or telegrams. 



page 50 

THE COLPORTEUR SERVICE 

The immense crops of wheat, corn and oats, together with 
the extraordinary prices at which they are selling, should inure 
to the "Harvest Work." Colporteurs in the grain-producing 
districts should be doing wonderfully well. Nothing should be 
allowed to hinder the most important work on earth. 

Colporteurs in less favored localities, finding work impossible, 
should seek to follow this lead to fields more favorable. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF MARCH 

Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDIES VI. -VII. 

WeekofMarch 7 Q. 37 to 38 Week of March 21 Q. 1 to 7 

Week of March 14 Q. 39 to 42 Week of March 28 Q. 8 to 13 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each; 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



R5630 : page 51 

PRESENT DUTY AND PRIVILEGE OF THE SAINTS 

"Cry aloud and spare not; lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and 
show My people their transgression, and the House of Jacob 
their sins. Yet they seek Me daily and delight to know 
My ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook 
not the ordinances of their God. They ask of Me 
the ordinances of justice; they take delight in 
approaching to God."— Isaiah 58:1,2. 

WE understand that the Lord, through the 

Prophet Isaiah, is here describing the condition 

of the nominal people of God. These 

words probably had an application in the 

Prophet's day, but we think they have a 

special application in our day. If we should 

view the words as a general statement, applicable 

at any time, it would seem to have 

reference to some who are truly the Lord's 

people and also to the House of Jacob in 

general. The Prophet speaks of certain transgressions 

of God's people, errors, and of sins of the House of Jacob 

(Natural Israel)— especially grievous transgressions. 



Applying this to the present day, we would understand 
that the Lord's people are those who are in covenant 
relationship with God, His real people, and no others. 
Those in covenant relationship with God are comparatively 
a small number. The great mass of professed 
people of God have gotten into many transgressions of 
the Divine will and Law, many of them quite ignorantly 
following blind leaders of the blind, following creeds of 
the darker past. The term "the House of Jacob," however, 
is a distinguishing term, referring exclusively to the 
Jews, God's ancient Covenant people. 

The Lord's people of the present time, those who have 
the Light of Truth as it now shines out from His Word, 
should, as they have suitable opportunity, point out to 
Christendom of today, and especially to those who are 
the professed people of God, their error, show them where 
they have deviated from God's Word, where their course 
is not in harmony with the Golden Rule, etc. Moreover, 
if they have favorable opportunity, they might point out 
to the Jews the reasons why they are in their present 
cast-off condition. But it would not be well to go about 
berating them, or berating anybody. 

Very little good is done by such a course. The Truth 
itself is to be the Sword. It is a sharp two-edged Sword, 
even the Word of God. The work that any of us could 
do aside from the Word of God would be but bungling 
work; whereas "The Word of God is quick, and powerful, 
and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to 
the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints 
and marrow." We are to "cry aloud, and spare not," to 
point out what the Scriptures have to say— on proper 
occasions. This does not mean to insult people. God's 
ambassadors have no commission to insult any one. But 
with gracious words we may, nevertheless, point to the 
conditions of today, the dangers that are now before the 
world, and the proper position to be taken by those who 
would wholly follow the Lord. 

A FORM OF GODLINESS WITHOUT ITS POWER 

The words of the text under consideration are along 
the same line as the words of the Prophet Isaiah in 
Chapter 29:13, quoted by our Lord. There the Prophet 
declares: "This people draw near Me with their mouth, 
and with their lips do honor Me, but have removed their 
heart far from Me"; "but," as the Master rendered the 
following words (Matthew 15:9), "in vain do they worship 
Me, teaching for doctrine the commandments of men." 

The translation of V. 2 of our text is not quite so 
clear as perhaps might be. The thought seems to be: 
They apparently seek Me daily, apparently delight to 
know My ways. They build churches with high steeples 
and gorgeous appointments, at great cost. Many churches 
have imposing images of the saints or great paintings 
which make a fine outward appearance. They have rich, 
melodious bells chiming out sweet hymns; such as "Nearer, 



my God, to Thee," "Rock of Ages," etc. They have well-trained 
choirs to sing anthems. They have highly educated 
ministers who are gifted orators and deliver 
eloquent dissertations. Outwardly, they have a wonderful 
zeal for righteousness; it would seem on the surface that 
they are doing well. They appoint an annual Thanksgiving 

R5631 : page 51 

Day and take up large collections for the poor; 
they pay large salaries to their preachers; they raise 
money for missions. It is very much as it was in our 
Lord's day, at His First Advent, when He said, "Ye compass 
sea and land to make one proselyte; and when he is 
made, ye make him two-fold more the child of Gehenna 
than yourselves"; he is far worse than before they 
touched him.— Matthew 23:15. 

There is great zeal shown for the traditions of men, 
for the propagation of men's theories, for the advancement 
of denominational interests, for attracting the world 
by varied and numerous devices, in order to gain their 
influence and their financial assistance. For instance, 
Thanksgiving Day was set apart in the early history of 
New England. Long ago it became a custom in the United 

R5631 : page 52 

States to have the last Thursday in November appointed 
as a day of thanksgiving to God for the harvest of the 
year. The Governor of the State of Massachusetts first 
took it up; then the Governor of another State followed; 
then another; then it was taken up by the President of 
the United States. Finally it became the custom for the 
President first to make the appointment every year, to be 
followed by a proclamation by each of the State Governors, 
making the day thus a legal holiday, when banks and 
places of business generally would be closed that the 
people might be free to meet for praise and thanksgiving 
to God for the blessings of the year. And the custom 
still persists. Now this might sound to people of other 
nations to whom it would be told as if the people of the 
United States were a set of saints. These nations might 
say, It was not sufficient that the general Government of 
the United States should make such appointment, but each 
State makes such appointment; and they do it every year. 

As a matter of fact, if the President of the United 
States were an infidel he would be expected to follow the 
custom and make the same proclamation. Or whether the 
Governor of a State were a Catholic or a Protestant or 
an atheist, he would be expected to do likewise. It has 
become a custom, just as the hands of a clock go around. 
But very few of the people think of the day in any other 
light than as a pleasant holiday, when they can enjoy a 
fine dinner and have a good time generally. Very little 
attention— in fact, none— is paid by the great majority to 
the real feature, of thanksgiving to God. 



It is the same with other customs in other nations of 
the world. If we were in a Mohammedan country, we would 
see, at twelve o'clock, every Mohammedan, no matter what 
he was doing, stop immediately for a moment of prayer 
to Allah. One who did not know might think from this 
that the Mohammedans were a most saintly people, who 
would be very honest and upright in all their dealings; 
better keep your eye open, for all that. So a great deal 
that we have everywhere today is a mere mechanical form, 
an outward display— a form of godliness without its power. 

PATENT FACTS IN CHRISTENDOM TODAY 

In our text the Prophet was declaring that God's true 
children should lift up their voice and cry aloud, and tell 
God's professed people their transgressions. The implication 
seems to be that there is a very special need of public 
expression on the matter of calling attention to the fact 
that there is a great deal of hypocrisy practised in the 
name of religion. If we consider the British people, or 
the Russians or the Germans, they all have very strict 
religious laws. They used to be even more strict— 
so strict that we who proclaim Present Truth would 
not have been permitted to live there; so strict that 
we would have been in danger of our lives. Yet how 
many of the people of these countries really serve God 
and follow the instructions of His Word as given to the 
children of the Lord? Which of these governments in 
its dealings with other nations has followed or is now 
following the Golden Rule taught by the Savior? What 
does history, past and present, show along this line? 

It is not now considered necessary or proper to cry 
aloud in the streets— the public are no longer ignorant. 
All these things of which we speak are criticized in the 
newspapers and elsewhere. As to religious intolerance, 
nearly all denominations have done their share in persecuting 
others. But it does not seem that there is any 
more heart-loyalty today than formerly, even though 
violent persecution is now seldom practised. If we have 
the right conception of the matter, only about one-tenth 
of all the ministers have any faith in the Bible as the 
Word of God. If that is the case, they are simply living 
on a high moral plane, though we do not know that this 
is true of ministers any more than of the world in general. 
But there is a great deal of religious formality. 
Those one hundred and eighty thousand ministers still 
take their texts from the Bible, as they formerly did, but 
they merely sanction those features of the Divine Revelation 
which they think comport well with Higher Criticism 
and general intelligence. It would seem that the Lord 
through the Prophet is referring to these conditions. 

We do not understand that we should cry out in any 
unseemly manner— not go to the churches and cry aloud. 
Those in the churches have a legal right to meet there, 
and to be as honest as they please or as hypocritical as they 
please. Neither would it be seemly to go along the streets 



crying aloud. There is a more fitting and effective way 
of sounding the alarm. 

As a notable instance of the present attitude of the 
nominal church ministry, we cite the case of the Rev. Dr. 
Aked. Our mention of this is not a divulging of any 
private matter; for Dr. Aked took it out of the personal 
list himself, by publishing the matter in the newspapers. 
Not long ago this minister disproved to his own satisfaction 
the virgin-birth of our Lord Jesus and made light of 
the whole matter. Rev. Mr. Aked is a very able man- 
stands high with the people and with the colleges and with 
the ministers. There is a branch of the Federation of the 
Christian Churches in San Francisco, and the Rev. Mr. 
Aked was chosen as President. Some one attacked Rev. 
Mr. Aked through the newspapers and said that he should 
be "churched," "unfrocked," etc., for his statements. Dr. 
Aked said that he thought everybody understood his position. 
He offered his resignation as President of the Federation 
of Churches. The man who thought that he 
should be called to account for his statements was treated 
as the offender, and Rev. Aked was requested to resume 
the presidency. Yet this minister publicly declared that 
he did not believe one word of the story of the Redemption 
of mankind— did not believe that Jesus was ever a 
superhuman being; and the fact that he was supported in 
his position by his fellow-ministers, with but very few 
exceptions, proves that the body of the ministry today 
have sadly fallen, and are "blind leaders of the blind." 

KINGDOM WORK THIS SIDE THE VEIL 

We are not surprised at these conditions; for long ago 
they were foretold in the Word of God. We were assured 
that our day would witness the fulfilment of the prophecies 
along these lines. Wherever we look, we witness 
the disintegration of the Present Order, whether we view 
the conditions from a social or a religious or a financial 
standpoint. The lease of power to the kingdoms of this 
world has expired. It was foretold by the Prophet Daniel 
that "in the days of these kings," before their utter overthrow, 
the God of Heaven would set up a Kingdom which 
should smite and break in pieces all the kingdoms of men, 
the beastly kingdoms of Daniel's dream. When these 
kingdoms would be given to "the people of the saints of 
the Most High," they were to "smite them in pieces as a 
potter's vessel." This intimates that in some sense of the 
word the Lord will take possession of these before they 
have been completely overthrown; that some of the 
kingdoms represented in the Gentile Image will be remaining 
at that time. 

What time, then, is signified by the expression "in the 
days of these kings," when the Kingdom of God was to 
be set up in power? To our understanding the first step 
in the setting up of this Kingdom was the raising of the 
sleeping saints of the Gospel Age, which we believe was 



R5631 : page 53 

in the spring of 1878. Then began the glorification of the 
Church. The work of setting up the Kingdom has, we 
understand, been progressing from that date, and is now 
merely lacking the last members of the Church class. 
When these shall have taken their places as members of 
the Church in glory, the Kingdom will be fully set up. 
This does not signify that there may not be a part of 
the Kingdom work begun while some of the members of 
Christ are still in the flesh. Indeed some Scriptures seem 
to imply that there will be a Kingdom work done this side 
the Veil, while a work of still greater magnitude and 
authority is progressing on the other side of the Veil. 
We read, "Let the saints be joyful in glory; let them sing 
aloud upon their beds." This seems to imply, as we have 
mentioned before, that there is a special work to be done 
while these saints still have beds, while they are in a condition 
of repose— not "tossed to and fro, and carried 
about by every wind of doctrine," but fully at rest in 
God's great Plan. The Scripture goes on to say that they 
have a two-edged sword in their hands— this is the Word 
of God. They use it as the Sword of the Spirit. This 
would not be true of them on the other side of the Veil. 
They would have no use for a sword there. The Scriptures 
also declare that the high-sounding praises of God 
are upon their lips. This, too, seems to be applicable to 
those this side the Veil. 

R5632 : page 53 

The final phrase, "to execute the judgments written," 
would seem to imply that there would be something for 
the saints on this side of the Veil to do in connection with 
the execution of the judgments upon the nations. As to 
just what this means, we have not yet fully learned. But 
we see nothing here to conflict with the thought that the 
Lord's Kingdom may be properly understood to have 
begun operations and that the present smiting of the 
nations is under Kingdom control. The fact that some 
of the members of the Kingdom class are still in the flesh 
does not militate at all against this thought. We see the 
kingdoms of this world now being dashed to pieces, and 
we are expecting to see the process continued until they 
are completely ground to powder. They shall become as 
the chaff of the summer threshing-floor, and the wind 
shall carry them away. Then shall they be found no more 
at all. -Daniel 2:35. 

THE KINGDOM OF GOD SET UP 

Because certain important things are to be accomplished, 
we see that God is permitting what to others 
might seem to be purely human devilishness. For a wise 
purpose He permits this reign of lawlessness, this condition 
which evokes universal odium. Our thought is that 



we should look for still further evidences day by day that 
the Gentile Times have ended, and that God's Kingdom 
has begun its work. We are expecting to see multiplied 
proofs of the Kingdom power, though the world will not 
recognize it as such until it is manifested in the flaming 
fire of Anarchy, which is still further along. The present 
step is the war of the nations. The next step will be 
Socialism— an attempted Socialism— among the people. 
Then the third step, Anarchy, will gradually come on. 
When this symbolic fire shall prevail, then the world will 
realize what we are trying to tell them now; namely, that 
God's Kingdom is taking control, and that these various 
demonstrations are evidences that our Lord is taking His 
great power. But the many will not begin to see until the 
flaming fire is revealed. When we endeavor to tell them 
now they will not receive it, but they will be thoroughly 
convinced when they see the destructive fire of Anarchy. 

It was merely during the interval between the destruction 
of the kingdom of Israel and the setting up of the 
Kingdom of the Heavens that the opportunity was given 
to these Gentile kingdoms to see what they could do 
toward establishing a righteous government on earth. 
Now the time has come for God's Kingdom to displace 
them; but they will not willingly resign their crowns and 
scepters; they are in defiance. Therefore force is required 
to destroy them. Their 2520 years of rule are in 
the past, and they must now submit to a complete overthrow. 
We are expecting that the work of their crushing 
will steadily continue until its full accomplishment. "A 
short work will the Lord make upon the earth," is the 
Scriptural declaration.— Romans 9:28. 

At the sounding of the Seventh Trumpet Messiah was 
to take unto Himself His great power and reign. That 
Trumpet is now sounding! "And the nations were angry 
and Thy wrath is come." (Revelation 11:18.) Surely 
the nations are angry now! They act as if they were 
bereft of common sense. We see readily enough that the 
spirit of selfishness has prevailed there right along; but 
that some hindrance or fear heretofore held them back. 
But finally, when the Lord's "due time" had come to permit 
it, they broke through their restraint. The Lord has 
at this particular time especially to do with the affairs of 
the nations. And this war was allowed to occur at about 
the end of the Times of the Gentiles, at the appropriate 
time when they are to be dashed to pieces with the iron 
rod of the Iron Rule. (Psalm 2:6-12.) It is our judgment 
that we shall see more of this iron rule and its breaking 
influence, not only upon the nations, but upon society 
at large. Now in this great Day of the Lord everything 
that can be shaken is to be shaken to pieces and shaken 
out, to the intent that nothing unrighteous or unworthy 
shall remain. God Himself is doing the shaking. 

FINANCIAL SHAKINGS 

For our own part we are looking for great shaking in 



financial matters. There has never before been a war 
that has shaken the world as this war has done. This 
effect is largely because of money conditions. The only 
thing that is current is gold. Silver was demonetized 
forty years ago. The results of this we are just feeling 
now. At the present time stocks, bonds and all other kinds 
of securities are largely built on confidence. As soon as 
confidence begins to shake, all these securities decline in 
value. With such a lack of confidence among the people, 
we can readily see that there is good ground for the bankers 
to have a great deal of trepidation— "men's hearts 
failing them for fear."— Luke 21:25,26. 

Since the beginning of the war there have been bonds 
and stocks sold as low as thirty per cent, less than those 
of last July. But the Exchanges did not recognize these 
sales. Why? They wish to keep the prices up. The 
banks have their vaults filled with stocks and bonds. If 
the Government Inspectors should come in to take stock, 
they would count the stock up at the price of the last sale; 
and the Government officer's duty would be to say, "You 
must make this right before you enter into business tomorrow 
morning." They would reply that they have any 
amount of securities. But the answer would be, "We 
do not want securities; we want gold." There is not 
enough gold in the world to pay the debts. These debts 
are put into gold bonds. The interest on all the debts is 
represented by gold bonds. But everybody is going to say, 
"I do not want bonds or stocks; I want gold." 

The business people of today who are feeling the 
strain most are the wealthy. They have the stocks and 
bonds, but they have not the gold, the money. If you 
demanded gold at the banks in exchange for something 
else, they might give it to you, but unwillingly. Gold 

R5632 : page 54 

notes are the same as the gold, because the Treasury must, 
according to law, have that gold on hand to exchange 
for them when presented. 

This matter is causing trouble, not only in the United 
States, but down in South America and Central America. 
They would like to buy goods. And the question comes, 
"Have you the money? Have you the gold?" "No, we 
have no gold. Sell to us in the same way you have sold 
heretofore." "No, no, we cannot do that; something has 
stopped. We do not know what is the matter." The 
wheels have stopped, and the people who have their fingers 
in the way are getting them pinched. There is not enough 
money; and the very people who destroyed silver money 
forty years ago are the ones who are now getting pinched. 

THE TIME FOR JUDGMENT IS RIPE 

We believe that the Times of the Gentiles ended 
just on time, as shown in Volume II. of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES. The hand of Justice is now doing the breaking 



the nations shall be broken as "a potter's vessel." 
The whole cataclysm of trouble may be upon the world 
during the next ten months or it may be longer deferred. 
We believe that the time for the setting up of the Kingdom 
was on September 21, 1914. At that time, when it 
was due for our Lord to take up His great power and 
reign, the nations were already angry. They were at war 
over a month in advance of the time, because so angry. 

The due time for the "wrath" was September 21. 
We are expecting to see this wrath still more manifest. 
The nations have been in just this same unloving spirit 
one toward another for a number of years, but apparently 
they have been under some forcible restraint. We believe 
that God's time had not yet come. We wondered, and 
many people wondered, how their anger could be restrained 
much longer; much has been written about it in 
the newspapers. When the Balkan war came, it was because 
the nations were angry; and it very nearly led to 
this conflagration. Austria tried to precipitate the trouble 
at that time, but the German Kaiser held back. Now the 
restraining hand has been removed. The time is ripe. 

"WHAT MANNER OF PERSONS OUGHT WE TO BE?" 

Seeing that we see all these things with such clearness, 
and realize what it all means to the Church, how soberly 
and carefully and faithfully we should live! Never were 
the words of the Apostle Paul— "Let us watch and be 
sober"— more applicable than now. Accompanying the 
momentous events that usher in the New Dispensation 
are special trials and difficulties, not only to the world, 
but also to the Church. The Apostle says, "Ye, brethren, 
are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a 
thief." But "as a snare will it come on all them that 
dwell on the earth." All except the brethren will be surprised, 
disappointed, chagrined, found unprepared and 
more or less overtaken. But the brethren, because they 
have been feeding at the Lord's table, and are strong in 
His might, will not be overtaken unawares. The Apostle 
urges that because the brethren are "children of the light," 
"children of the Day," they shall not act as children of 
the darkness, "children of the night." 

In the New Day that is just dawning we shall have 
the "Reign of Righteousness." We belong to that New 
Dispensation. While living in the flesh, we are not of the 
flesh; while living in the world, we are not of the world. 
Our minds are clarified by the light of the New Day. We 
are not interested in the things of this world, but in the 
things of the Lord; and because of our special relationship 
to the Lord, as His Elect, we are not left in the 
darkness of the world. 

Above all others, then, we should be sober. When 
the Apostle enjoins, "Be sober," he is not referring to the 
use of intoxicating liquors; for those who have the Lord's 

R5633 : page 54 



Spirit, the Lord's mind— the Truth— do not so indulge. 
Neither would we understand him to mean that we should 
always go about wearing long faces; for the children of 
the Light should of all others be happy, cheerful people. 
But we should be sober in the sense of being of serious 
mind, thoughtful, not given to frivolity or levity, but 
earnestly watching our thoughts, our words, our doings, 
that we may in all things bring honor to our King whose 
name we bear. We who have our eyes open see what sin 
is and how the reign of sin is about to culminate. We 
see God's arrangements; and having entered into a Covenant 
with God, we surely must be sober, vigilant, realizing 
the great battle now on between Light and Darkness, 
between Truth and Error; realizing that faithfulness in 
this "evil day" will require all the soberness of mind, all 
the fortitude, that we possess. We shall continually need 
the wisdom from on High. "If any man lack wisdom, let 
him ask of God, who giveth to all liberally and upbraideth 
not; and it shall be given him." (James 1:5.) It is only 
those who are using to the best of their ability the power 
and the talents already given them who have any right to 
ask for further wisdom and who are prepared to use more. 

THE "CUP" OF THE APOSTATE "WOMAN" 

The Scriptures speak of various kinds of intoxication. 
We can be intoxicated with the spirit of the world. But 
it would be impossible for true children of the Heavenly 
King to become thus intoxicated. We have a new wine 
which the Lord gives, and we should be fully satisfied 
and not seek the intoxication of the world. Then there is 
a spiritual intoxication, the spirit of error. All the world 
are intoxicated with this spirit. All Christendom has 
been made drunk with the wine which comes from the 
Golden Cup mentioned in Revelation, which the Apostate 
Woman has held out for all to drink. This Cup is filled 
with false doctrines. These false doctrines were her mixture. 
Thank God! the intoxication of these is passing 
away, and we are able to see more clearly than ever 
before. But we see many who are still intoxicated. 

The most stupefying potion is the doctrine of eternal 
torment. It gives people the impression that after they 
have heard of Christ, have turned from outward sin, and 
have professed His name, that is all there is to it, and 
now they should go out and try to induce others to turn from 
a life of sin. They verily think that there is nothing more 
to do, not recognizing that there is an important work of 
grace to be attained in their own hearts, and that they are 
to be upbuilt in the knowledge of God and in obedience to 
His will; and that is His will, "even their sanctification." 
As a consequence of this, many of them are mere babes 
in Christ; and many more are not even justified to life, 
having never made a full consecration of themselves. 

Many professed Christians of broad mind and of good 
influence are thoroughly confused with this wine of false 



doctrine. They are content to give some money to the 
Church system and to engage in some works of benevolence. 
It does not occur to them to seek for further 
knowledge of God or of service for Him. How much 
these need to be delivered from the enslaving influences 
which are binding them hand and foot! How glad, how 
thankful we are that the chains of bondage will soon be 
broken and the captives all set free! The children of the 
Light, however, are properly on the watch all the time. 
They are not influenced by the deluding, false doctrines. 
We rejoice that the Morning is about to dawn, the time 
when all will be awakened and see the light as it will then 

R5633 : page 55 

be streaming from the Sun of Righteousness, risen with 
healing in His beams. 

We who are now awake should be very active and 
energetic in the service of God; for we have a hundred-fold 
more opportunities than those of other days— by 
telegraph, by telephone, by mail and by newspapers, by 
rapid and convenient train service, through the printed 
page, etc. This is pre-eminently the time for the Lord's 
children, "children of the Day," to be sober, vigilant, active. 
In the presence of so great opportunities, who 
should not be sober and vigilant. 

And we are to watch. What should we watch? Pre-eminently 
we should watch ourselves, to keep ourselves 
from the snares of the present time, which are more insidious 
and entrapping than ever before, so that we do 
not endanger our peace with God nor lose our enlightenment. 
The Adversary is on the watch, and it is necessary 
that the Lord's people be especially alert and watchful. 
In the past there was little opportunity for the Lord's 
people to watch the fulfilments of Scripture; for these 
fulfilments were far apart. But now is the time for us to 
watch particularly along this line. The Times of the Gentiles 
have ended, and the nations are now disintegrating. 

There are certain indications that the Lord has a 
great work for all His people, His watching saints, at the 
present time. Unless we are on the alert, we might go to 
sleep. In our Lord's time the disciples were disposed to 
go to sleep, and to go back to the fishing business, instead 
of doing the work the Lord had outlined. We should all 
be fully awake and watching to see what is the duty of 
the hour and then to be diligent in doing it. 

OPPORTUNITIES FOR SERVICE NEVER BEFORE SO GREAT 

There are some of the Lord's children who seem possessed 
with the idea that "the door is shut," and that there 
is no further opportunity for service. So they become 
indolent in regard to the Lord's work. We should lose 
no time dreaming that the door is shut! There are people 
who are seeking the Truth— people who are sitting in 
darkness. There never was a time like the present. Never 



have so many people been ready to hear the good Message. 
In all the forty years of Harvest there have not 
been such opportunities to proclaim the Truth as now 
present themselves. The great war and the ominous signs 
of the times are waking people up, and many are now 
inquiring. So the Lord's people should be very diligent, 
doing with their might what their hands find to do. 

Business men are greatly troubled. At the present 
time there are thousands of business men who scarcely 
get a night's rest. "Men's hearts are failing them for 
fear, and for looking after those things which are coming 
on the earth." (Luke 21:26.) They do not know what 
to do. They thought they were secure; for they had large 
bank accounts and stocks and bonds. Now they say they 
do not know what these things are worth. "We had some 
insurance too," they say, "but we do not now know 
whether the Insurance Companies can pay." Their stocks 
and bonds are not salable. Their holders are therefore in 
perplexity. They have not had the security of God's 
promises, and they have nothing on which to rest. But 
the Lord's people have the full assurance of His Word 
that "all things shall work together for good to those who 
love God"— love Him supremely. 

Then let all of us whose eyes have been anointed with 
the "eye-salve" of Present Truth, who are loyal to the 
Lord, lift up our voices and point the way to those who 
are bewildered and troubled, who know not which way to 
go, nor where to seek for comfort, who long for something 
substantial upon which to rest, when everything 
seems to be slipping from beneath their feet. Their 
religious teachers have failed to be true to their commission, 
and they have been left to grope in darkness. Some 
of these may be helped by our efforts and led to the "green 
pastures" and "still waters" of the true Shepherd's Fold, 
before the dark night is fully upon the world. 



R5633 : page 55 

THE MINISTRY OF ANGELS 

"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them 
that fear Him, and delivereth them."— Psalm 34:7. 

THERE is more or less difficulty associated 

with all attempts to think about the great 

Jehovah, His character and His power. The 

Scriptures seem to indicate that God has 

used various ways of manifesting His 

power to His people— to the Jews during 

the Jewish Age and to the Christian Church 

during the Gospel Age. We think it would 

not be an improper thought that the word 

angel may stand for any agency or power, 

whether animate or inanimate, that God would be pleased 



to use in connection with service. God could make the 
wind or the flaming fire His messenger. He could make 
the great Archangel or an inferior angel His messenger. 
He could use as His messenger whatever or whomsoever 
He might choose to invest with the requisite power; just as 
a representative of these United States, going to another 
country, would be recognized, regardless of his own personal 
ability or standing. 

The details of how the Almighty has knowledge of our 
prayers, our thoughts, our words, our needs, are not furnished 
us in the Scriptures; and evidently it is not necessary, 
therefore, that we should understand these in every 
particular. We do not think that any finite mind could 
comprehend God. He is too great for our comprehension, 
far too mighty for us to understand fully all His powers, 
His ability. Nevertheless we can apprehend some things 
respecting God, and are therefore invited in the Scriptures 
to study Him along the lines of His Revelation. To assume 
that God is in every place, in every niche of space 
throughout the Universe, seems to us an absurdity, not 
taught in the Bible; and to assume that God knows about 
every little tadpole, pollywog, microbe, or that He even 

R5634 : page 55 

takes knowledge of every act of each one of the human 
family, when there are millions upon millions of these, is 
beyond our understanding. 

If we should limit God's attention to the Church, still 
there are thousands of these; and the capacity to understand 
and deal with ten or twenty thousand people in an 
instant seems to us to be an impossibility. Nor would 
such an arrangement be what we would expect God to 
have. Any human being who would attempt to deal with 
even a hundred people and to know everything going on 
would be thought to be very unwise. Rather he would 
have various agencies through which his will would be 
done by those hundred people by which he would know 
what was being done, and by which they would know his 
purpose respecting the work. His general knowledge of 
matters would not imply that he would be in every room 
in the house at one instant nor take notice of every person 
at the same instant. 

In our present text, however, we are inclined to think 
that the word "angel" used by the Psalmist refers to spirit 
beings. Our reason for thinking so is that the revelations 

R5634 : page 56 

of the Lord in olden times previous to Pentecost were 
nearly all by spirit beings. These materialized and then 
dematerialized, vanishing from sight. In general the 
Scriptures seem to indicate that God's dealing with His 
people in those earlier times was through angels. As 
respects this Gospel Age, just closing, we have confidence 
that God has shown as great care in His dealings with 



Spiritual Israel as He did with Natural Israel; for 
Spiritual Israel comes nearer to Him as His House of 
Sons than did Natural Israel as a House of Servants. But 
God expects the House of Sons to walk by faith and not 
by sight, a much higher walk. Hence His manifestations 
to these are not such as appeal to the natural senses. They 
are, nevertheless, just as real. 

THE EYES OF THE LORD 

We read that "The eyes of the Lord run to and fro 
throughout the whole earth, to show Himself strong in 
the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward Him"; 
also, "The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding 
the evil and the good." But this does not give us the 
thought that God personally beholds every individual act 
of every person on earth, but that He takes cognizance of 
matters throughout the world by means of His power, 
His agencies. These "eyes" referred to are the Lord's 
influence, His power of knowing, whatever the means. 
Whether His power is exercised and His will executed 
through angels or through other forces and agencies, it 
makes no difference— no more than it would with us in 
carrying out our wishes. If we wished to know about 
certain matters in Philadelphia, there would be various 
methods by which we could learn. One effective method 
would be to telephone and get into direct communication 
with the individual, provided he is supplied with a telephone. 
Or through the telegraph we could send a message; 
or we could send a messenger directly to the party, 
by foot or by train or some other conveyance. 

Now if mankind have these various ways of accomplishing 
their designs, we can appreciate our Heavenly 
Father more by thinking of Him as having full ability to 
come into communication with His children, and as having 
various agents of communication. God has means, no 
doubt, far superior to any of ours. He has not revealed 
the matter clearly to us except to tell us that He is informed 
respecting all that concerns us, as well as respecting 
all the affairs of the world. He does tell us that 
angels are His ministers, and that these have a charge 
over His people. "Are they not all ministering spirits, 
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of 
salvation?" They do not minister in the sense of directly 
providing bread for us, nor in the sense of cooking our 
food, nor of building our houses— in none of these ways 
do they minister. How, then, do they serve us? We have 
no way of knowing positively how they serve except from 
the words of our Lord Jesus, that the angels of God's 
"little ones" always behold the face of the Father, always 
have access to Him. 

The fact that these angels represent the Lord's "little 
ones" would imply that they would have immediate access 
to God and have immediate attention. What would be 
the use of the Father's receiving the angels into His 
presence unless there was something to be communicated? 



Our understanding is that God's knowledge of our affairs 
and interests is gained by methods with which we are not 
acquainted. We may assume, however, that the mediums 
used are largely the angelic messengers. The head of 
every business house and banking institution has certain 
laws, certain regulations, governing all the operations of 
the business. Just so God has certain laws governing 
nature. It is not necessary that we pray to God that the 
earth may turn around upon its axis and that tomorrow 
may come. We may be sure that the Almighty, the One 
who represents exact Justice and infinite Wisdom, has 
laws that govern His entire Universe; that the angels 
have insight into these laws; and that they are Jehovah's 
deputies, just as an earthly court might deputize some one 
to sit in chancery and to take information. 

OUR LORD JESUS THE CHIEF MESSENGER 

If in connection with our text we also have in mind 
our Lord's words before His ascension, "Lo, I am with 
you alway, even unto the end of the Age," we shall understand 
that the Lord Jesus is the Chief Messenger, or 
Angel, of Jehovah. He has surely been the Chief Messenger 
to the Gospel Church. Our thought, then, is that 
through the angels and other agencies God is governing 
the world, and especially caring for His people, through 
our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Head of all the Divine 
spiritual powers and has charge of all Jehovah's affairs. 
We have been brought into the School of Christ. He is 
our Teacher. When we go to the Father in prayer, we 
do not ignore this Teacher, but we go in His name; and 
we are not to suppose that the Father would ignore Him. 
He would be the Father's Representative in dealing with 
us. But we are not to suppose that the Lord Jesus has 
every detail of the affairs of the world under His personal 
supervision; but rather that those angels report to 
Him whatever is necessary, and that thus there are certain 
principles operating. This seems to us to be the reasonable 
and logical arrangement of Divine operations. 
We are not insisting upon this for other minds, but merely 
saying that this appeals to our own mind. 

In view of the fact that the Church has been put under 
the special guidance of the Lord Jesus, it would not be a 
far-fetched thought that Jehovah encampeth round about 
His people through Jesus, and that the angels are under 
His direction. If Satan is the chief of his band of angels, 
so our Lord would have angels under His control, and He 
would be their Prince. We read of what Alexander the 
Great accomplished, and of what Napoleon Bonaparte 
did, regardless of the fact that they had many thousands 
under them to carry out their will. So we think of all the 
spirit beings as under the direction and guidance of Jesus 
Christ. Into His hands God has committed all power in 
Heaven and on earth. All the angels of God were made 
subject to Him; and through these, under the control of 
our Lord, all the interests of God's people are supervised. 



This is our thought, and we like to think so. 

DELIVERANCE IN VARIOUS WAYS 

Our text proceeds to say that the angel that encamps 
around the people of the Lord "delivereth them." In olden 
times the Lord's children were sometimes delivered miraculously. 
Some were delivered from prison; others were 
not. Some were delivered from the sword; others were 
not. We should accept the will of God, whatever it may 
be. But in order to be able to do this, for our spiritual 
good, our ultimate good, we must realize that the terms 
and conditions under which we accepted of Him were that 
we would give ourselves unreservedly into His hands. 
A proper fear, or reverence, for the Lord, would surely 
lead us to place ourselves fully in His keeping and under 
His guidance and control. Our experiences in life have 
shown us how unable we are to direct ourselves aright. 
The Lord will deliver each of us in the way that will 
bring us the largest measure of blessing. 

In the days of the Apostles, St. Peter was delivered 
from prison by an angel of the Lord, who appeared to 
him as a man. This was in the interest, not only of the 

R5634 : page 57 

Apostle, but of the entire Church, showing them that the 
Lord was able to fully care for His people, giving them 
valuable lessons. And although these outward manifestations 
are not given to us of the present time, we have 
other blessings that more than compensate for these outward 
tokens that are not at present for the good of the 
Church. We are able to say with the Apostle that all 
things are working together for good to those who love 
God, to the called ones according to His purpose. We 
should be full of confidence in Him— that we are subjects 
of His choicest care at all times. 

EACH SAINT HAS HIS MINISTERING ANGEL 

While we may not be too positive in our interpretation 
on this subject, we understand that each one of the Lord's 
people, in proportion as he is one of God's true children, 
has a ministering spirit, a person, an angel, who has 
charge of his affairs. This angel makes his report to the 
Lord, whether monthly, weekly or hourly we do not know. 
If God sees this to be the wise, proper course, we have 
every confidence in His Wisdom. Whatever God has arranged 
is fully satisfactory to us in this matter, and we 
are sure that it is quite right and fully in harmony with 
the Divine character. 

We think that this principle is illustrated in the Book 
of the Prophet Daniel. Daniel had been praying and after 
some little time his prayer was answered. The angel 
Gabriel, who was the Lord's messenger to Daniel, explained 



R5635 : page 57 

to him certain things. At the beginning of his 
supplications the Lord had purposed to send him an 
answer. Gabriel had been sent especially to inform him, 
but had been detained by certain other duties. The fact 
of his detention should not give us the thought that 
Daniel or any of the Lord's people would ever be neglected; 
but that while minor affairs of Daniel were under 
the guidance of some lower angel, there were important 
matters that were entrusted to Gabriel as the plenipotentiary, 
as it were, in regard to Daniel's interest and other 
matters. There was a delay, and Gabriel mentioned what 
the delay was; the prince of Persia had withstood him for 
twenty-one days. 

We have heretofore pointed out that this Gospel Age 
has been different from the Jewish Age and preceding 
ages; that after the Gospel Dispensation was ushered in, 
outward demonstrations, such as the gifts of the Holy 
Spirit— the gift of healing, the gift of tongues, the interpretation 
of tongues, and discerning of spirits— and 
angelic visitations passed away; and that during the 
Gospel Age it has been God's will that the Spiritual House 
of Israel should walk by faith and not by sight, and that 
therefore it would be inappropriate after the Church was 
fully established to expect angels to appear, to manifest 
themselves outwardly. 

But the angels of the Lord, nevertheless, have a 
charge more particularly over us of the Gospel Church 
than over any other of the Lord's people at any previous 
time in the world's history. The Lord is especially interested 
in Spiritual Israel. These angels, then, care for us, 
supervise our affairs, and are God's agencies or channels 
of communication to us as to His will; that is, communication 
in the sense of providences for us, causing this 
providence or the other providence. 

HOLY ANGELS NOT MANIFEST TO OUR SENSES 

We would not give the thought of the angels whispering 
into our ears. We think that the angels which now 
whisper in the ear are the same ones that give table-tippings, 
planchette communications, communications 
through the hand by writing, and various other communications 
to the ear and the eye of spirit-mediums; namely, 
evil spirits, fallen angels. Our understanding is that the 
holy angels do nothing of the kind. The Lord's people 
of the present Age are to find their instruction in His 
Word. There is no need of a book on Mormonism or 
Spiritism or New Thought or of clairvoyant or clairaudient 
power for the Lord's children. These are all snares 
of the Adversary and his demons. 

The followers of Christ have the Bible and the invisible 
ministries of the holy angels to provide for their 
interests and to providentially guard and guide their affairs. 
This, to us, is very real and of great comfort. If 



we had the thought that God was doing all this personally, 
we would think that He had certainly forgotten us. But 
having the assurance of His Word that not a hair of our 
heads can fall to the ground without our Father's attention, 
our mind can rest in the fact that He accomplishes His 
purposes in Christ for His children through the ministrations 
of the holy angels. 



R5636 : page 57 

PREFERRED MONARCHY TO REPUBLIC 

--MARCH 7.-1 SAMUEL 8-10.- 

ISRAEL A THEOCRACY-HUMANLY A REPUBLIC -A KINGDOM 
PREFERRED-SAMUEL OFFENDED-THE REQUEST GRANTED- 
SAUL, SON OF KISH-HIS ANOINTING -CHOSEN BY LOT. 

"Fear God, honor the king."— 1 Peter 2:17. 

ISRAEL'S government was a theocracy; that 

is to say, God was their King; His Law 

was their government. The elders of each 

tribe supervised its affairs. God provided a 

priestly tribe, which represented the religious 

interests of the people. Prophets and 

Judges were sent them from time to time as 

special messengers of the Lord, but without 

authority except as the people believed their 

counsels to be wise. Thus Israel was, so 

far as its earthly interests were concerned, a republic, in 

covenant relationship with God. 

No one will dispute that a republic is the highest 
type of government. In a republic each citizen is a sovereign; 
and these sovereigns, by their votes, appoint some 
of their number to be their representatives and servants. 
But this highest type of government can be thoroughly 
appreciated only by intelligent people, and can work the 
highest good only in the hands of intelligent and conscientious 
people, submitted to the Divine regulations. 

Had no fall occurred, undoubtedly this highest form 
of human government would have prevailed. The Scriptures 
indicate that after Messiah's Kingdom shall have 
thoroughly subjugated sin, thoroughly uplifted humanity, 
absolutely destroyed all the wilfully wicked, and shall have 
completely brought the remainder of the race up to absolute 
perfection, then, at the close of Messiah's Reign, 
the earth to all eternity will be a republic, each member 
of the race a sovereign. 

Our lesson shows us that the Israelites did not appreciate 
their Divinely arranged republic. They beheld 
the splendor of the surrounding nations, and thought that 
because they were different, it was to their disadvantage. 

As a result of the noble reform instituted by Samuel 



and maintained throughout his long judgeship, the people 
were greatly blessed, and the national spirit was strengthened. 

R5637 : page 58 

But they perceived that the Prophet was growing 
old, and they feared that his sons would seek to succeed 
and continue themselves as judges. The narrative tells 
that they were unreliable— "walked not in his ways, but 
turned aside after lucre, and perverted judgment." 

A NATIONAL STEP BACKWARD 

The elders of the tribes conferred together and believed 
that it would be better to choose from amongst 
themselves a king and thus become more like the nations 
roundabout. They came to Samuel with the matter, as 
children to a father, as wise men to a statesman of extraordinary 
wisdom. They told him their desires. Samuel was 
disappointed, but gave no answer to them until he had 
time to confer with the Lord. The Lord bade him not be 
offended— that it had not been he who was rejected, but 
that the Lord had been rejected and His government. 

But the Lord was willing to let them have their experiences 
with kings; nevertheless, Samuel was instructed 
to fully inform them what would be the consequences, 
what would be the manners of the kings, what would be 
the difficulties. He explained that their liberties would be 
fewer— that the kings would exercise a more or less autocratic 
power and would conscript their sons for servants 
and for soldiers and for public works, and that thus their 
liberties would be greatly abridged, the wealth of the 
people would more or less flow into the coffers of the 
king, and the best of their lands and of everything would 
gradually pass into his control. Instead of being the sovereigns, 
the people would be the slaves of the sovereign, 
retaining at best only a portion of their rights, etc. 

The people, however, had set their heart on having a 
king. Already they were imagining how a king would lead 
them forth and give them dignity, marshal their hosts, 
and cause fear of them in the hearts of their enemies. 

DIVINE FOREKNOWLEDGE ILLUSTRATED 

At the appointed time, Samuel, apparently by Divine 
arrangement, having received instructions from the Lord, 
came in contact with the one who was to be the future 
king— Saul, the son of Kish. The story reminds some of 
witchcraft and other occult doings. A herd of asses 
strayed from the farm of Kish, and Saul was sent to seek 
them. After searching in vain, he and his servant called 
upon the Prophet to ask his wisdom— that the Seer tell 
them where the asses were. The answer was that the 
asses were found, but that Saul was to come and dine 
with the Prophet in an appointed place where guests had 
already been invited, food already prepared, etc. 



The place of honor was given to Saul; and the young 
man, fresh from the country, was astounded to hear the 
Prophet speak of him as being the choice of Israel for 
their leader. He modestly called attention to the fact that 
he belonged to an inferior tribe— a small one— the tribe 
of Benjamin; and that his family was not even the greatest 
in it. But the Prophet persisted, addressing him as 
the one to have future honors. 

The next morning he was called early and directed 
respecting his journey in such a manner that he would 
have corroborations of things that the Prophet intimated 
in advance. He would meet certain people, and by some 
he would be invited to partake of food, etc. Moreover, 
he would meet with certain experiences which would 
make of him a changed man. Meantime, as the two walked 
together and Saul's servant went before, the Prophet 
drew forth a vial of oil and poured it upon Saul's head, 
anointing him to be the king of Israel by Divine appointment. 
However, matters were kept secret until such time 
as would be indicated. 

Saul's faith in the Prophet's declaration was strengthened 
by the fulfilment of the very experiences foretold. 
Meeting a company of those who were styled a school of 
prophets, the Spirit of the Lord came upon Saul and he 
joined with them in their singing and prophesying. We 
read, "God gave Saul another heart, and the Spirit of God 
came upon Saul, and he prophesied."— 1 Sam. 10:9,10. 

DIFFERENT OPERATIONS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 

We are to remember that the Spirit of God signifies 
simply an invisible power from God. Those coming under 
this power sometimes acted in one way and sometimes in 
another— sometimes speaking, sometimes writing, as they 
were moved by the Power of the Holy One, Jehovah. Let 
us not forget the clean-cut distinction which the Bible 
makes between the Holy Spirit in its operations upon men 
before Pentecost and since. Since Pentecost, the impartation 
of the Holy Spirit generally signifies that begetting 
influence which the Lord gives to consecrated believers 
in the Lord Jesus Christ, by which begetting and anointing 
they are brought into the family of God as sons, and 
are enabled to have discernment of mind to more and 
more appreciate the mind of God as expressed in the Bible, 
by the Prophets of the past. 

But previously, the Holy Spirit simply signified a holy 
energy, and meant no begetting to sonship; for, as the 
Scriptures declare, the Holy Spirit (in this sense) was 
not given until Jesus was glorified. (John 7:39.) Only 
saintly persons, fully consecrated to God and fully trusting 
in the merit of Jesus, are spirit-begotten now, but 
any person might at times be used of the Lord as an 
amanuensis to write, or as a servant to do or to say, 
wherever, whenever, whatever, the Lord wished to have 
said, done or written. 

The Spirit which came upon Saul was not the Spirit of 



sonship; the change of his heart did not signify that he 
had become a New Creature in Christ; for there could be 
none such until Christ, the Head of the Church, had come 
and, as the Forerunner of His members, had opened up 
"the new and living way." Saul had a new heart in the 
sense that he no longer had the mind, purpose, "disposition," 
to be a farmer, but a Divine "disposition," will, 
ambition, judgment and wisdom granted him, especially 
qualifying him to the office to which God had chosen him; 
namely, to be a statesman. 

In other words, God's Holy Spirit, qualifying Saul for 
his position as a king, was a mechanical one, much after 
the same manner that we read that God qualified certain 
workmen in preparing the Tabernacle. The Lord said to 
Moses, Choose any workmen for this particular work, and 
I will put My Spirit upon them, and thus qualify them 
for the work to be done. We may be sure that if God 
calls any man for any particular work, He is quite able to 
qualify him for its performance, whether it be a religious 
work, as is sometimes given to His consecrated people, or 
whether it be for some work of public benefit, as for 
instance, in modern inventions, which belong in this 
dawning time of the New Dispensation. 

EVIL OCCULT POWERS IN OPERATION 

The difference between Samuel and his occult powers, 
and the occult powers of others today is this: Samuel's 
were manifested under Divine direction at a time when 
God was pleased to use such powers amongst His people 
Israel— powers which doubtless will be in exercise also to 
some extent during the Millennial Age for the world's 
guidance. But the Scriptures recognize evil occult influences; 
and the Israelites were warned against necromancers, 
those who claimed to have communion with the 
dead, and those that peeped and muttered and had mediumship, 
etc. 

R5637 : page 59 

The Bible explains that the fallen angels personate the 
dead. The Bible tells that the dead are really dead, that 
the dead know nothing whatever until the resurrection. 
The Lord warned Israel that these evil spirits would seek 
to personate the dead, and thus to indoctrinate them in 
error and lead them away from God. Similarly, throughout 
this Gospel Age, the same evil spirits, the same fallen 
angels, have used, and do still use more or less of occult 
power— psychic powers, mediumistic powers, mesmeric 
powers, hypnotic powers— to mislead, to attract away from 
the Truth, to make error appear to be Truth— especially 
to make people believe their dead friends are not dead, 
but more alive than before they died. 

During this Gospel Age, we believe that God does not 
use such hypnotic powers, but as St. Paul declares, He 
has "spoken to us through His Son," and has given us His 



Scriptures, "that the man of God may be thoroughly furnished 
unto every good work"— not needing any occult 
powers. Hence we know of no good occult powers, 
but are to rate them all as deceptions of the Adversary, 
against which God's people are fighting. 

ISRAEL'S FIRST KING CHOSEN 

In due time, in harmony with the will of the Judges of 
Israel and with the Divine consent, the people came 
together to Samuel to have the matter of a king amongst 
them decided— to have the will of the Lord expressed in 
the matter. Again Samuel expostulated with them, and 
told them the dangers of leaving the simplicity of God's 
arrangement and taking up with the monarchial arrangement. 
But seeing that they still desired a king, he acted 
for them and drew lots as respected the different tribes, 
and then the different families in the chosen tribe, and 
then the different members of the family indicated. The 
lot fell on Saul as Samuel knew it would do and as Saul 
also knew; for they believed the Lord's hand was in the 
matter. 

The fact that they used this method of casting lots 
should not be considered as an endorsement of such a 
method today; for we are living under different institutions; 
and neither the Natural nor the Spiritual Israelites 
are in that relationship with God in which He proposes to 
guide their affairs by the casting of lots. 

When the lot fell upon Saul, the elders of the various 
tribes began to look for him. Where is he? Finally they 
found him bashfully sitting amongst the stuff— the luggage 
that belonged to the parties that had come to the gathering. 
As he was brought forth, the young man in the 
prime of life— probably seven feet tall, of athletic build- 
he exactly filled the ideal of the people. They were pleased 
with God's choice, and God had already qualified Saul that 
he might be a successful king if he would prove loyal, 
faithful and obedient to Him. 



R5635 : page 59 

THE PSYCHOLOGICAL MOMENT 

-MARCH 14.-1 SAMUEL 11:1-15.- 

KING SAUL, ALTHOUGH ANOINTED OF GOD, WAITED FOR THE 
VOICE OF THE PEOPLE-HIS OPPORTUNE MOMENT AND HOW 
HE UTILIZED IT-HIS ACCEPTANCE BY THE PEOPLE- 
OPPORTUNITIES OPEN FOR ALL-LESSONS FOR ALL IN SAUL'S 
EXPERIENCES-SPECIAL LESSONS TO THE CHURCH, ALSO 
CALLED TO KINGLY OFFICE-THE ROYAL PRIESTHOOD-ALL 
MEN TO BE MADE KINGS AGAIN BY MESSIAH'S REIGN- 
ALL LOVERS OF INIQUITY TO BE DESTROYED. 



"He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that 
ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city."— Proverbs 16:32. 

ISRAEL had asked for a king. God, through 
the Prophet Samuel, had caused the anointing 
of Saul to be the king. The people of 
Israel had assembled, and God's Prophet 
Samuel had indicated God's choice for them. 
Some of the people had gladly accepted the 
choice; but the rougher element had refused 
it, sneeringly saying, Who is he? What is 
his record, that we should hope for anything 
great in his hand? 

It looked as though the Lord and His plan had failed 
—as though the choice had been an unsatisfactory one 
and had come to naught. Saul made no attempt to exercise 
authority, seeing that he had such half-hearted support 
from the people. He returned to his home— resuming 
his life as a farmer; but we may be sure he was patiently 
waiting for the opportune, or psychological, moment to 
arrive when, with God's blessing, he would enter upon 
the duties and responsibilities of a king, for which he 
had been Divinely anointed. 

Saul's farm life continued only a month, until the 
opportunity offered which brought him the support of all 
the people as king. The Ammonites, residing in the east 
of Israel's possessions, were making war on one of the 
tribes of Israel. For some time they had besieged Jabesh-gilead, 
until the city was in such straits for food, etc., that 
they asked terms for surrender. The taunt of the Ammonite 
general was that on one condition he would save 
their lives; namely, they should each submit to having one 
eye put out, as a shame on the whole people of Israel. 

Time was asked— seven days— for decision. If they 
could not get help in that time, they would submit to the 
terms. Messengers were dispatched, possibly to all the 
tribes. At all events some came to the place where Saul 
resided, evidently hoping that the one who had been 
chosen king, acceptable to some, would take steps for 
their deliverance. The disgrace of the situation struck 
home to Saul's heart. Israel to whom God had promised 
the possession of the land and His assistance, lacked faith 
and leadership. 

Saul was appointed leader, and the psychological 
moment for him to lead had come. He killed the yoke of 
oxen he had been driving and sent pieces to all the tribes, 
saying that whoever did not respond, to become a defender 
of the general interests and to wipe out the shame, would 
have his oxen hewn to pieces. This was a peculiar command 
for a king; but it seems to have touched the right 
spot, for three hundred and thirty thousand men responded. 
The messengers returned to Jabesh-gilead with 
assurances of succor before noon the next day; and they 
gave answer to their besiegers to the effect that they 
would by the time appointed march out for the Ammonites 
to do with them as they thought best— meantime expecting 



such a deliverance as would make their enemies 
impotent to harm them. 

King Saul divided his army into three sections, and 
from three different quarters came suddenly upon the 
besieging hosts, routing them, destroying many lives and 
delivering the people of Israel. Thereupon the masses 
of the Israelites realized that God had indeed given them 
a wise king, whom they had been slow to recognize; and 
they inquired for those who had spoken against Saul at 
first, saying, Let them now be slain. However, the king 
was wise and generous, and said, "There shall not a man 
be put to death this day; for today the Lord hath wrought 
salvation in Israel."— Verse 13. 

R5635 : page 60 

THE DIVINE CHARACTER VINDICATED 

We again remind our readers that although this war 
and the slaughtering of those Ammonites had the Divine 
approval and blessing, it did not signify what many of us 
once supposed; namely, that those thousands of Ammonites 
slaughtered in their sleep or in their waking moments, 
went immediately to the theological Hell, there to suffer 
eternal torments. On the contrary, they merely went to 
the great prison-house of death, the tomb, there to sleep 
until in God's arrangement Christ would die as the world's 
Redeemer— and more, until at His Second Advent the 
Redeemer should take His great Power and reign, begin 
His work of calling back from death all that are in their 
graves.— John 5:28,29. See Revised Version. 

To grasp the situation we must remember that all men 
are under a death-sentence, conviction, not worthy of life 
everlasting. All were to die anyway; and it mattered little 
whether they would die from starvation or sickness or 
pestilence or by the sword. The penalty merely reads, 
"Dying, thou shalt die"— not live, anyhow or anywhere. 
This view of matters has a distinct bearing on everything 
appertaining to the Lord's authorization of wars, and 
permission of famines, sickness, etc. While God has enforced 
the penalty, "The wages of sin is death," and has 
thus manifested His justice, He in another way has been 
preparing for the manifestation of His Love. The first 
step of this love-manifestation was in the sending of His 
Son to be man's Redeemer— to die for Adam's sin, under 
which all the race is condemned to death. 

Still the Divine Plan is hidden from the world in general. 
Only the Lord's consecrated people may have a 
clear understanding through the Bible of God's great 
purposes of love for the race. These are informed, and 
are able to comprehend the Message, that ultimately God 
will establish a Kingdom which will bind Satan's power, 

R5636 : page 60 

release humanity from its mental, moral and physical 



weaknesses— the results of the curse— and restore all the 
obedient to full perfection and to relationship with God. 

GREAT OPPORTUNITIES AWAIT ALL 

Looking out into the world, we perceive that opportunities 
for progress and greatness are by no means equal. 
Nevertheless, few men and few women make use of all 
the golden opportunities which do come to them for their 
own betterment and for usefulness on their part to their 
fellows. All such may take a good lesson from Saul; for 
he had naturally some good traits which he subsequently 
diverted or misused. 

That Saul had humility is evidenced by the fact that 
when the suggestion of his becoming king was made, he 
repudiated the thought of his worthiness of the position, 
saying that there were greater tribes than the one of 
which he was a member, and that even in his own tribe, 
his family was not the most prominent. Again, at the 
time when Samuel the Prophet called the people, that the 
Lord's lot might be determined as to who should be the 
king, Saul was in hiding amongst the stuff, sitting amongst 
the piles of baggage. He knew how the Lord's lot would 
fall; and it was to his credit that he was not strutting 
about amongst the people showing himself, and saying, 
The Lord would surely choose me. Again, when some of 
the people murmured that he was not acceptable, Saul 
quietly went to his home and to his farming, letting the 
matter rest. Thus he displayed patience and wisdom, 
as well as humility. 

His subsequent action and leading the army of Israel 
showed his faith in God and his courage. Had Saul maintained 
these characteristics, his experiences later would 
have been very different. But nearly every young man 
and young woman on the threshold of life, as well as 
when older, can gain some valuable and lasting lessons 
from Saul's experiences. 

It may surprise some when we say that Christians- 
God's consecrated people— may especially learn lessons of 
profit from Saul's experiences. They, like Saul, have 
been nominated of God, not only to be kings, but also to 
be priests, "a Royal Priesthood." As Saul was anointed 
with the oil, so the Royal Priesthood are anointed with 
the Holy Spirit. As the people rejected Saul, and he 
waited patiently for the Lord's time, so the people, mankind, 
are not yet ready for the Reign of the Royal Priesthood, 
of which Jesus is the Head; and God's time has not 
yet come for the establishment of the Kingdom. Lessons 
of patience, of humility and of confidence in God are 
requisite that after enduring, they might inherit the 
promises.— Hebrews 6:12. 

The great Armageddon is at hand, and terrible lessons 
will be learned by the world at great cost. Thereafter the 
Kingdom of Messiah will be very popular; and they will 
be saying, as they did in Saul's case, Let all those who 
oppose be put to death. However, The glorified Christ— 



Jesus the Head, the Church His members— will be very 
gracious, and a general amnesty will be proclaimed for 
all who will desire to come in line with the Kingdom. 

Not only those who persecuted the Savior will be 
forgiven and be assisted back into harmony with God 
through Him, but those, also, who have despised the 
Royal Priesthood and persecuted them unwittingly, will 
be mercifully dealt with. "Your brethren that hated you, 
that cast you out for My name's sake, said, The Lord be 
glorified: [We do it for the good of the cause] but He 
shall appear for your joy, and they shall be ashamed." 

The shame that will then come upon all who in the 
meantime had resisted the Lord's choice for His Kingdom 
class will be a sufficient penalty. After the shame and 
God's forgiveness to all the willing and obedient, The 
Christ will bring blessings of "Restitution, which God 
hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy Prophets since 
the world began."— Acts 3:21. 

A WORLD FULL OF KINGS 

God created Father Adam the king of earth. Had he 
remained loyal to his God, he would have retained not 
only his life and health and happiness, but also his kingly 
authority over the beasts, the fish and the fowl— ruling 
them with telepathic powers. The breaking of the Covenant 
with God by Adam not only brought death and 
separation from God, but impaired his ruling powers as 
respects the lower creatures. The redemption accomplished 
by the death of Jesus is eventually to reach every 
member of Adam's race, and not merely will be applicable 
to their restoration to human perfection of mind and body, 
but will include a restoration of kingly powers. 

In a republic there is a recognition of the fact of a 
human equality before the law. In a republic, every man 
is a king; and these kings vote for one of their number 
to be a president-king, or otherwise to hold a government 
executive position as the servant of all. This is a theory, 
an ideal, but we all know that it is more or less defective. 
It is in vain to claim that all men are born free and equal 
when we know that there are great inequalities of birth, 
of character, of talent, of will-power. While, therefore, 
a republic would be the ideal condition for perfect men, 
it only partially meets the requirements of the case so 
long as man is imperfect. 

Nor will Messiah's Kingdom be established as a republic. 
Instead of giving humanity more power and 
leaving everything to be settled by the popular will and 

R5636 : page 61 

vote, Messiah's Kingdom will do the reverse. It will lay 
down the law, punish every infraction of the law, and 
point men to the fact that they are not qualified to govern 
themselves, and that therefore, God has decreed the establishment 
of Messiah's Kingdom to rule over humanity, 



while they are in the imperfect condition, and to bring 
them up by Restitution to full perfection, where they will 
be able, as originally designed, to all be kings; or, failing 
to come up to this standard, they will be destroyed as 
incorrigible, lovers of iniquity. 

Surely the Divine Program for humanity is beautiful, 
simple, and sublimely grand! It leaves nothing to be 
desired further. As the Bible declares, it will be "the 
desire of all nations." Those whose eyes and ears of 
understanding are open to appreciate this Message of the 
Bible have much advantage every way over the average 
man at the present time. This knowledge is very assistful 
to them as they come to realize that the anointing of the 
Holy Spirit upon them is with a view to preparing them 
to be the Royal Priesthood of the future and, with Jesus, 
to bring to mankind the blessings of Jehovah, lost by sin, 
redeemed at Calvary. 



R5638 : page 61 

LESSONS FROM SAUL'S FAILURES 

--MARCH 21.-1 SAMUEL 14:1-46.- 

OBEDIENCE WITHOUT ITS SPIRIT CAUSED SAUL'S DIFFICULTIES- 
THE KINGDOM, TAKEN FROM SAUL'S FAMILY, GIVEN TO 
DAVID, "A MAN AFTER GOD'S OWN HEART"-SAUL PROFITED 
PARTIALLY BY HIS MISTAKES AND WAS BLESSED ACCORDINGLY- 
LESSONS FOR EVERYBODY-PARTICULARLY FOR 
GOD'S CONSECRATED PEOPLE. 

"Let us put on the armor of light."— Romans 13:12. 

THE army which gathered to Saul, and which 

accomplished the victory of our last Study, 

was disbanded; and subsequently the king 

had a standing army of three thousand men. 

One thousand of these were under command 

of his son Jonathan. The remainder constituted 

a royal guard and were immediately 

under Saul's own directions. Apparently 

the land of Israel was completely dominated 

by the Philistines, who here and there had 

garrisons. These were content to take a certain amount 

of tax from the people, much as the British govern India. 

The Israelites were poorly armed; for the Philistines 
would not permit them to have weapons of war lest they 
should rebel. Similarly, the British prevent war munitions 
from going to India for the same reason. When 
therefore Jonathan made an attack upon the garrison of 
the Philistines and wiped it out, it raised a hubbub, much 
as such a circumstance would do if the people of India 
were to rise against the British garrison there. It meant 
war. The Hebrews trembled at what might be the result, 



just as the people of India would tremble at what the 
British might do in a similar case. 

The Philistines increased their army of occupation; 
and the Israelites— unarmed, except with agricultural implements, 
etc.— were terrorized by the warlike Philistines. 
Saul's army of three thousand dwindled to six hundred; 
yet the word which reached him from the Prophet Samuel 
was, to wait seven days for his arrival, apparently with the 
intention that the people should thoroughly feel their 
impotence, and cry unto the Lord for succor. King Saul 
did as directed to the extent of waiting seven days; and 
with the expiration of the time, seeing how his army was 
dwindling and that Samuel had not returned, he on the 
seventh day undertook to be his own priest. He offered up 
sacrifices to God without authority. 

Just as he had finished the sacrifices, the Prophet 
Samuel appeared, reproved him sharply, and told him 
that because of his failure to fully obey the Lord, his 
family should not be continued as the Lord's representatives 
in the Kingdom of Israel. The king apologized, explained 
the circumstances— thought it necessary to do 
something, and that what he did was the only thing he 
could think of. Very few kings or generals of our day 
would be prepared to do any nearer the will of the Lord 
than did King Saul. Very few would have waited seven 
days at all, or would have paid any attention to the 
Prophet. Very few would have apologized to the Prophet 
afterwards, and explained why they attempted to offer 
sacrifice to God. 

We cannot but think that if King Saul had been given 
further opportunities he might gradually have learned the 
lesson of implicit obedience to God; and yet our next 
lesson will show us that he again failed along the very 
same lines. It requires many experiences to teach some of 
us the lesson of complete reliance on the Lord and full 
obedience to His every requirement. Perhaps the Lord 
was wishing to teach a special lesson along this line— that 
any king sitting upon the typical throne of the Lord must 
be implicitly obedient, not merely to the letter of the command, 
but also to its spirit; for Israel's kings to a considerable 
extent foreshadowed the Kingdom of Christ and 
His Church. Those who will be joint-heirs with Messiah 
in His Kingdom of glory must learn obedience; else they 
will not be accounted worthy of the honors of the Kingdom. 
They must not only be outwardly obedient, but inwardly 
obedient to the spirit or intent of the Lord's Law. 

ONLY PRIESTS MIGHT SACRIFICE 

While passing, we do well to note why King Saul's 
sacrifice of burnt offerings to the Lord was condemned as 
a sin. This was because God had made a specific law to 
the effect that only the priests might offer sacrifices. Then 
comes the question, Why should God limit the offering of 
sacrifices to the priestly tribe? The answer is that that 
tribe typically represented the Church— fully consecrated 



to God and accepted by Him. These the Apostle styled 
the antitypes, not only of Israel's kings, but also of Israel's 
priests. St. Peter says of the Church in general, and not 
of the clergy in particular, "Ye are a Royal Priesthood." 

In the antitype, all of God's consecrated people are 
prospective kings and are sacrificing priests. Unless these 
saintly Christians sacrifice their earthly interests, their 
present lives, they will not get the great reward of joint-heirship 
with Christ, the great Chief Priest of their profession. 
As we read, "If we suffer with Him, we shall also 
reign with Him"; and again, St. Paul says, "I beseech you, 
brethren,... present your bodies a living sacrifice." 

It would be therefore a mistake for us to suppose, as 
some do, that the clergy have special priestly offices now, 
and are commissioned to offer mass and prayers. Let us 
remember that there is only one great High Priest— the 
Lord Jesus— that He offered up Himself in the days of 
His flesh, and has passed beyond the Veil into glory, and 
that He has since been offering up His consecrated people, 
who present themselves to Him in the proper spirit of 
submission and self-sacrifice. 

The Bible recognizes no division of the people of God 
into clergy and laity. This was a snare of the Adversary, 
introduced gradually in the third and fourth centuries. 
The Bible teaching is that all spirit-begotten children of 

R5638 : page 62 

God are members of the antitypical Royal Priesthood, that 
they are all brethren, that they are all ordained or authorized 
to preach the Message of God's grace as presented 
in God's Word; and that they should call no man on the 
earth father; but should realize that One is their Father, 
even God, and that the Lord Jesus is their Elder Brother. 

CRAVING FOR ANOTHER CHANCE 

How many of the human family have felt, when they 
reached their death-beds, that if they had life to live over 
again, their lessons of experience would be precious and 
enable them to do much better! The man or the woman 
who has not had some experiences along this line of 
failures and endeavored to surmount them and to do better, 
has lived his life very much in vain. Let us therefore 
encourage one another to strive for high ideals, and not 
to be discouraged by our unintentional failures. This is 
expressed by the little quotation which we all learned in 
childhood, "If at first you don't succeed, try, try again." 
That little message which came to our childish minds was 
a valuable one. It helped us over many a discouragement. 

Beset by our own weaknesses with which we were born, 
surrounded by others who similarly have weaknesses of 
mind, body and morals, and assaulted, as the Scriptures 
assure us we are, by Satan and the fallen angels, who seek 
to ensnare us and divert us from God and from righteousness, 
is it any wonder that we fail to come up to our own 



highest ideals, and therefore fail still more seriously to 
come up to the perfect standards of God's Word? 

The very simplest statement of God's Law is the 
Golden Rule. Yet how many who understand that Golden 
Rule and its spirit perfectly could claim that they live up 
to its requirements every hour, every day? "Thou shalt 
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy 
soul, with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thou 
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." All that any of us 
can do is to be honest with ourselves, to confess our 
delinquencies, to strive daily to overcome these and to 
attain more and more to the Divine standards in thought, 
in word, in deed. 

It is a further lesson, which only Christians have 
learned, that it is impossible to live up to the standards of 
this Law, and that we need the covering of the Redeemer's 
merit— even after we have surrendered all to Him to seek 
to walk in His steps— to cover our shortcomings and to 
continue us in relationship with God. Another lesson 
which the Christian learns is that those continuing in 
relationship with God find not only forgiveness for trespasses 
unintentionally committed, but find also grace to 
help, assistances for every need— through the same Savior. 

Thus the Christian is learning of his own weaknesses 
and of God's mercy, and growing strong in battling for the 
right day by day. He not only has a second chance, but 
has many repeated chances, day by day, of repentance of 
sin and of making a fresh start after recovery from the 
stumbling, through the merit of Christ. 

King Saul in our lesson had no such experiences; the 
Savior had not yet died; He had not yet appeared in the 
presence of God, to offer an atonement or to open up a new 
way of life. Saul, therefore, had only the arrangement 
which was common to all Jews— the typical Day of Atonement, 
once every year, to atone for the sins of the whole 
people for one year, including the typical priesthood, 
through whom the message of God was communicated to 
them. And being himself partly a type, King Saul was 
necessarily dealt with along the lines of strict justice, and 

R5639 : page 62 

the kingdom was declared to be forfeited by his family because 
of his offering to the Lord a sacrifice not authorized. 

THE WORLD IN THE FUTURE 

Gradually Bible students are learning that the story of 
our various creeds of Christendom is untrue, which tells 
that all the heathen have gone to eternal torture, and all 
the Jews similarly, because they did not believe in the Lord 
Jesus Christ; and furthermore, that nearly all the people 
of civilized lands who have died, have gone to eternal 
torture because, having heard of Christ, they did not become 
His saintly followers. These terrible doctrines have 
driven many away from God and from His Book, as 



people seem to realize their horrors and injustice. 

Bible students are coming to see that God has provided 
two trials for the whole world of mankind. The first 
trial was in Eden, Father Adam being the representative 
of himself and his race. That trial ended in disaster to all 
concerned. Unless God had made an arrangement for a 
second trial, none of the human family would ever gain 
eternal life or escape the sentence that came on them there. 
The death of Christ was for the very purpose of giving a 
second trial to Adam and all his race; as the Apostle declares, 
"As by man came death, by man comes also the 
Resurrection of the dead. For as all in Adam die, even 
so all in Christ shall be made alive; every man in his own 
order."— 1 Corinthians 15:21-23. 

During this Gospel Age, those who believe the Message 
of the Gospel, and who consecrate themselves fully to the 
Lord and whom He accepts by the begetting of the Holy 
Spirit— these become New Creatures in Christ, and these 
New Creatures are on trial a second time— their destiny 
being either everlasting life on the spirit plane or everlasting 
death. The remainder of the world are still in the 
condemned condition; or, as the Apostle says, they have 
not yet escaped the condemnation that is on the world. 
There is only the one way of escape now— through accepting 
Christ on the terms of discipleship. 

However, we see that God's provision for a second 
trial includes the remainder of mankind who do not now 
hear, or who do not now accept Christ and are not now 
begotten again as New Creatures. The world in general 
is to have its trial time during the Millennium. Then, "the 
knowledge of the glory of God will fill the whole earth." 
Then, "all shall know Him from the least to the greatest." 
They will not have the opposition of Satan; for he will be 
bound during that time. They will have the assistance of 
Christ and of the glorified Church, the Royal Priesthood. 

The object of that Millennial Kingdom will be to uplift 
the world— to bring all the willing and obedient back 
again to human perfection and everlasting life, and to 
destroy all the incorrigible ones, who refuse when they 
have that full and second opportunity. In this connection 
we are reminded of the words of the poet: 

"I wish that there were some wonderful place 

Called the Land of Beginning-again, 

Where all our mistakes and all our heartaches 

And all our poor, selfish grief 

Could be dropped, like a shabby old coat, at the door 

And never put on again." 

The poet's words are to come true, and the time is near 
at hand. If, as Bible students are realizing, the present 
European War is a prelude to the anarchy of the great 
Battle of Armageddon, and is the vestibule to the Kingdom 
of Messiah, then the time of putting off the "shabby old 
coat" of present imperfection on the part of mankind in 
general is near at hand. Surely all who have themselves 



put off the filthy rags of their own righteousness, and by 
faith put on the Robe of Christ's Righteousness, can rejoice 
that the poor world— heathen, Jew, and civilized 
Gentiles— may all have so good an opportunity as God's 

R5639 : page 63 

love and mercy have provided for them through the great 
Sacrifice made at Calvary, when "Jesus Christ by the 
grace of God, tasted death for every man"; that he who 
believeth on Him, whether now or in the future, should 
not perish, but might gain everlasting life. 

Not only so, but as Jesus gives all who come unto Him 
the gracious opportunity whereby they may "try, try 
again," and gradually demonstrate, cultivate their loyalty 
to God and to righteousness, so the Bible intimates an 
opportunity will be given to the world in general. For a 
thousand years the world will have the opportunity of 
trying, trying again, peradventure that by the many lessons 
of that time they may learn righteousness and come 
fully into accord with the Great King Eternal and His 
glorious Golden Rule. This the Scriptures assure us respecting 
the Millennium: "When the judgments of the 
Lord are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the world 
will learn righteousness."— Isaiah 26:9. 

JONATHAN'S FAITH WAS REWARDED 

Our lesson proceeds to tell the story of how Jonathan 
and his armor-bearer, blessed of the Lord, were victorious 
over the enemies; and how the Philistines, divided into 
three parties, mistook each other for Hebrews and 
slaughtered one another. 



R5639 : page 63 

"THE TONE OF VOICE" 

"It is not so much what you say 

As the manner in which you say it; 

It is not so much the language you use, 
As the tones in which you convey it. 

'"Come here!' I sharply said, 

And baby cowered and wept; 
'Come here,' I cooed, and he looked and smiled 

And straight to my lap he crept. 

"The words may be mild and fair, 

And the tones may pierce like a dart; 

The words may be soft as summer air, 
And the tones may break the heart. 

"For words but come from the mind, 



And grow by study and art, 
But the tones leap forth from the inner self 
And reveal the state of the heart. 

"Whether you know it or not, 

Whether you mean or care, 
Gentleness, kindness, love and hate, 

Envy and anger are there. 

"Then, would you quarrels avoid, 
And in peace and love rejoice, 

Keep anger not only out of your words, 
But keep it out of your voice." 



page 63 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
"NOTHING LEFT BUT TIME FOR PRAYER" 

BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The year must not pass without a word from us to cheer 
and encourage you and to wish you God's choicest blessing on 
your every word, thought and deed, which go forth to His 
glory. 

At this juncture we have just closed a long session of many 
weeks of the PHOTO-DRAMA. The experience has been trying, 
but helpful, because it has shown us that the Apostle's admonition 
is still needed— "Ye have need of patience," and we find 
we are still in need of extreme watchfulness in points of character 
which we were beginning to think were nearly invulnerable. 

We are glad indeed now that so many thousands by means 
of the PHOTO-DRAMA have been brought into direct touch with 
the Truth— a pure message— and especially at a time when the 
clergy (who should be feeding and comforting their sheep) 
are positively impotent and have no message to give. On the 
other hand many of them— the majority, in fact— are preaching 
war and urging the use of carnal weapons as the highest 
ideal for young and old. 

The attendance at the PHOTO-DRAMA during recent 
weeks has been phenomenal, and many are the encomiums 
received concerning it. We feel it a duty to speak of Brother 
Shearn in this connection, because his energies have been 
continuous day and night. In every case he has schemed 
successfully on the side of economy, and has overcome obstacles 
in cases where many an able man would have given up 
the fight. 

Indefatigable is the best word in our language we can find 
for him, and that is not expressive enough. He has kept us 
going at full steam while the work was on; and it was indeed, 
as the hymn says, "Nothing left but time for prayer." 
The wonderful and unselfish co-operation of an army of 
brethren shows what the Truth can do; and the unanimity 
among them has been sufficiently marked to impress the visitors, 



who in their turn have expressed delight and admiration 
at such service. 

We have slowed down now and are glad of a little respite; 
and though we do not expect to be able to put in so much 
time to the DRAMA if it continues, we hope to do our best. 

Yours in the dear Lord, F. GUARD.— England. 



THE TRACT STILL DOING GOOD 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Greetings in Jesus' precious name. Just a few lines to inform 
you of things in general up here. In February last 
year I received a tract from a brother dealing on Scripture. 
It appealed to me so much that I became a Bible student, 
and my wife as well. Before that I was a Roman Catholic, 
and my wife belonged to the Church of England; it is needless 
to say that there were religious disagreements which 
were not binding us together. On the other hand, now, we 
are pulling together in spite of the very hard and especially 
trying times. My sister-in-law is also a Bible student, having 
gotten the start from us. 

Since last February, I am glad to say, there are several of 
my neighbors interested in Scripture, and I am in hope of 
some becoming like us. 

One of my methods is to write down some pointed Scripture 
texts and ask my neighbors what they think of them. As 
they have to look up the Bible for these, they get interested, 
hence, I refer them to the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 

Now, brethren, I am isolated here and cannot go up to 
Edmonton to take part in the class, because I am a farmer 
and cannot be away from home long enough. If any of the 
brethren are on their way through this section, my house will 
be always welcome to them if they want to stop a day with 
me to discuss Bible topics. 

With my best wishes, I remain, 

Your brother in the service of the Lord, C. R. BANNISTER. 



NOW AN UNBROKEN FAMILY 

OUR DEAR PASTOR AND BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

My heart is full to overflowing, and I must tell you of 
the great blessings I received at Providence, and what it did 
for Brother Kies. 

As he belonged to the M.E. Church, lived as near right 
as possible— was a worker, etc.— he thought he was a Christian, 
but now he says, "Why, I never was a Christian; for I 
never acknowledged I was a sinner, and never took Jesus for 
my personal Savior." So your theme, "What is a Christian?" 
struck him very favorably and gave him a foundation to 
start on. 

Then at the afternoon meeting he got the Plan; and in 
the evening at Boston he found out what and how to do when 



you are a Christian. Oh, it became so plain to him; and he 
says he wouldn't take a thousand dollars for what he got! 

I am a babe in Christ also, and symbolized my consecration 
Nov. 2, in Springfield, Mass., and have been trying to 
let my light shine; and he says he has noticed it and has been 
watching me; and that when you spoke of that in Boston it 
just hit him. 

Oh, what it has done for us both, praise His name! He 
expects to withdraw from the Methodist Church and give his 
reason and testimony how he got "truly converted." We are 
all rejoicing, and Brother and Sister Merrill say, "Now we 
are an unbroken family." And oh, I am so happy! 

I could hardly give him up, but now he is given back to 
me; you can imagine my joy. 

Yours in the one blessed hope, 

SR. CLARENCE KIES. 



page 64 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 65 

VOL. XXXVI MARCH 1 No. 5 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

The Blood of Sprinkling of the Passover 67 

The Antitypical Passover Lamb 67 

"A Kind of First-Fruits" 68 

"Church of the First-Borns" 68 

"As Oft as Ye Do This" 68 

The Mass Is Not the Eucharist 69 

Date of the Memorial Supper 70 

Drink Ye of the Same Cup 71 

Cup of Joy in the Kingdom 71 

Sacrificial Love vs. Duty Love 72 

Our Personal Responsibility to God 73 

Christian Not a General Policeman 73 

God's Mercies to Disobedient Israel 74 

Fruits of Disobedience 75 

Messianic Reign Autocratic 76 

Saul Rejected by the Lord 76 

King Saul's Second Test 77 

"Are Ye Able?" (Poem) 78 

Interesting Letters 79 

Miracle Wheat Takes Prize 79 

page 66 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5649 : page 66 

CHANGES IN "SCRIPTURE STUDIES" 

We call attention to a few slight changes which have been 
made in four pages of Vol. II. and six pages of Vol. III., 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES." These are all trivial and do 
not alter the real sense and lesson, but conform to the facts 
as we have them today. The pages containing these corrections 
are as follows: 



Vol.1 

Vol.1 

Vol.1 

Vol.1 

Vol.1 
Vol.1 

Vol.1 

Vol.1 
Vol.1 
Vol.1 

Vol.1 

Vol.1 
Vol.1 



, page 77, line 1, "will be the farthest limit," reads "will see the 

disintegration." 
, page 77, line 6, "will obtain full universal control," reads "will 

begin to assume control." 
, page 77, lines 16,17, "end of A. D. 1914," reads "end of the 

overthrow." 
, page 81, line 9, "can date only from A.D. 1914," reads "could 

not precede A.D. 1915." 
, page 170, line 16, "at that time they will all be overturned."* 
, page 221, line 25, "full favor until A.D. 1914," reads "full 

favor until after 1915." 
I., page 94, line 29, "in this end or harvest," reads "at the end of 

this harvest." 

I., page 126, line 12, "at A.D. 1914," reads "after 1914." 
I., page 133, line 21, "ere the harvest is fully ended. "+ 
I., page 228, line 1 1, "some time before 1914," reads "very soon 

after 1914." 
I., page 228, line 15, "just how long before," reads "just how long 

after." 

I., page 362, line 11, "some time before," reads "some time near." 
I., page 364, line 14, "must not only witness," reads "may not only 
witness." 



*How long it will require to accomplish this overturning we are not informed, 
but have reason to believe the period will be short. 
+The end of the harvest will probably include the burning of the tares. 

Unless we find the chronology in Vols. II. and III. to be 
wrong, we must believe that it will be practically the same 
chronology as will be used throughout the Millennial Age. 

So far from the events of our time disproving the 



chronology, they seem to confirm it. The gathering of the 

nations to the Valley of Jehoshaphat ("valley of graves") is 

evidently in progress. They are gradually realizing it to be 

a life and death struggle that will be awfully costly. They 

do not see, as we do, that it means their destruction— "grinding 

to powder." Nevertheless they are apprehensive of what 

we see coming; viz., the EARTHQUAKE of revolution, to be followed 

by the FIRE of anarchy, which will utterly consume 

them and prepare the earth for Messiah's Kingdom, and cause 

them to hear the "still small voice."— 1 Kings 19:11,12. 

The present is a time of testing, we believe, to many of 
the Lord's people. Have we in the past been active merely 
because we hoped for our glorious change in A.D. 1914, or 
have we been active because of our love and loyalty to the 
LORD and His Message and the brethren! 

Never before has the world been so ready to hear the 
Kingdom Message. Never before, therefore, have the privileges 
and opportunities of the Colporteurs been so great. If 
there are some parts where Colporteurs find it difficult to 
make sales because of scarcity of money, there are other 
parts of the country where money is not so scarce and where 
high prices for food make the community prosperous. 

Let us see to it that we testify to the Lord by our faithfulness 
in letting our light shine more and more, demonstrating 
our loyalty to Him even unto death. "Faithful is 
He that called you," who also will do for us "exceeding 
abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the 
power that worketh in us." 



page 66 

COTTON SEED FREE 

Again we have some cotton seed for free distribution. It 
is of the Caravonica cotton type, which has been so successful 
in South Africa. It is quite prolific. Our subscribers 
are welcome to sample lots, free. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR APRIL 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
April follow: (1) Vow; (2) 259; (3) 326; (4) 221; (5) 164; (6) 
106; (7) 119; (8) 130; (9) 41; (10) 46; (11) 238; (12) 202; (13) 
310; (14) 14; (15) 19; (16) 273; (17) 165; (18) 258; (19) 117; 
(20) 283; (21) 229; (22) 215; (23) 330; (24) 303; (25) 8; (26) 
230; (27) 9; (28) 293; (29) 12; (30) 198. 



R5640 : page 67 



THE BLOOD OF SPRINKLING OF THE PASSOVER 

"When He seeth the blood the Lord will pass over the door 
and not suffer the destroyer to smite you."— Exodus 12:23. 

THE Passover season, as celebrated by the 

Jews, draws near— beginning this year on 

the 30th of March (the 15th day of Nisan 

actually starting at 6 p.m. Monday, March 

29th). But the interest of Christians centers 

especially in the slaying of the lamb, 

which preceded this Passover Feast. The 

Passover lamb was slain on the 14th day 

of the month Nisan, which date this year 

begins at 6 p.m. Sunday, March 28th. The 

Memorial of the death of the antitypical Passover Lamb, 

our Lord Jesus, which is celebrated on the same date, 

will therefore be observed by us on the evening of Sunday, 

March 28. How much we regret that while millions 

of Christians and Jews will in some formal ceremonies 

and in a perfunctory manner celebrate this great 

event of history, but few of either religion discern the 

real significance of the celebration! 

THE PASSOVER INSTITUTED 

Could the minds of all these be awakened thoroughly 
to its true significance, a religious revival would be 
started such as the world has never yet known. But, 
alas! as the Apostle declares, the god of this world has 
blinded the minds of many; and even some whose eyes 
of understanding are partially opened St. Peter describes 
as being blind and unable to see afar off, or holden and 
unable to see the deep things of God in respect to these 
ceremonies, which have been celebrated in the world for 
now more than 3500 years. And, by the way, it must be 
admitted even by Higher Critics and agnostics in general 
that an event so prominently marked, so widely observed 
for so long a time, must have a foundation in fact. There 
must have been just such an occurrence in Egypt; the 
first-born of Egypt must have perished in that tenth 
plague, and the first-born of Israel must have been preserved 
from it— all who observed the injunction to remain 
under the blood— else this widespread celebration of the 
event would be inexplicable. 

We need not remind you of the particulars connected 
with the institution, except to say that the Israelites were 
held in a measure of serfdom by the Egyptians, and that 
when the time, in the Lord's providence, arrived for their 
deliverance, their masters sought selfishly to maintain 
their bondage, and refused to let them go forth to the land 
of Canaan. One after another the Lord sent during the 
year nine different plagues upon the people of Egypt, relieving 
them of one after another when their king craved 
mercy and made promises which he afterwards broke. 



Finally, the servant of the Lord, Moses, announced a 
great, crowning disaster— that the first-born in every 
family of Egypt would die in one night, and that in the 
home of the humblest peasants as well as in the home of 
the king there would be a great mourning, as a result of 
which they would be glad finally to yield and let the 
Israelites go— yea, urge them to go, and in haste— lest the 
Lord should ultimately bring death upon the entire people 
if their king continued to harden his heart and resist the 
Divine mandate. 

The first three plagues were common to all in Egypt, 
including the district in which the Israelites resided. The 
next six plagues affected only the district occupied by 
the Egyptians. The last, the tenth plague, it was declared, 
should be common to the entire land of Egypt, 
including the part apportioned to the Israelites, except 
as the latter should show faith and obedience by providing 
a sacrificial lamb, whose blood was to be sprinkled 
upon the sides and the lintels of their doorways, and 
whose flesh was to be eaten in the same night, with bitter 
herbs and unleavened bread, the eaters standing staff in 
hand and girded ready for the journey— with full expectancy 
that the Lord would smite the first-born of the 
Egyptians with death and make them willing to let the 
Israelites go, and with full faith also that they would 
share in this calamity were it not for the blood upon 
their door-posts and lintels. 

THE ANTITYPICAL PASSOVER LAMB 

The Israelites were commanded to celebrate this Passover 
as the first feature of the Jewish Law and as one of 
their greatest memorials as a nation. As a matter of fact, 
we find that in some degree the Passover is celebrated by 
Jews in all parts of the world— even by those who claim 
to be agnostics and infidels. They still have a measure 
of respect for it as an ancient custom. But is it not 
strange that, with the bright minds which many of them 
possess, our Jewish friends have never thought it worth 
while to inquire into the meaning of this celebration? 
Why was the lamb slain and eaten? Why was its blood 
sprinkled upon the door-posts and lintels? Because God 
so commanded, of course; but what reason, motive, object 
or lesson was there behind the Divine command? Truly 
a reasonable God gives reasonable commands, and in due 
time will be willing that His faithful people should understand 

R5640 : page 68 

the significance of every requirement. Why are 
the Hebrews indifferent to this subject? Why does 
prejudice hold their minds? 

Although Christianity has the answer to this question 
we regret that the majority of Christians, because of 
carelessness, are unable to give a reason and ground for 
any hope in connection with this matter. If the Jew can 



realize that his Sabbath day is a type or foreshadowing 
of a coming Epoch of rest and blessing and release from 
toil, sorrow and death, why can he not see that similarly 
all the features of the Mosaic Law institution were designed 
by the Lord to be foreshadowings of various blessings, 
to be bestowed in due time? Why can it not be 
discerned by all that the Passover lamb typified, represented, 
the Lamb of God, that its death represented the 
death of Jesus, the Messiah? and that the sprinkling of 
its blood symbolizes, represents, the imputation of the 
merit of the death of Jesus to the entire Household of 
Faith, the passed-over class? 

Blessed are those whose eyes of faith see that Jesus 
was indeed "the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin 
of the world"— that the cancellation of the world's sin is 
effected by the payment of Adam's penalty— that as the 
whole world lost the favor of God and came under the 
Divine sentence of death, with its concomitants of sorrow 
and pain, it was necessary before this sentence or curse 
could be removed that a satisfaction of Justice should 
be made; and that therefore, as the Apostle declares, 
Christ died for our sins— the Just for the unjust, that He 
might bring us back to God. Thus He opened up "a new 
and living way"— a way to life everlasting. 

"A KIND OF FIRST-FRUITS" 

Those familiar with the Bible have noticed that therein 
the Church of Christ is called "the Church of the First-born," 
and again "a kind of First-fruits unto God of His 
creatures." (Heb. 12:23; Jas. 1:18; Rev. 14:4.) This 
implies others ultimately of God's family later born— 
the after-fruits. Christian people seem to have overlooked 
these Scriptures so far as making application of 
them is concerned, and have generally come to believe 
that only those who are of the First-fruits will ever be 
saved, that there will be no after-fruits. But let us look 
at this type of the Passover— let us notice that it was 
God's purpose to save all Israelites, and that as a nation 
they represented all of mankind that will ever come into 
harmony with God and be granted eternal life in the 
Land of Promise. 

Let us notice also that there were two passovers. 
There was a great one, when the whole nation by Divine 
power was miraculously delivered by the Lord and led 

R5641 : page 68 

by a sand-bar across the channel of the Red Sea especially 
prepared for them by the accentuation of winds and tides. 
That picture, or type, shows the ultimate deliverance from 
the power of sin and Satan of every creature who will 
ultimately come into accord with the Lord and desire to 
render Him worship— not an Israelite was left behind. 

But that passover at the Red Sea is not the one we are 
discussing particularly on this occasion— not the one 



whose antitype we are about to celebrate. No; the event 
which we celebrate is the antitype of the passing over, or 
sparing, of the first-borns of Israel. Only the first-borns 
were endangered, though the deliverance of all depended 
upon the salvation of the first-borns. Applying this in 
harmony with all the Scriptures, we see that the First-fruits 
unto God of His creatures, the Church of the 
First-borns, alone, are being spared at the present time- 
being passed over— those who are under the blood. We 
see that the remainder of mankind who may desire to 
enlist and to follow the great antitypical Moses when He 
shall ultimately lead the people forth from the bondage of 
sin and death are not now endangered— merely the First-borns, 
whose names are written in Heaven. 

"THE CHURCH OF THE FIRST-BORNS" 

The First-born— the "Church of the First-Borns"— 
are those of mankind who in advance of the remainder 
have had the eyes of their understanding opened to a 
realization of their condition of bondage and their need 
of deliverance and of God's willingness to fulfil to them 
His good promises. More than this, they are such as 
have responded to the grace of God, have made a consecration 
of themselves to Him and His service, and in 
return have been begotten again by the Holy Spirit. With 
these first-born ones it is a matter of life and death 
whether or not they remain in the Household of Faith— 
behind the blood of sprinkling. For these to go forth from 
this condition would imply a disregard of Divine mercy. 
It would signify that they were doing despite to Divine 
goodness, and that, having enjoyed their share of the 
mercy of God as represented in the blood of the Lamb, 
they were not appreciative of it. Of such the Scriptures 
declare, "There remaineth no more a sacrifice" for their 
sins. They are to be esteemed as adversaries of God, 
whose fate was symbolized in the destruction of the 
first-born of Egypt. 

We do not mean to say that the first-born of Egypt 
who died in that night and any of the first-born of the 
Israelites who may have departed from their homes contrary 
to command and died therefor, have gone into the 
Second Death. Quite to the contrary, we understand 
that all these matters were types, figures, illustrations, 
foreshadowings of matters on a higher plane, and that 
the realities belong to the Church of Christ during this 
Gospel Age since Pentecost. If we sin wilfully after we 
have received a knowledge of the Truth, after we have 
tasted of the good Word of God, after we have been made 
partakers of the Holy Spirit and thus members of the 
Church of the First-born— if we should then fall away, 
it would be impossible to renew us again to repentance; 
God would have nothing further for us; our disregard 
of His mercy would mean that we would die the Second 
Death. -2 Peter 2:12; Jude 12. 

From this standpoint the Church of the First-born, 



through the begetting of the Holy Spirit and the greater 
knowledge and privileges they enjoy every way, have a 
greater responsibility than the world, for they are the 
only ones as yet in danger of the Second Death. This is 
the lesson of the type and applies to Christians only. 
By and by the night will have passed, the glorious 
morn of deliverance will have come, and The Christ, the 
antitypical Moses, Head and Body, will lead forth, will 
deliver all Israel— all the people of God— all who when 
they shall know will be glad to reverence, honor and obey 
the will of God. That Day of Deliverance will be the 
entire Millennial Age, at the close of which all evil and 
evil-doers, symbolized by the hosts of Egypt, will be 
utterly cut off in the Second Death. 

"AS OFT AS YE DO THIS" 

The Apostle clearly and positively identifies the Passover 
lamb with our Lord Jesus, saying, "Christ our Passover 
is slain for us; therefore let us keep the feast." 
(1 Cor. 5:7,8.) He informs us that we all need "the 
blood of sprinkling," not upon our houses, but upon our 
hearts. (Heb. 12:24; 1 Pet. 1:2.) We are also to eat the 
unleavened (unfermented, pure) bread of Truth, if we 

R5641 : page 69 

would be strong and prepared for the deliverance in the 
Morning of the New Dispensation. We also must eat the 
Lamb, must appropriate Christ, His merit, the value that 
was in Him, to ourselves. Thus we put on Christ, not 
merely by faith, but more and more to the extent of our 
ability we put on His character, and are transformed day 
by day into His glorious image in our hearts. 

We are to feed upon Him as the Jews fed upon the 
literal lamb. Instead of the bitter herbs, which aided and 
whetted their appetites, we have bitter experiences and 
trials, which the Lord provides for us, and which help to 
wean our affections from earthly things and give us 
increasing appetite to feed upon the Lamb and the unleavened 
Bread of Truth. We, too, are to remember that 
here we have no continuing city, but as pilgrims, 
strangers, travelers, staff in hand, girded for the journey, 
we are en route to the Heavenly Canaan and all the 
glorious things which God hath in reservation for the 
Church of the First-born, in association with their Redeemer 
as kings and priests unto God. 

Our Lord Jesus also fully identified Himself with the 
Passover lamb. On the same night that He was betrayed, 
and just preceding His crucifixion, He gathered 
His disciples into the upper room, saying, "With desire 
have I desired to eat this Passover with you before I 
suffer." It was necessary that as Jews they should celebrate 
the Passover supper on that night— the saving of 
the typical first-born from the typical "prince of this 
world." But as soon as the requirements of the type had 



been fulfilled, our Lord instituted a new Memorial upon 
the old foundation, saying, "As often as ye do this [celebrate 
the Memorial of the Passover season— annually] do 
it in remembrance of Me"! (1 Cor. 11:24,25.) Your 
Jewish neighbors, whose eyes of understanding have not 
been opened, will not appreciate the matter in its true 
antitypical sense, but you— who recognize Me as the 
Lamb of God, who in God's purpose has been slain from 
the foundation of the world— who recognize that I am 
about to give My life as the world's Redemption-price— 
will note this Passover season with peculiar and sacred 
significance that others cannot appreciate. Henceforth 
you will not celebrate any longer the type, but memorialize 
the Antitype, for I am about to die as the Lamb of God, 
and thus to provide the blood of sprinkling for the 
Church of the First-born, and meat indeed for the entire 
Household of Faith. 

"THIS IS MY BODY, BROKEN FOR YOU" 

That the Lord's followers should no longer gather as 
the Jews had done previously to eat the literal Passover 
supper of lamb, in commemoration of the deliverance in 
Egypt our Lord shows by choosing new emblems— "unleavened 
bread" and the "fruit of the vine"— to represent 
Him as the Lamb. Thenceforth His followers, in accord 
with His injunction, celebrated every year His death as 
their Passover Lamb, until after the Apostles had fallen 
asleep in death, and a great falling away had confused 
the faith of nominal Christendom, producing the epoch 
known as the Dark Ages. Even during the Dark Ages 
the teaching that Christ was the antitypical Passover 
Lamb persisted, though the celebration of His death in 
the Passover Supper which Jesus instituted fell into disuse. 
It was crowded out by that most terrible blasphemy, which 
has deceived and confused so many millions of Christendom— 
the Mass— introduced by Roman Catholicism. This 
in the Scriptures is called "the abomination of desolation," 
because of the disastrous influence it has had upon the 
faith and practise of the Lord's people. Although 
Protestants in general have repudiated the Mass, as being 
wholly contrary to the teachings of Christ and the Apostles, 
nevertheless the practises of Protestants are largely 
influenced yet by that terrible error, from which they 
have only partially escaped. 

THE MASS IS NOT THE EUCHARIST 

Many Protestants will innocently ask, Is not the Mass 
merely the Eucharist, the Lord's Supper, under another 
name? O, no! we answer— it is wholly different! The 
Lord's Supper celebrates the death of Christ accomplished 
at Calvary. The Mass represents a new sacrifice 
for sins made every time the Mass is performed. Our 
Roman Catholic friends believe that when the priest 
blesses the wafer it becomes the actual body of Christ in 



his hands, for the very purpose of sacrificing Him afresh. 
High Mass is a particular sacrifice of Christ for a particular 
sin of a particular individual. Low Mass is a 
sacrifice of Christ for the general sins of a congregation. 
Roman Catholics claim to believe in the merit of Christ's 
sacrifice at Calvary— that it covered original sin, general 
sins that are past; but they claim also that the daily sins, 
shortcomings, blemishes of every individual, require to 
be cleansed by fresh sacrifices of Christ from time to 
time. Thus, from their standpoint, as represented in the 
Mass, and as practised by the Roman Catholics and Greek 
Catholics and High Church Episcopalians, Christ is being 
sacrificed afresh all the world over every day. This in 
the Scriptures is called an "abomination" in God's sight, 
because it disregards, sets at naught, the fact as stated in 
the Bible, that Christ dieth no more, "that by one sacrifice 
He hath perfected forever all who come unto the Father 
through Him. "-Rom. 6:9; Heb. 10:14. 

R5642 : page 69 

It will be readily seen that the repeated sacrifices 
represented in the Mass would have the effect of nullifying 
or minimizing the value of the great Sacrifice at 
Calvary, represented in the Passover and in the Memorial 
Supper. How could those who had come to look especially 
to the Mass for the cancellation of their sins be expected to 
look with as deep concern and as high an appreciation as 
otherwise back to the antitypical Passover? While, therefore, 
the celebration of Good Friday has continued, the 
celebration of the Memorial Supper preceding it fell into 
disuse long ago. 

As for Protestants, repudiating the dogma of the Mass 
as wholly unscriptural, they have abandoned it and returned 
to a celebration of the Lord's Supper. Meantime, 
however, accustomed to the frequency of the Mass, they 
have considered it merely a matter of expediency how 
often the Lord's Supper should be celebrated. Hence we 
find some celebrating it every four months, some every 
three months, some every month, and some every Sunday. 
This general laxity and failure to reach a common ground 
of conformity is due to two things: (1) Christian people 
generally have overlooked the fact that our Lord's death 
was as the antitypical Passover Lamb, and that its celebration 
is the antitypical Passover Supper; (2) They 
have misunderstood our Lord's words, "As oft as ye do 
this," to mean, Do this as often as you please, whereas 
the words really signified, As often as you, My disciples 
(all of whom are Jews and accustomed to keeping the 
Passover), celebrate this occasion, do it in remembrance 
of Me— not in remembrance of the literal lamb and the 
typical deliverance from typical Egypt and its bondage 
through the passing over of the typical first-born. 

Those who celebrate the Lord's Supper weekly consider 
that they have Scriptural precedent for so doing because 
in the Bible we read that the early Church met 



R5642 : page 70 

together on the first day of the week and on such occasions 
had the "breaking of bread." It is a great mistake, 
however, to confound such breaking of bread with the 
Memorial Supper, for the former was merely an ordinary 
meal. There is absolutely nothing in the record to indicate 
otherwise; the wine, the fruit of the vine, is not 
mentioned in connection with it, and the bread was not 
said to represent the broken body of our Lord. It was a 
cheerful social custom in the early Church to celebrate 
our Lord's resurrection on the first day of the week, and 
this common social custom helped to unite the bonds of 
brotherhood and fellowship. In many places the Lord's 
people follow this custom still. The Tabernacle congregation 
at Brooklyn has such a breaking of bread every 
Lord's day between the afternoon and the evening services, 
as a convenience for those living at a distance, and 
especially as a desirable opportunity for extending fellowship 
amongst the Lord's people. 

THE DATE OF THE MEMORIAL SUPPER 

As we all know, the Jews used the moon more than we 
do in the reckoning of their time. Each new moon represented 
the beginning of a new month. The new moon 
which came closest to the spring equinox was reckoned as 
the beginning of the ecclesiastical year, the first day of 
the month Nisan. On the fifteenth day of that month, the 
Feast of Passover of the Jews, lasting a week, began. 
That Feast of seven days represented the joy, the peace, 
the blessing, which resulted to the first-borns of Israel 
from their passing over, and typified the complete joy, 
peace and blessing which every true Christian experiences 
through a realization of the passing over of his sins 
through the merit of Christ's redemptive sacrifice. All 
true Christians, therefore, in their hearts have a celebration 
of this Feast of Passover continually— the completeness 
of the matter being represented in the seven days, 
seven being a symbol of completeness. Not seeing the 
matter from the same standpoint, the Jew thought less of 
the killing of the Passover lamb and the eating of that 
supper than he did of the week following it. But our Lord 
emphasized the importance of the killing of the Passover 
lamb when He announced Himself as its Antitype and 
when He invited us to celebrate His death on its anniversary, 
until, at His Second Coming, our entrance into the 
Kingdom would signify the complete fulfilment of all our 
blessings. 

It would be a great blessing, doubtless, to many Christians 
if they could see this subject in its true light, could 
lay more weight upon the value of the death of Christ, 
and join more heartily in its celebration— on its anniversary, 
instead of at various other times and seasons, irregularly 
and without special significance. However, there 



have sprung up all over the civilized world little groups 

of the Lord's people who are taking heed to this subject, 

and whose delight it is to celebrate the Master's death 

according to His request— "As often as ye do this"— 

annually— "do it in remembrance of Me." We believe 

that such a celebration brings special blessing to both 

heart and head. The nearer we come to the Divine requirements 

the greater is the measure of our blessing, the 

more closely are we drawn to our Master and Head, and 

to each other as members of His Body. 

The date of the celebration this year will fall on 
March 28, after 6 p.m., because at that hour begins the 
14th day of the month Nisan, according to the Jewish 
reckoning. We urge upon all of the Lord's people everywhere 
to gather as may best suit their convenience in 
little groups or families to do this in remembrance of our 
Lord's great sacrifice. The fact that it is the anniversary 
of His death makes the matter the more impressive. 

"LORD IS IT I?" 

We recall the circumstances of the first Memorial, the 
blessing of the bread, and of the cup, the fruit of the vine, 
of our Lord's exhortation that these represented His 
broken body and shed blood, and that those who are His 
followers should participate— not only feeding upon Him, 
but being broken with Him, not only partaking of the 
merit of His blood, His sacrifice, but also in laying down 
their lives in His service, in co-operating with Him in 
every and any manner. How precious these thoughts are 
to those who are rightly in tune with the Lord! 

Following these thoughts they may think of the course 
of Judas, who, though highly favored, loved filthy lucre 
to the extent that he was willing to sell his Master, and 
was bold enough even while his treachery toward the 
Lord was being exposed to cry, "Is it I?" The very 
thought that any who had companied with the Lord could 
thus deny Him and betray Him to His enemies causes a 
proper loathing of such conduct, and should properly fill 
us with caution, if not with fear, lest in any sense of the 
word we should for the sake of honor or wealth or any 
other matter sell the Truth or any of its servants, the 
members of the Body of Christ. 

Let our minds, then, follow the Redeemer to Gethsemane's 
Garden, and behold Him with strong cryings 
and tears praying to Him who was able to save Him out 
of death— expressive of the Master's fear of death lest in 
some particular He might have failed to follow out the 
Father's Plan and therefore be thought unworthy of a 
resurrection. We notice how our Lord was comforted 
by the Father through the angelic messenger with 
the assurance that He had faithfully kept His consecration 
vow and that He would surely have a 
resurrection as foretold. We behold how calm He 
was thereafter, when, before the High Priest and 
Pilate, and before Herod and Pilate again— "as a lamb 



before her shearers is dumb so He opened not 

His mouth" in self defense. We see Him faithful, courageous, 

to the very last, and we have His assurance that 

He could have asked of the Father and had more than 

twelve legions of angels for His protection. But instead 

of petitioning for aid to escape His sacrifice, His petition 

was for aid to endure it faithfully. What a lesson for 

all His footstep followers ! 

AN OCCASION FOR SELF-EXAMINATION 

On the other hand, we remember that even amongst 
His loyal disciples the most courageous forsook the Lord 
and fled, and that one of them in his timidity even denied 
his Master! What an occasion is this for examining our 
own hearts as respects the degree of our faith, courage 
and willingness to suffer with Him who redeemed us! 
What an opportunity is thus afforded for us to buttress 
our mind with resolutions that by His grace we will not 
deny our Master under any circumstances or conditions 
—that we will confess Him not only with our lips but 
also by our conduct. 

Next we are shocked with the thought that it was the 
Lord's professed people, the Jews, who crucified the 
Prince of Life! Not only so, but that it was the leaders 
of their religious thought, the chief priests, scribes, Pharisees 
and Doctors of the Law rather than the common 
people. We hearken to the Master's words, saying, 
"Marvel not if the world hate you; for ye know that it 

R5642 : page 71 

hated Me before it hated you"; and we see that He meant 
the religious world in our case also. 

DRINK YE OF THE SAME CUP 

The lesson to us, then, is not to be surprised if the 
opposition to the Truth and the persecutions of the light-bearers 
walking in the footsteps of Jesus shall come from 
the most prominent exponents of Christianity. This, 
however, should neither cause us to hate our opponents 
nor those who persecuted our Lord to the death. Rather 
we are to remember the words of the Apostle Peter— "I 
wot that in ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers." 
Ah, yes! ignorance, blindness of heart and mind, are at 
the bottom of all the sufferings of Christ— Head and 
Body. And the Father permits it to be so now, until the 
members of the Body shall have filled up that which is 
behind of the afflictions of Christ. With the completion 
of the membership of the Body of Christ, the very elect, 
and the completion of their testing as to faithfulness unto 
death, will come the conclusion of this Gospel Age— the 
resurrection change of the Church to be with and like 
her Lord. Then, as our Master declared, those who 



R5643 : page 71 

now partake of His broken body and are broken with Him 
in the service of the Truth, those who now participate 
in His cup of suffering and self-denial, will by and by 
drink with Him the new wine of joy in the Kingdom— 
beyond the veil. -Matthew 26:29. 

"LET US KEEP THE FEAST" 

With that glorious Morning of the New Dispensation 
will begin the great work of the world's release from the 
bonds of sin and death— the great work of uplifting. The 
Apostle Peter calls that great Epoch "The Times of Restitution 
of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
Prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.) The 
thought before the minds of those who participate in this 
Memorial should be that expressed in the Apostle's words, 
"If we suffer with Him we shall also reign with Him"; 
"If we be dead with Him we shall also live with Him"; 
"for the sufferings of the present time are not worthy to 
be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us." 
-Rom. 8:17,18; Rom. 6:8; 2 Timothy 2:11,12. 

With these thoughts respecting the passing over of the 
sins of the First-born through the merit of the precious 
blood, we may indeed keep the Feast of the Passover with 
joy, notwithstanding trials and difficulties. So doing, and 
continuing faithful as the followers of Jesus, very soon 
we shall have the great privilege of leading forth the 
Lord's hosts— all who ultimately shall hear and know and 
obey the great King— out of the dominion of sin and 
death, out of Egypt into Canaan. Yes, dear brethren, in 
the language of the Apostle, "Christ our Passover is slain 
for us; therefore let us keep the Feast." 

THE CUP OF JOY IN THE KINGDOM 

On the occasion of the institution of the Memorial of 
His Death, the Master in His conversation with the 
Apostles, said: "But I say unto you, I will not drink 
henceforth of the fruit of the vine until that Day when I 
drink it new with you in My Father's Kingdom." 
(Matthew 26:29.) Our Lord was here contrasting two 
great Days— the Day of suffering and the Day of glory. 
This Gospel Age has been the Day of suffering. The 
Millennial Age will be the Day of glory, and is especially 
spoken of as "the Day of Christ." 

The fruit of the vine, the literal cup, represents two 
thoughts. The cup of wine is produced at the cost of the 
life of the grape. The grape loses its own individuality. 
The juice is pressed out, and thus the fruit of the vine is 
made ready for use. The cup of wine— the juice of the 
grape— represents, however, not only the crushing of the 
grape, but also the exhilaration that comes as the result. 
So in our drinking of this literal cup. To us it symbolizes 
our Savior's sufferings and death, and our own participation 



with Him in these sufferings. But wine also 

represents joy, gladness, and is thus used in the Scriptures. 

So in the sense in which the Lord used the words 

"fruit of the vine" in the text just quoted, it represented 

the joys of the Kingdom. 

The Father marked out for our Lord Jesus in His 
earthly experience a certain specific course. This course 
constituted His Cup of suffering and death. But the 
Father promised Him that after He had drunk this Cup 
faithfully, He should be given a different Cup, a different 
experience— glory, honor and immortality. And then the 
Savior was authorized by the Father to make the same 
proposition to those who might desire to become His followers— 
that if they would suffer with Him, would drink 
His Cup of death with Him, then they should participate 
with Him in His future Cup of Joy. 

BY WAY OF THE CROSS 

"Whosoever will save his life shall lose it." We are all 
to pass through the trying experiences represented by the 
wine-press. We are to lay down our lives in the Divine 
service. We are to submit ourselves to the crushing experiences, 
to be obliterated as humans, and to become New 
Creatures. "If we suffer [with Him], we shall also reign 
with Him"— not otherwise. So we joyfully accept the 
invitation to drink of His Cup. And not until the Cup has 
been drained to the last shall we receive the other Cup— 
the Cup of Kingdom joys. While our Lord had a great 
blessing in the obedience which He rendered to the 
Father, yet it was a trying time for Him down to the last 
moment, when He cried, "It is finished!" And so with 
the Church. We must drink all of the Cup. We must 
endure all of the experiences. None of the Cup is to be left. 

All the sufferings of Christ will be complete when the 
Body of Christ shall have finished its course. The new 
Cup of Joy was given our Lord when He was received up 
into glory. Then all the angels of God worshiped Him. 
Soon our Cup of Joy will be given to us. Surely there 
was a joyous time when the sleeping saints were awakened 
and entered into their reward and received the Cup 
of Blessings! (See STUDIES, Vol. III., pp. 233-240; Vol. IV., p. 622.) 
And one by one those who were alive and remained 
at the Coming of the Master are being gathered 
Home. Undoubtedly we shall all partake of this joy with 
them soon, if we are faithful. We believe the fulness of 
joy will not be reached until all the members of Christ are 
with Him beyond the veil. Then we shall share His 
Throne and partake of His glory. Then with our beloved 
Lord we shall drink of the new wine in the Kingdom; for 
the promise is to all His faithful saints. 

"Not all the blood of beasts 

On Jewish altars slain 
Could give the guilty conscience peace 

Or wash away the stain. 



"But Christ, the Heavenly Lamb, 
Takes all our sins away; 

A Sacrifice of nobler name 
And richer blood than they. 

"My soul looks back to see 
The burden He did bear, 

While pouring out His life for me; 
And sees her Ransom there." 



R5643 : page 72 

SACRIFICIAL LOVE VS. DUTY LOVE 

"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with 
all thy soul, and with all thy mind... Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself." (Matthew 22:37-39.) "This is My 
commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved 
you. Greater love hath no man than this, that a man 
lay down his life for his friends."— John 15:12,13. 

THE qualities of Wisdom, Justice, Love and 
Power are fully harmonized and unified in 
the character of our Heavenly Father, our 
Creator. In Him these qualities are supplemental 
to each other, and in the fullest harmony. 
And we are to strive to incorporate 
into our own characters these same qualities. 
When we use these terms in reference 
to mankind, we are bound to recognize in 
how comparatively small a degree these 
character-qualities are possessed by humanity. 

We use the terms justice and love as representing 
characteristics which are more or less imperfect in all 
mankind. We speak of charity, or generosity. This quality, 
a certain manifestation of love, goes beyond mere 
justice. Here is a person to whom we owe a dollar. It 
is not charity for us to pay him that dollar. It is duty, 
justice. A certain course would be right, and nothing less 
than that would be right. Certain things are obligatory. 
Beyond obligation would be mercy, compassion, love. 

What is our duty toward our neighbor? Suppose that 
the neighbor has fallen into debt or that his life has been 
forfeited. What ought we to do for him? Shall we give 
our lives for his life? Shall we assume his obligation? 
To do so would be a very loving deed. It might also be 
just, but it would go beyond the line of mere justice; for 
justice would require merely that we do for our neighbor 
just as we would have him do for us, if our positions were 
reversed. The Golden Rule would measure what we 
should do for our neighbor. If after we have done this, 
we wished to do a little more, this would go beyond the 
demands of justice; it would be love, favor. 



But we should notice that the Law of God demands 
not only justice, but also love— love supreme to God, and 
love to our fellowmen. It demands mercy, kindness. Let 
us note the injunctions along this line which God gave 
to natural Israel under the Law. Let us see how far-reaching 
they were. "If thou meet thine enemy's ox or 
his ass going astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to him 
again. If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lying 
under his burden, and wouldest forbear to help him, thou 
shalt surely help with him." "If thine enemy be hungry, 
give him bread to eat; if he be thirsty, give him water to 
drink; for thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head, and 
the Lord shall reward thee." (Exodus 23:4,5; Proverbs 25:21,22.) 
If love so broad and so comprehensive as this 
is demanded by God's Law, and was obligatory upon Natural 
Israel, to what degree should Spiritual Israel possess 
and manifest this noble quality! 

JUSTICE PRONOUNCED MAN'S SENTENCE 

The penalty that God placed upon our sinner race involved 
humanity in crying, sighing and death. It was not 
a special exercise of Love that pronounced the death 
penalty. It was a special exercise of Justice. However, 
there was no violation of the principle of Love in this 
death sentence; it was in full harmony with Love. In due 

R5644 : page 72 

time God manifested His Love for man, even in his fallen 
condition, by the gift of His choicest treasure— His Only 
Begotten Son. He was not deficient in Love during all 
those four thousand years before He sent His Son to 
earth. His Love remained as far as compatible with the 
perfection of His character. It was no longer a love of 
fellowship, as with a perfect being; but it was a love of 
pity, of compassion. 

Love was not obligated to make provision for the redemption 
of fallen man. The act was one purely of grace; 
and if redemption was of grace, it was not of Justice. In 
sending His Son, then, to be man's Redeemer, God took 
a step beyond anything that Justice could require. Herein 
was manifested the Love of God, the compassion of God, 
superabounding over what was His duty. No duty-claim 
could be pressed by man; for he had forfeited all his 
rights, and had become a convict before God's righteous 
Law. But God's great mercy in providing a deliverance 
for this convict race illustrated His glorious and beneficent 
character. In this was manifested the Love of God for 
us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us; 
and this was Jehovah's own Plan. So Love can go beyond 
Justice, and even beyond the measure of love demanded of 
a perfect character. 

The Love of God and of Christ, as manifested in the 
great Plan of Redemption, was a sacrificial Love. So 
those who are invited to become members of Christ's Body 



are to have this same love. It is not merely the love demanded 

by God's perfect Law, which is incumbent upon 

all His intelligent creatures on whatever plane; but it is 

more. It is a love which will gladly lay down the life 

purchased for them by the death of Jesus. This life is 

laid down as a sacrifice with their Lord and Head. We 

lay down our lives in service for the brethren, and this 

sacrifice is acceptable because the merit of Christ is imputed 

to us, making us reckonedly perfect before God. 

As the Apostle says, "We ought to lay down our lives for 

the brethren." The brethren could not demand this of us, 

nor we of them; but we should all do so gladly, as we have 

opportunity.— 1 John 3:16. 

LET US HAVE THE MIND OF CHRIST 

As Christ redeemed us by laying down His life as a 
willing sacrifice, so let us have this same mind, this same 
disposition, this same will. This is the special Covenant 
of the Church— the Covenant of Sacrifice. (Psalm 50:5.) 
This is the Covenant which our Lord made with the 
Father, and we are to follow in His footsteps. The world 
will gain everlasting life if they come up to the standard 
of justice required by God's Law. But as for us, we must 
have a still higher standard. 

So when the Apostle declares that "Love is the fulfilling 
of the Law," he is not limiting those who are so governed 
by love as to do the Father's will even unto death, 
to the mere keeping of the Law given to Israel. To be of 
this elect class, a member of the Royal Priesthood who 
covenant to lay down their lives as a sacrifice, requires 
more than merely fulfilling the demands of the Law. It 
requires love to a self-sacrificing degree. And so by gladly 
carrying out our Father's will for us, we shall prove ourselves 
worthy of glory, honor and immortality, the Divine 
nature— which has been promised to the overcoming class 
—the "more than conquerors." 

"Love is the filling from one's own another's cup, 
Love is a daily laying down and taking up; 
A choosing of the stony path through each new day, 
That other feet may tread with ease a smoother way. 

"Love is not blind, but looks abroad through other eyes; 
And asks not, 'Must I give?' but, 'May I sacrifice?' 
Love hides its grief, that other hearts and lips may sing, 
And burdened walks, that other lives may buoyant wing. 

"Brother, hast thou a love like this within thy soul? 
'Twill change thy name to saint when thou hast reached this 
goal." 



R5644 : page 73 



OUR PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY TO GOD 

"See that none render evil for evil unto any man; but ever follow 
that which is good, both among yourselves, and to all men." 
-1 THESSALONIANS 5:15. 

THIS text is a part of the counsel of the 

Apostle Paul to the Church at Thessalonica, 

in connection with his message on 

the subject of the Second Coming of our 

Lord. He reminds them how carefully 

and faithfully they should live, who had 

such hopes of glory, such hopes of being 

gathered to Christ at His appearing and 

Kingdom. He exhorts them that they 

"warn the unruly," that they "comfort the 

feeble-minded" [faint-hearted], that they "support the 

weak" [those not strong in the faith, comparatively undeveloped]. 

Then in the words of our text, he urges that 

"none render evil for evil unto any." 

We do not understand the Apostle to mean that no one 
in the Church should be permitted to render evil for evil. 
It would not be in the power nor in the jurisdiction of any 
one to see that none others do evil. The only ones who 
have such power or authority would be God Himself and 
His great Representative, Christ Jesus. In fact, if we undertake 
to see that no man renders evil for evil, we shall 
be busybodying in every man's matters; we shall cultivate 
the habit of evil-surmising, and shall have no time for our 
own business. The Apostle means, Let each one see to it 
that he does not return evil for evil. This principle is to 
govern each; each is to exercise care in his own case. 

The thought seems to be that we should be critical of 
our own motives, of the principles underlying our own 
conduct. We should reason, "I am about to do so and so. 
Is this course right?" We should judge our actions in 
advance. We should not go blundering along, failing to 
take ourselves in hand, and then say, after the thing is 
done, "Well, I intend to make amends." Of course we 
should make amends if we have done wrong. But we 
should get into the habit of so controlling our mind that it 
would preclude our doing what we should not do. 

While in the flesh, of course we shall never attain perfection 
in action or words, but we should earnestly endeavor 
to do our best to attain this. We shall not do our 
best unless we set ourselves very diligently about it, and 
determine that we will by the help of the Lord attain as 
full control of our flesh as is possible. If we make up our 
minds that we will conquer, much can be accomplished. 

ALL THE SAINTS STRONG CHARACTERS 

The Savior so loved to do right that He laid down His 
life for righteousness' sake. Thus it is to be with all who 
are under His banner, fighting a good fight. But there is 
a natural tendency to retaliation, especially in persons who 



have the disposition of conquerors— the very class that 
God is now seeking. These are the ones who have the 
qualities of an overcomer. They have a strong individuality; 
they have a will. They are not supine; they are not 
merely placid. Those to whom Truth appeals are strong 
characters; and people of naturally strong character are 
inclined to carry out the Law of Moses— "an eye for an 
eye, and a tooth for a tooth"— in the cases of those who 
have done wrong. 

But the Lord's injunction to the Church is to the contrary, 
for this is the way of the sinful world. God has 
not yet forced the world into obedience to righteousness; 
in the Millennial Age He will do this. The special people 
who have followed Jesus from the world into consecration 
to God are pledged to do the will of God, to support the 
right. Being strong characters, they wish to correct that 
which is wrong. That is a natural impulse and a good 
one. But we must remember that it is not the time now 
for us to judge and discipline the world. The Scriptures 
say, "Judge nothing before the time." We are therefore 
to await God's time. If the matter is a legal one, and we 
are personally wronged by process of law, we are to yield 
to it in the right spirit, even though it be unjust. Let us 
wait for the Lord's time and way to set things straight. 

THE CHRISTIAN NOT A GENERAL POLICEMAN 

If you receive a double injury, there would be a double 
reason why you would wish to correct it. The inclination 
to try to do so would rise, but there should be nothing 
like retaliation. We are not to return evil for evil. We 
are under responsibility to do evil to none. The expression, 
"See that none render evil for evil," has been understood 
by some to signify that the Christian should be a 
kind of general policeman, to see that his brethren, his 
neighbors, and everybody else, do no one harm. This is a 
mistaken idea. There seems to be a certain exception, 
however, in the case of the head of a family. As the head 
of the house, one would be responsible to the civil law, as 
well as to the Divine Law, for the conduct of his 
household. 

Some have supposed that this injunction of the Apostle 
means: Let the Elders of each congregation see that the 
members of the congregation do no wrong. This likewise 
is not the right thought. This Scripture does not 
give an Elder any more right to see that none render evil 
in return for evil than it does any one else. The passage 
seems to mean this: Let each of you see that you do not 
yourself render evil for evil. 

There might be some ways in which it would be proper 
for any member of a family to render help to another 
member who was being wronged. If, for instance, one 

R5645 : page 73 

saw another doing injustice to a third, he might remonstrate. 



He might say, Brother (or Sister), do you not 
think so and so about this matter? And so with the 
Church. But the Elders are charged more especially with 
looking after the interests of the Church. If they should 
see some one in the Ecclesia not living up to the Scriptural 
standard, it would be quite proper to make a suggestion 
to that one about the matter. But we must not be 
busybodies in other people's affairs. 

We are to build one another up; for thus the Bride 
makes herself ready. These matters should be approached 
only after prayer and in the very wisest way possible, lest 
we do more harm than good. Let us remember that we 
are consecrated to righteousness, to follow that which is 
good. Let us also remember that not merely in the Church 
are we to render no evil for evil, but amongst all men; 
for we have pledged our lives to follow that which is good 
under all conditions and circumstances. 

According to the standard of God's Word, the disciples 
of Christ should be the most polished, the most courteous, 
the most refined, the most generous, the most kind and 
considerate, of all people. Theirs should not be merely 
an outward appearance of these graces, so common to the 
world, but should be a kindness, a gentleness, which 
springs from the heart, because of the possession of the 
Lord's Spirit, the spirit of justice, of mercy and of love. 
Thus they are to let their light shine in their lives. 

DIFFERENT INSTRUCTIONS DURING JEWISH AGE 

Under the Jewish Law it was different in some respects. 
Every Jew was an avenger of God, to render just 
punishment for any crime. He who sins shall suffer, was 
the principle; and this is a right principle. During the 
period of the Law Dispensation it was very necessary, 

R5645 : page 74 

evidently, that these lessons of just retribution for sin 

should be deeply impressed upon the people of Israel. So 

during that time it was commanded that if a man shed 

blood, by man should his blood be shed. (Exodus 21:12; 

Leviticus 24:13-20; Numbers 35:9-33.) If they saw their 

neighbor do a wrong, they were to help adjust that wrong. 

They were to have this principle of justice thoroughly ingrained, 

because it is a principle of God's character. This 

rule held good from the days of Noah. (Genesis 9:6.) It 

is right, too, that laws of justice be enforced by the world 

at the present time as far as they are able. 

When Christ's Kingdom is set up, The Christ will know 
how to make all due allowances for those who are weak. 
But we are instructed from the Scriptures that the Lord's 
people in the present time are not to judge the heart nor to 
be the avengers of justice. Neither are we to attempt 
to exact justice for ourselves; but we are to learn and 
to practise the principles of kindness, mercy and love. 
The Church are to live on a different plane, a higher 



plane, than any others, not rendering evil for evil, but, 
contrariwise, returning good for evil. 

We are to bear in mind that we are ourselves imperfect. 
We are to learn, as disciples of Christ, the great 
lesson of compassion. We are to show mercy by and by, 
when exalted to positions of power, wherever conditions 
shall present themselves as needing mercy; and such conditions 
will abound; for all will be imperfect and weak 
until they can progress up out of their fallen state. So if 
we would be fitted for that responsible and honorable position 
of judges of the world, we must develop the qualities 
of love, mercy, compassion, now. We must learn to be 
very pitiful with the brethren and with the world of mankind, 
but must take heed to ourselves. Remembering our 
personal responsibility to the Lord, we are to judge our 
own course, and see that we ever "follow that which is 
good," both among the brethren and with all men. 



R5645 : page 74 

GOD'S MERCIES TO DISOBEDIENT ISRAEL 

-MARCH 28.-QUARTERLY REVIEW.-READ NEHEMIAH 9:26-31.- 

THE PERIOD OF THE JUDGES -DIVINELY APPOINTED LEADERS- 
THEIR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES-ONLY ONE LAW-GIVER 
AND ONE LAW -TWO PICTURES OF ISRAEL'S 
NATIONAL LIFE UNDER THE JUDGES-MANIFESTATIONS OF 
DIVINE LOVE AND CARE FOR GOD'S CHOSEN PEOPLE- 
LESSONS FOR THE SPIRITUAL ISRAELITES. 

"Righteousness exalteth a nation; but sin is 
a reproach to any people."— Proverbs 14:34. 

ISRAEL'S history from the time of the division 

of Canaan amongst the tribes until the 

anointing of Saul to be their king, a period 

of 450 years (Acts 13:19-21), is called the 

Period of the Judges— Joshua being the first 

Judge and Samuel the last. These Judges 

were evidently not elected to their position, 

but raised to it providentially. But 

as these Judges had no power nor authority, 

collected no revenue and held no office which 

they could entail upon others, it follows that any power, 

or influence, they possessed was a personal one; and to 

give it weight or force implied a proper acknowledgment 

of them as Divinely appointed, or "raised up." 

This arrangement led the people continually to look 
to God for their helpers and leaders rather than to engage 
in an ordinary claptrap of politics, in which personal 
ambition and spoils would dominate and control. 
God did the nominating; and the people, in proportion 
as they came into harmony with Him, took cognizance of 



His choice (and practically endorsed it or voted for it) 

by their acceptance of the Judge. There may have been 

a more methodical procedure in some instances; for the 

elders of Israel who had witnessed God's miraculous interposition 

on their behalf and who outlived Joshua seem 

to have constituted the Judges in the different tribes during 

the remainder of their lifetime.— Judges 2:7. 

This arrangement by which God gave Israel their 
Judges is in considerable harmony with His dealings with 
Spiritual Israel during the Gospel Age— raising up for 
them from time to time special counselors, deliverers, 
ministers. Similarly Spiritual Israelites are not to caucus, 
wire-pull and decide for themselves who shall be their 
spiritual leaders, but are to regard the Lord as the great 
Chief Captain and to look to Him to raise up from time 
to time such spiritual chieftains as He may please. The 
acceptance of the leadings of these as God's appointees 
does not necessarily mean their selection by ballot, but 
may be indicated merely by giving ear to their teachings 
in harmony with the Word of the Lord. 

The lead of such spiritual lieutenants of Divine 
appointment will always be marked by spiritual victories 
and the bringing of the Lord's people into closer heart-relationship 
with Him. Any leadership which does not 
produce such fruits is evidently not of the Lord, for the 
Spirit of the Lord leads not to bondage, ignorance or strife, 
but to love, joy, peace of heart, liberty of conscience. 

Israel needed no congress or legislature; for it had 
one Lawgiver— the Lord— and the Law given at Mt. 
Sinai was to be perpetually the guide of the nation. 
The priests and the Levites, under the Law, were the 
appointed helpers of the people in things pertaining to 
God— to instruct them in the Law and to represent them 
in the typical sacrificing, atonement work, etc. In each 
tribe, also, the Elders, according to their capacity, had 
charge of the civil affairs of the tribe. As for soldiers 
and a war department they had none. The Divine Law 
was to separate them from other nations; and if they 
would remain faithful to the Lord, He was to be their 
Protector against all antagonists. 

Similarly, Spiritual Israel in every congregation are 
to look out amongst themselves for fit men for the 
services needed. God's Law is to keep them separate 
from the schemes, and warfares and entanglements of 
the world. They are to be His peculiar people, and His 
pledge to them is that all things shall work together for 
their good so long as they abide faithful to Him. Therefore 
they need no armies armed with carnal weapons, 
although they are all soldiers of the Cross, pledged to 
fight against sin, especially each within himself, and to 
lay down their lives for each other— "the brethren." 

TWO PICTURES OF NATIONAL LIFE 

If the Book of Judges be read as a fully complete 
history of Israel during those four and one-half centuries, 



it would be a discouraging picture and to some 
extent would give the inference that they were continually 
in sin and idolatry, and suffering punishment 
therefor. But this would be an unfair view to take. On 
the contrary, the record passes by the happy period of 
Israel's prosperity, and especially points out their deflections 
from God, the punishments for such transgressions, 
and the deliverances from their troubles through the 
Judges, or deliverers, whom God raised up for them. 

R5645 : page 75 

That this was in many respects a favorable time for the 
Israelites is implied in the Lord's promise, "I will restore 
thy Judges as at the first, and thy counselors as at the beginning. 
—Isaiah 1:26. 

Incidentally the story of Ruth and that of the parents 
of Samuel give us little glimpses of the other side of the 
matter— of the God-fearing piety prevalent amongst many 
of the people, the happiness and contentment enjoyed. 
In our own day, if we judge of the affairs of the world 
wholly by the daily history and details in the newspapers, 
we might get the impression that crimes, strikes, accidents 
and imprisonments constitute the whole life in our land; 
for the great mass of the people attending to the ordinary 
affairs of life are scarcely mentioned. 

R5646 : page 75 

In accordance with this are the following lines from 
the poet Whittier, in which he rejoices in this land of 
liberty and blessing, notwithstanding the unfavorable 
reports thereof which go out to the world daily through 
the press: 

"Whate'er of folly, shame or crime 

Within thy mighty bounds transpires, 
With speed defying space or time, 

Comes to us on the accusing wires; 
While all thy wealth of noble deeds, 

Thy homes of peace, thy votes unsold, 
Thy love that pleads for human needs, 
The wrongs redressed, but half is told!" 

THE FRUITS OF DISOBEDIENCE 

The Israelites had been instructed by the Lord to 
utterly exterminate the people of the land, which extermination 
we saw, in a previous lesson, prefigured our 
conquest as Spiritual Israelites over the desires of the 
fallen nature. Israel, however, settled down to enjoy 
the Land of Promise without fully exterminating the 
condemned ones; and later on the false religions of 
the latter contaminated the Israelites through friendship 
and fellowship. Thus those whom God had condemned 
gradually alienated the hearts of many from their full, 
proper loyalty to the Lord, seducing many of them into 



a lascivious idolatry. 

So with the Spiritual Israelites who do not wage a 
valiant war against the natural desires of their own 
fallen flesh— they find shortly that the flesh prospers at 
the expense of the spiritual life, and that truces with the 
flesh mean that their love for the Lord is gradually cooled 
until some form of idolatry creeps in— the love of money 
or of praise of men or of self, etc., dividing with the Lord 
the love and reverence of their hearts. 

We are not to suppose that all of the Israelites fell 
away into idolatry; we are rather to understand that 
repeatedly a considerable number of them became alienated 
for a time from the love and worship of the Lord, 
and thus repeatedly brought upon them the Lord's disfavor. 
Applying this to Spiritual Israel, we are not to 
expect that the Lord's displeasure with His people would 
delay until they had fully and completely gone into idolatry 
to self or wealth or fame; but rather that when 
some of the affections of the heart begin to go out to 
other things, the Lord's chastisements would be sent to 
reprove, rebuke and correct while still there is in our 
hearts something of obedience and love toward Him— 
before the world, the flesh and the Adversary should 
have time to capture us completely. 

These records of Divine chastisements and of Israel's 
subsequent repentance and the Lord's deliverance are all 
proofs of the Divine love and care for that consecrated 
people. So far as we have information the Divine power 
was not thus exercised upon the other nations for their 
reproof, correction, etc. They were left as strangers, 
foreigners, aliens from God and from His promises. 

So now the Lord's corrections in righteousness, His 
chastisements, etc., are evidences of special protection, 
care and relationship to the House of Sons. It is because 
of our acceptance in Christ and our consecration 
to the Lord that He in turn has accepted us as sons and 
gives us the experiences, trials and difficulties needful to 
our testing and character-development. This is to the 
intent that we may realize the treachery and the seductive 
influences of our own fallen natures, represented by 
the Amalekites, the Canaanites, etc.; and that we may 
utterly destroy these, and thus come eventually into the 
condition mentioned by the Apostle when he declares that 
the consecrated should bring every thought into captivity 
to the will of God in Christ— 2 Corinthians 10:5. 

When Natural Israel learned one lesson after another 
and, as fast as each was learned, sent a cry of loyalty up 
to God, His power was exercised on their behalf, and 
their deliverance was effected. So with the Spiritual 
Israelite; when he recognizes the true situation and with 
thorough repentance turns unto the Lord and cries for 
deliverance from his own weaknesses and imperfections 
according to the flesh, his prayer is heard, and his deliverance 
is provided for with the assurance that the Lord's 
grace is sufficient. Such a cry to the Lord implies that 
the sins and weaknesses of the flesh were contrary to the 



transgressor's will. It implies that in some manner he 
was seduced or entangled by the world, the flesh or the 
Adversary; but that his heart is still loyal to the Lord 
and to the Truth. All such who cry to the Lord in sincerity 
and faith shall be heard, shall be delivered; for 
His grace is sufficient for us. 

ISRAEL'S WRONG COURSE 

The government of Israel was different from every 
other government in the world. God was their King; 
and in His providences, according to His Covenant with 
them, He supervised their affairs— whether by permitting 
them to go into temporary captivity because of unfaithfulness 
to Him, or by prospering the nation and guiding 
their efforts favorably when they lived in obedience to 
Him. In many respects their condition was most happy. 

But in the days of the Prophet Samuel as the Elders 
perceived that his sons were not to be relied upon to follow 
in their father's steps and be faithful, impartial 
Judges, they forgot— or perhaps had never fully realized 
—that God was their real Judge, their King; and that 
Samuel was only His representative and mouthpiece. 
They forgot that although Samuel was growing old, the 
Lord was "the same yesterday, today and forever," and 
able to raise up for them, in His own due time, a Judge 
of the kind best suited to their necessities. Doubtless, 
also, they did not realize that personally and nationally 
they were on a higher plane than the nations round about 
them that had kings. On the contrary, they felt that they 
were "out of style"; and, as people are very apt to do, 
they concluded that the majority must be right. 

Influenced by this servility to custom, the Elders of 
Israel petitioned Samuel that he as God's representative 
would anoint for them a king— make them a nation of 
servants to one of their own nation. It is hard for us 
to sympathize with such ignoble sentiments, such prayers 
for their own degradation. Samuel seems to have viewed 
the matter from this standpoint, and perhaps he also regarded 
it as a personal slight to himself. However, he 
very properly took the matter to the Lord in prayer; it 
was not for him to decide— he was merely the Lord's 

R5646 : page 76 

mouthpiece and representative, to speak to the Israelites 
whatever message he should receive. 

How grand it would be if the whole world could be 
under such rule— Heavenly Wisdom directing, and incorruptible 
earthly Judges communicating and enforcing the 
Divine Message and Law? The Scriptures inform us 
that this is what will eventually come to pass. (Isaiah 1:26.) 
However, before that grand condition can be 
realized, it will be necessary for the Messiah to take His 
great power and reign. Then the people will be ready to 
hearken to the voice of the Lord through those whom He 



will appoint and recognize as His mouthpiece. As it is 
written, "Thy people shall be willing in the Day of Thy 
power."— Psalm 110:3. 

THE MESSIANIC REIGN AUTOCRATIC 

In recounting to Israel the manner of a king, neither 
the Lord nor the Prophet Samuel meant that the description 
given would be the proper one for a model king, but 
rather that it would be the general course of any man raised 
to such imperial power as the kings of olden time enjoyed. 
The wrong course of kings in general may be traceable 
to three conditions: (1) All men are imperfect and fallen, 
and hence in the case of any king it would be merely a 
question of the degree of imperfection and the tendency 
to pride, selfishness and abuse of power; (2) The imperfection 
of those over whom a king reigns makes possible, 
and to some extent reasonable, the usurpation of great 
power; (3) The Adversary's derangement of all earthly 
affairs, putting darkness for light, often makes it seem 
to both ruler and subjects that an abuse of power is really 
to the advantage of those ruled. 

The question then arises, How will it be with Messiah's 
Kingdom? We reply that the Scriptures teach that 
His Rule will be autocratic in the extreme; nevertheless, 
no one who understands the matter need have any fear; 
for He who is to take the Throne of the world is the One 
who so loved the world as to give Himself a Ransom for 
all mankind. Instead of His Kingdom being one of selfishness, 
which would ruin its subjects for its own aggrandizement, 
He has shown His Spirit to be the very reverse 
of this, in that He left the glory of the Heavenly Courts 
and humbled Himself to a lower nature, in order to become 
man's Substitute— He "tasted death for every man." 
It is this One who is now highly exalted and appointed 
Heir of all things. 

Let us also remember that the Church, now being 
selected from the world, is composed of those only who 
have their Master's Spirit and who delight to lay down 
their lives in co-operation with their Lord and Head. Let 
us remember that according to the Divine predestination 
none shall be of that elect class save those who are copies 
of God's dear Son; and that the tests of discipleship are 
such as to prove their love and loyalty to God, to Christ, 
to their brethren, to the world, yea, to their enemies also. 

Who need fear an autocratic government in the hands 
of such a glorious King! Indeed, such a Government 
will be the most helpful, the most profitable, that the world 
could possibly have— wise, just, loving, helpful. Let us, 
therefore, who have been called to this High Calling lay 
aside every weight and every besetting sin, and, by the 
Lord's assisting grace, gain this great prize of joint-heirship 
with Him in His Messianic Kingdom, to have a share 
with Him in the blessing of all the families of the earth, 
in the recovery of whosoever will from sin and death. 



R5647 : page 76 

SAUL REJECTED BY THE LORD 

--APRIL 4.-1 SAMUEL 15:10:23.- 

DISOBEDIENCE TO THE HEAVENLY KING COST SAUL THE THRONE- 
HIS FIRST SEVERE TEST-LESSON TO SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 
-SAUL'S SECOND SEVERE TEST-WHY THE AMALEKITES 
WERE DESTROYED-WAS THEIR CONDEMNATION JUST?- 
SAUL'S WRONG ATTITUDE OF HEART-BEAUTY AND 
STRENGTH OF SAMUEL'S CHARACTER. 

"Behold, to obey is better than to sacrifice."— 1 Samuel 15:22. 

THE words of the Golden Text of this Study 
are the Lord's rebuke to King Saul by the 
Prophet Samuel, in connection with the 
announcement that Saul, by disobedience 
to the Heavenly King, had forfeited his 
privilege of representing God on the throne 
of Israel. The rending of the kingdom 
from the hands of Saul meant more than 
his own displacement; it meant that his son 
and his successive heirs should not continue 
as the Lord's representatives in the kingdom. 

For a number of years Saul seems to have prospered 
fairly on the throne, and the people of Israel prospered 
with him. It was several years after his coronation that 
his first severe testing, noted in our lesson of two weeks 
ago, came to him. At that time a war was instituted 
against the Philistines, who apparently dominated Israel. 
Saul waited several days for the Prophet Samuel to come 
to offer the sacrifices of the Lord, previous to the beginning 
of the battle. Samuel was providentially hindered; 
and Saul himself, after waiting for a time, offered the sacrifices 
to the Lord, contrary to the Divine arrangement, 
and then proceeded to battle, the result being a considerable 
defeat to his forces. 

Apparently King Saul was not evilly intentioned, but 
lacked proper respect and reverence for the Lord and His 
arrangements. This incident may be said to have been 
the beginning of Saul's rejection by the Lord. The 
Prophet Samuel's words to him were, "Thou hast not kept 
the commandment of the Lord;. ..now thy kingdom 
shall not continue. The Lord hath sought Him a man after 
His own heart."— 1 Samuel 13:13,14. 

APPLICATION TO SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 

The lesson of this incident is as applicable to Spiritual 
Israel today as it was to King Saul and to Natural Israel 
in their day— "Obedience is better than sacrifice." In 
how many ways we may see expressions of this same condition 



amongst many who profess the Lord's name today? 
Many are workers in the Lord's Cause in the 
various denominations of Christendom, and many are 
their sacrifices of time and money; but inasmuch as they 
are not obedient to the Lord, they fail of the blessing 
they would have and, indeed, in a considerable measure 
cut themselves off from greater privileges and opportunities. 
Yea, many of them, we fear, are cutting themselves 
off from the Kingdom, from glory and from joint-heirship 
with our Lord in that Kingdom. 

From this lesson, given us in King Saul's experience, 
we should learn that our Heavenly Father wishes us to 
be very attentive to His Word, and not to think for a 
moment that we can improve thereon, or that times and 
circumstances will alter the propriety of our obedience 
to Him. Had King Saul been obedient and the results 
disastrous, he would at least have had a clear conscience; 
he could have said that he had been obedient to God and 
was not responsible for results. But if he had been 

R5647 : page 77 

obedient, God would have been responsible for results; 
and we know that Divine Power would have brought about 
the proper results. Let us apply the lesson to ourselves 
in respect to our daily conduct in every matter of life. 
Let us hearken to the Word of God and keep close to it, 
not fearing the results, but having faith that He who 
keeps us never slumbers nor sleeps and is too wise to err, 
as well as competent to meet every emergency that could 
possibly come upon us as a result of our obedience. 

How many of the Lord's people in Babylon would be 
blessed by following the instructions of this lesson! Time 
and again they have said to themselves, "I see that present 
institutions and arrangements are contrary to the simplicity 
of the Gospel of Christ and the practise of the 
early Church; but what can I do? I am identified with 
this system and am engaged in sacrificing for its upbuilding. 
If now I withdraw my hand, it will mean more or 
less disaster. I wish I were free from human institutions, 
and that I had my hands filled with the Lord's work along 
the lines of His Word; but I cannot let go, for necessity 
seems to be upon me. I must perform a sacrifice, and this 
seems to be my most convenient place for so doing." 

The Lord is not pleased with such arguments. His 
message to us is that to obey is better than sacrifice; that 
we leave the matter of our sacrifice in His hands; for unless 
He accepts it, our sacrifice will amount to nothing, 
and He accepts sacrifices only from those who are first 
obedient. "Come out of her, My people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins, and receive not of her plagues."— 
Revelation 18:4. 

Although the Lord announced the rejection of King 
Saul, the prediction was evidently not fulfilled for several 
years after— perhaps for ten years. The decree stood as if 
it were a dead letter; for quite possibly King Saul was 



properly exercised by his rejection and became more attentive 
and more obedient to the Divine will, and David, 
who was probably anointed about this time, was not yet 
sufficiently developed to be the Lord's representative in 
Saul's stead in the kingdom. 

KING SAUL'S SECOND TEST 

King Saul's next severe trial was in connection with 
the Amalekites— a fierce nomadic people who on several 
occasions had done injury to the people of Israel. In 
sending the message to the king, the Lord gave special 
instructions that the Amalekites should be destroyed, saying, 
"Utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them 
not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, 
ox and sheep, camel and ass." Without mentioning other 
of Amalek's transgressions, He specifies that the destruction 
here was on account of Amalek's opposition to Israel 
in the way when the Israelites came up out of the land of 
Egypt, several centuries previously. 

This narrative is seized upon by skeptics to prove either 
one or the other of two things: (1) That it was the 
imagination of either Samuel or Saul or of some one 
writing fictitiously in their names; or (2) That if it be 
accepted as being the command of the Lord, it would 
prove Him to be a monster— lacking injustice, pity, 
sympathy and love— that He should thus command the 
wholesale slaughter of human creatures and dumb animals. 
There is but one answer to make to this matter, and it 
should be satisfactory to all who understand it. It is this: 

(1) The slaughter of the Amalekites did not mean, as 
is usually inferred, that being admittedly wicked they went 
forthwith to eternal torture. Death had the same meaning 
to the Amalekites that it had to their cattle— a termination 
of whatever was desirable in the present life; and the desirable 
things of the present life were probably not more 
to the Amalekites than to their herds. Slaughtered by the 
sword, the Amalekites suffered far less than if they had 
been made the subjects of famine or pestilence, and had 
died of hunger or disease— the ending of life with little 
pain to themselves or trouble to others— the ending of 
comparatively uneventful lives, anyway. 

They all went down to the great prison-house of death 
— Sheol, Hades, the tomb. God foreknew and had already 
arranged a great redemption, not only for them, but for all 
mankind. And that redemption, secured by the great 
sacrifice of Christ centuries after their death, will by and 
by secure to them release from their imprisonment— an 
awakening from the sleep of death. They will be amongst 
the class mentioned by our Lord, saying, "All that are in 
their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God and 
shall come forth." They will come forth under much more 
favorable conditions, to learn of the grace of God in 
Christ and to be amongst the families of the earth who 
shall be blessed by the Seed of Abraham— Spiritual Israel. 
The Amalekites will not be in the Chief Resurrection, but 



will be awakened unto the privileges of Restitution by 
judgments— corrections in righteousness. 

(2) It is quite true of the Amalekites, as it was of 
the Amorites, that they would have been cut off sooner, but 
that their iniquity was not yet come to the full. One 
lesson to be learned from this is that even though those 
nations may not be under special covenant relationship 
with God, there is a certain Divine supervision— that their 
iniquities go not too far; and that, when these iniquities 
have reached their full, punishment is to be expected. We 
know not the particulars respecting the Amalekites; but, 
knowing the character of God, and His justice and mercy, 
we may be sure that in some particular sense of the word 
their iniquities had come to the full and running-over 
measure before this order for their execution was committed 
to King Saul. 

KING SAUL'S WILFUL DISOBEDIENCE 

Saul's error in this trial was his failure to carry out 
the command of the Lord explicitly. He slew all the 
Amalekites, old and young, except the king, whom he kept 
alive, possibly thinking to exhibit him in some kind of 
triumphal display. But as for the flocks and herds, he 
consented with his people to spare all that were desirable. 

It was at this juncture that the Prophet Samuel came to 
him and the colloquy of our lesson ensued. The general 
narrative— Samuel's indignation and the Lord's positive 
statement— clearly indicates that King Saul had not misunderstood 
his instructions, but had with considerable 
deliberation violated them. Consequently we must understand 
his words addressed to the Prophet Samuel to have 

R5648 : page 77 

been to a great extent hypocritical. He first salutes the 
Prophet with blessings and with assurances that he had 
performed the commandment of the Lord successfully. 

Immediately the Prophet replied, "What meaneth, then, 
this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of 
the oxen which I hear?" The Prophet understood at once 
that the work of destruction had not been complete— that 
King Saul and the Israelites were anxious to take a spoil. 
This was wholly contrary to the Divine direction. They 
were not to destroy their enemies to their own advantage, 
but to act simply as the agents of the Lord in thus executing 
His decree, the sentence of Justice. They were not 
to take booty and thus to become like the nations about 
them— a robber nation, profiting by the troubles which they 
inflicted upon the enemies of the Lord. This is in full 
accord with the Lord's character and the foregoing explanation 
of it. 

R5648 : page 78 

Seeing that the Prophet was not likely to sympathize 



with his violation of the command, King Saul began 

hypocritically to represent that all the sheep and oxen captured 

from the enemy were to be sacrificed to the Lord; 

and incidentally this would have meant a great feast for 

the Israelites; for the flesh of animals so sacrificed was 

eaten by them. The Prophet stopped the king in his explanation, 

and told him of the Lord's words of the night 

preceding, which in Jewish reckoning would be "this 

night," because their day began in the evening. 

The Divine message calls attention to the fact that 
Saul was humble when he was chosen as the Lord's representative 
upon the throne, and that at that time he was 
very willing to give strict obedience to the Heavenly voice; 
but the intimation is that he had grown more self-confident, 
and therefore less reliant upon the Lord and less 
attentive to the Lord's commands. Getting into the wrong 
attitude of heart, he had failed to execute properly a very 
plain, specific direction. Knowingly and in violation of 
the Lord's command he had the spoil separated, and had 
spared the best when the Lord had commanded the reverse. 

If, in applying the principles of this lesson to the Lord's 
people today, we think of the Amalekites as representing 
sins and remember that the Lord's command comes to us 
to put away sin entirely, we may get a good lesson. Like 
Saul, many are disposed to destroy the vilest things connected 
with sin, but to save alive the king sin, merely 
making him a prisoner. Many are disposed, also, to seek 
out the things which they realize to be condemned of the 
Lord to destruction— such things as would be choice and 
desirable to their taste; and frequently, like Saul, they 
claim that even these sins of the less obnoxious kind are 
held on to for the purpose of sacrificing them in order 
thus to honor God. How deceitful above all things is the 
heart! How necessary it is that all who would be in accord 
with the Lord should be thoroughly true-hearted, 
thoroughly sincere; and that under the Lord's direction 
we should seek to take away the life of every sinful principle, 
evil teaching, evil doctrine and all unholy words, 
deeds and thoughts ! 

OBEDIENCE VERSUS SACRIFICE 

King Saul sought to defend his course, to put as good 
a face upon the matter as possible and to lay the responsibility 
for the saving of the spoil upon the hosts of Israel, 
who with himself were very desirous of offering sacrifices 
to the Lord. The Prophet's answer is the pith of this 
Study and contains its Golden Text. He clearly pointed 
out to the king what the latter should have known and 
what all should recognize; namely, that offering sacrifices 
is far less pleasing to the Lord than is obedience to His 
Word. No one could offer an acceptable sacrifice to God 
unless he was obedient in his heart and unless the sacrifice 
represented that obedience. 

So with God's people today. It is not so much of ill-gotten 
wealth that we may sacrifice to the Lord; it is not 



so much the proceeds acquired directly or indirectly by 
wrong doing that we may sacrifice acceptably. Our sacrifice 
must be from the heart. First of all must be the will. 
He who gives his will, his heart, to the Lord gives all; he 
who gives not his will, who comes not into heart obedience 
unto the Lord, can offer no sacrifice that could be acceptable 
to the Lord. "Behold, to obey is better than to 
sacrifice," is a lesson which should be deeply engraved 
upon the hearts of all the sanctified in Christ Jesus. 

It is also necessary to have the spirit of obedience. 
Whoever has that spirit will not only obey the Divine will, 
but will seek to know the Divine will more and more that 
he may obey it. It is of this class that the Scriptures 
declare, "Thy words were found, and I did eat them"; 
and again, in the words of our Redeemer, "I delight to do 
Thy will, O my God; Thy Law is written in my heart." 

King Saul had been very diligent in his opposition to 
witchcraft and idolatry throughout the land of Israel, and 
in so doing was accomplishing a good work in accord with 
the Divine plan, the Divine will; but the Prophet calls attention 
to the fact that his energy in such matters would 
not prove an offset to his deliberate, wilful neglect of the 
Divine injunction. The Lord's commands against sin and 
every evil thing are to be executed to the very letter, no 
matter how highly exalted the sin may be in dignity and 
place, and no matter how precious or valuable or desirable 
or toothsome the sin may be to our fallen natures. Though 
it be as dear as a right hand or as a right eye, there is no 
course open to the Lord's followers but to be obedient- 
obedient even unto death. 

Although fully rejected, King Saul was not removed 
until the due time. The Prophet Samuel associated himself 
with the king in a public sacrifice, commemorating the 
victory over the Amalekites; and on this occasion he slew 
Agag with his own hand, and then departed to his home. 
He never afterward saw King Saul; yet the Scriptures 
declare, "Nevertheless, Samuel mourned for Saul"— thus 
again showing us the beauty and the strength of the 
Prophet's character. He was ever ready to do the command 
of the Lord in any and every particular, yet was not 
without a feeling of compassion for those who were out 
of the way— not a compassion which would make them his 
friends and lead him to co-operate in their wrong course, 
but one which would have been glad to co-operate with 
them at any time in a righteous course. 



"ARE YE ABLE?" 

Are ye able to walk in the narrow, strait way, 
With no friend by your side, and no arm for your stay? 
Can ye bravely go on through the darkening night? 
Can ye patiently wait till the Lord sends the Light? 

Are ye able to crush your soul's longing for Love, 



Will ye seek for no friendship save that from above? 

Can ye pass through this world, lone, unnoticed, unknown, 

While your faith faintly whispers, "He knoweth His own"? 

Where the feet of the Blessed One stood, can ye stand? 
Can ye follow His steps to a wilderness land? 
Are ye able to cast aside pleasure and fame? 
Can ye live but to glorify His precious name? 

Can ye smile as His dear voice says tenderly "No," 
When "the field is so white," and your heart yearns to go? 
Can ye rest then in silence, contented and still, 
Till your Lord, the Chief Reaper, revealeth His will? 

Are ye able to lay on the Altar's pure flame 

That most treasured possession, your priceless good name? 

Can ye ask of your Father a blessing for those 

Who see naught in your life but to scorn and oppose? 

When the conflict 'twixt Error and Truth fiercer grows, 
Can ye wield the strong "Sword" against unnumbered foes? 
Can ye lift up the "Standard" e'en higher and higher, 
While His praises ye sing in the midst of the fire? 

When ye see the Lord's cause going down to defeat, 

Will your courage endure in the seven-fold heat? 

Will your faith keep you steadfast, though heart and flesh fail, 

As the New Creature passes beneath the last Veil? 

Ah, if thus ye can drink of the Cup He shall pour, 
And if never the Banner of Truth ye would lower, 
His beloved ye are, and His crown ye shall wear, 
In His Throne ye shall sit, and His glory shall share! 

G.W. S. 



R5648 : page 79 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
MIRACLE WHEAT TAKES PRIZE 



GREATEST WHEAT STATE SENDS MIRACLE WHEAT AS ITS BEST 
PRIZE WHEAT TO THE WORLD'S FAIR. 

DEAR FRIENDS AND BRETHREN:- 

A copy of the Chicago Daily Tribune recently came to 
my notice containing articles, the object of which was an 
attack upon the Association and especially upon Pastor Russell. 
Among other points of attack was Miracle Wheat, and 
thinking that some information on the subject might be of 
value to you in meeting this attack, I enclose herewith picture 
and data relative to a field of Miracle Wheat I grew last 
year. This picture, among thousands of others of the best 
fields raised in the State, was sent to the Secretary of the 



State Board of Agriculture, J. C. Mohler. From this collection 
was to be chosen the one which would represent the 
State at the World's Fair, which convenes February 20th. 

Now the judges in this matter did not know that this 
was Miracle Wheat, hence they had nothing to bias their 
decision. So Miracle Wheat received the award. 

I grew 70 acres of this wheat and planted and cared for 
it in the regular, ordinary way, and had no trouble in disposing 
of it to my neighbor wheat-growers last fall for seed, 
at $2 per bushel. 

In this section of the country we have to sow more to 
the acre than in some localities, hence we could not follow 
the 20 lb. to the acre rate of seeding, but some we seeded 
at the rate of 1/2 bu. and some at the rate of 3/4 bu. per acre, 
and we found the three pecks to be the better. If we were 
going to sow again we would sow rather more than this. 

My field yielded 49 bu. to the acre— more than twice the 
average yield of wheat in this vicinity and in many instances 
more than three times as much. If this information is of 
any value to you or any of the friends who may have charge 
of the matter of setting these things straight before the 
public, I am thankful for the opportunity to furnish the same. 
With Christian love and best regards, I am 

Your brother and fellow-servant, W. A. JARRETT. 



403,000 SEE CREATION DRAMA IN LONDON 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

On Sunday, the 13th inst, we completed the first seven 
days at the Royal Albert Hall, London. Two Sundays are 
included, as we have no presentation on Mondays. The following 
are the figures: 

Sale 
Attendance, of Scenarios 

First seven days Opera House 19,767 967 

First seven days Royal Albert Hall 24,192 1,066 

We count it a privilege indeed to be enabled to send reports 
of the Lord's work here that are an encouragement to 
you, and to our beloved colaborers in the U.S.A. All the 

R5649 : page 79 

time we are mindful of the great blessings which have come 
to us through you, His honored servant, and the great incentive 
we have received from time to time by the noble example 
of our dear brethren laboring by your side. It will 
probably never be our privilege to witness to eight millions, 
as in America; in fact, so far as London is concerned, the 
witness seems to be drawing to a close for lack of funds, 
although we have not as yet reached a half million of its 
population— only some 403,000. We are truly thankful for 
the opportunities which have been granted us, however, and 
realize that these are of the Lord's provision. 



The Royal Albert Hall was somewhat of a surprise to us. 
On inquiry regarding it we found the Manager quite willing 
to do everything in his power to meet us. He evidently had 
a good impression of our former visits to the Hall, when 
you gave the Lectures which were so greatly used of the 
Lord for the opening up of the work in Great Britain. The 
actual net out-of-pockets was suggested by him as a fee, but 
exceeded our limit as to cost. Ultimately he agreed upon a figure 
of L200 for thirteen days, and accepted the risk of selling 
L10 in reserved seats per night to make up the necessary difference. 
A sum of L20 will easily cover the balance for "extras," 
and this we hope to provide from the sale of Scenarios. 

It would seem to be the Lord's purpose for the DRAMA to 
be held back for awhile, possibly over the holiday season. We 
have no funds, and no serviceable applications at present. In 
the meantime the Eureka DRAMA is claiming our attention. 

At a prayer, praise and testimony meeting held at the 
Royal Albert Hall last evening, after the big public meeting 
was over, the Brothers and Sisters expressed their gratitude 
to the Lord for all the privileges bestowed. All felt uplifted 
and full of fervor for the Truth. 

Since the above was written Brother Hemery has received 
a letter from Sister Seibert enclosing a draft for L100. This 
generous gift is intended for the PHOTO-DRAMA, we understand; 
but Sister Seibert does not make it clear whether it 
is to be divided between the provinces and London, or 
whether it is intended for London only. The money is most 
welcome, and every care will be exercised to use same wisely 
as the Lord may direct. With much fond love, 

Your brother in the Lord, H. J. SHEARN. 



"THE LAND OF THE MIDNIGHT SUN" 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Some time has passed since we left you all at dear 
"Bethel," and nothing have you heard from us, but now 
as we are in Sweden's northernmost city, we want to send 
a message of love to you and all the Bethel family from 
one of Sweden's Drama groups, in which we have the privilege 
of laboring for our Master. 

What a wonderful privilege we have to be able to help 
spread the "Tidings of Great Joy" amidst the world's tumult, 
and also what a privilege to be able to present the Drama 
up here, where it is so dark and cold just now! The sun 
is invisible fifty-two days during the winter months ! Truly 
we have seen God's power and the manifestation of His 
love so wonderful that we have, oh! so much to rejoice over. 

Wherever the Drama has been presented so far, much 
interest has been shown, and not once has the theater or hall 
been large enough for all to gain entrance, and many times 
have more been turned away than have been able to get in. 

One evidence of God's power was manifested in Lidkoping. 
It had been snowing for two days, and during one 
of the afternoon performances it began to snow still harder, 



and half an hour after the performance was over the electric 
power was cut off and the whole city was in darkness, with 
the exception of a few gas lights here and there. The two 
hours before the 8 o'clock performance were trying ones for 
us. Shortly before 7 o'clock people began to gather. All 
the light we had was a candle held by a sister at the book 
table. People kept gathering more and more, and in spite 
of the storm and no power, waited patiently to get in. The 
brothers helped to line up, and in our hearts we were sorely 
troubled. We prayed silently, "O God, if it be Thy will and 
the Drama is of Thee, give us power, for Jesus' sake." 

Seven volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and twenty-five 
SCENARIOS were sold, with the light of the candle. It 
was fifteen minutes of 8; the candle was still giving its faint 
light; the people were invited in, and in but a few minutes 
the house was filled to its uttermost capacity. We intended 
to play a few records on the graphophone and then tell 
them something about the Drama work. We had played 
two pieces, and it was 8 o'clock. I came to the platform 
and was ready to speak to the people when the power came 
with a wonderful flash! The people rejoiced with us, and 
loud applause rang through the whole theater. We learned 
so much through this experience. We had no need of power 
before 8 o'clock, but it came just when we needed it. God 
wants us to be patient and to trust Him. 

"Simply trusting every day, 
Trusting through a stormy way. 
Trusting Jesus— that is all." 

This is only one incident, and we have experienced so 
many. God is love. His Truth proclaims it; day by day 
His Truth we prove. 

•i* *i* *i* •?* 

With greetings of Christian love to you and all the dear 
friends, we are 
Your humble servants for the Master's use, 

BROTHER AND SISTER UNDEN.-Sweden. 



SURELY THE TRUTH DESERVES BETTER HANDLING 

BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY, 

Brooklyn, N.Y. 

GENTLEMEN:- 

When one of our firm was about to leave his residence 
today, he noticed a man passing along the street throwing 
folded papers from the sidewalk without any pretension of 
walking up to the doorstep. The one thrown at the residence 
above referred to landed in snow and water on the front 
porch 25 feet from the door. Upon being unfolded it was 
found to be a copy of the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY. Our 
point is this: We are supposed to be the only distributors in 
the city of Oswego. One of our distributing advertisers might 



come out of his house and find a folder such as yours thrown 
in the snow. He would naturally think it was some of our 
work, become disgusted with this method of advertising and 
stop doing business with us and we would never know the 
reason. WALLACE POSTER ADV. CO.-Oswego. 



page 80 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 8 1 

VOL. XXXVI MARCH 15 No. 6 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

Patient Endurance the Final Test 83 

The Patience of God 83 

The Necessity for Patient Endurance 84 

Trials Absolutely Essential 85 

"The Hour of Temptation" 85 

One of Satan's Special Deceptions 86 

St. Paul's Picture of Present Conditions 86 

The Importance of Self-Control 87 

David Anointed King 88 

"Jehovah Is My Shepherd" 90 

Interesting Questions 92 

Many Christians Not Yet Enlightened 92 

Shall We Sacrifice Legitimate Pleasures? 93 

Preachers Back of Malicious Attack 93 

Interesting Letters 94 

More Valuable Than Year in College 94 

Saved by Creation's Photo-Drama 94 

A "Truth" Baby 94 

The Faith That Overcomes (Poem) 95 

Conventions of 1915 82 

page 82 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 



Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



1915-GENERAL CONVENTION ARRANGEMENTS 



Many of our dear readers used their money talent quite liberally 
last year in connection with Pilgrim Public Meetings, Class Extension 
Work, the Drama Work, Eureka Drama Work, etc. We are sure that 
they have no regrets, but are equally sure that many of these will have 
less opportunity in these directions during the present year. In view of 
these conditions our present thought is to omit our usual large mid-summer 
Conventions, which, aside from the cost of preparation, involve 
all who attend in considerable outlay for railway fare, hotel accommodations, 
etc. Our Conventions last year must have cost those who attended 
one hundred thousand dollars at least, notwithstanding the fact that we 
scattered the Conventions considerably, with a view to shortening the 
railway journey and the incidental expenses. 

We believe that it will be quite to the pleasement of the majority of 
the friends that a still more economical plan be followed this year, namely, 
the holding of One-Day Conventions in various convenient localities. 
We purpose one hundred such Conventions. Indeed, we have already 
commenced the plan. The Editor makes a loop-trip, taking in a number 
of places and consuming about ten days for each trip, serving at different 
cities each day, as far as possible. The Classes thus served communicate 
with friends in their neighborhood as to the date and place for the 
assembly. A meeting for the public is arranged usually in the evening, 
while other services are held throughout the day. In some cases the 



meetings are prolonged, either beginning the day before or continuing 
the day after the one on which the Editor gives a public address. 

This less expensive plan not only affords cheaper facilities for the 
friends and permits some to be in attendance who could not take an expensive 
trip, but, additionally, it gives opportunity for a public witness 
all over the country, which seems to be well received and to be yielding 
good fruitage. Those Classes which have made application for public 
services are always given the preference. Information and inquiries by 
mail or by wire determine the route (in harmony with the possibilities as 
respects auditoriums, etc.). It is hoped that by this means the Editor 
will meet the friends and address the public this summer in places never 
before visited by him, as well as in others where he has previously been. 

SAN FRANCISCO, CAL., EXPOSITION CONVENTION 
MAY 29-JUNE 7--OAKLAND AND SAN FRANCISCO 

The Panama Expositions at San Diego and San Francisco, California, 
are arousing considerable interest, especially on the Pacific Coast. 
The friends at these points are very desirous of having Conventions, believing 
that they will be convenient for some who may have business as 
well as spiritual interests calling them in that direction. In harmony 
with their requests the Editor is laying out a lengthy loop which will 
have San Francisco as its furthest limit. Incidentally he proposes to 
stop at quite a number of cities, both going and returning. The following 
is his proposed itinerary— subject, of course, to the acceptance or 
rejection of the Classes at the places named:— 

May 11.... East Liverpool, Ohio. May 19....Denison, Texas. 



" 12.. 


..Pittsburgh, Penna. 


" 20. ...Dallas, Texas. 


" 13.. 


..Cincinnati, Ohio. 


" 21. ...Waco, Texas. 


" 14.. 


..St. Louis, Mo. 


" 22. ...Houston, Texas. 


" 15.. 


..Sedalia, Mo. 


" 23. ...San Antonio, Texas. 


" 16.. 


..Kansas City, Mo. 


" 24. ...El Paso, Texas. 


" 17.. 


.. Coffey ville, Kans. 


" 26-29. Los Angeles, etc. 


" 18.. 


..Oklahoma City, Okla. 


" 30. ...San Francisco, Cal 



June 7th will be Bible Students' Day at the Fair, where Festival 
Hall has been set apart for their use that day. Brother Russell expects 
to deliver a public address on Sunday, May 30th, at San Francisco 
and on Sunday, June 6th, at Oakland. He also expects to be with the 
Conventioners at Festival Hall, June 7th. Convention arrangements are 
not fully perfected; but as Brother Russell will have editorial duties 
and correspondence needing his attention, he will probably speak only 
once at the Oakland Convention, aside from the two public Sunday addresses 
here mentioned and the address at Festival Hall, June 7th. 

Address communications for information respecting room and board 
at reasonable rates to I.B.S.A. Committee, Box 473, Oakland, Cal. 

THE RETURN JOURNEY IS OUTLINED AS FOLLOWS-Subject 

to acceptance or rejection by the Classes: 

June 8.. ..Sacramento, Cal. June 18. .. .Cheyenne, Wyo. 

" 10. ...Portland, Ore. " 20. ...Pueblo, Colo. 

" ll....Tacoma, Wash. " 21. ...Colorado Springs, Colo. 

" 12. ...Everett and Bellingham, " 22. ...Denver, Colo. 

Wash. " 23.... Omaha, Neb. 



3. ...Seattle, Wash. 


" 24.. ..Chicago, 111. 


4. ...Spokane, Wash. 


" 25.. ..South Bend, Ind. 


5.... Helena, Mont. 


" 27. ...Cleveland, Ohio. 


6. ...Butte, Mont. 


July 4. ...New York City Temple 



DOCTOR JONES PROPOSES EXCURSION 

Learning of the above proposal for a series of One-Day Conventions 
and of the San Francisco-Oakland Eight Days' Convention, Brother Jones 
inquired whether or not we would like company. Assured that the 
companionship of God's people is always welcome, he notified us of his 
intention to form a Convention Party. He proposes to charter one or 
two sleeping cars and to accommodate such of the friends as may be disposed 
to make this journey. Whoever has any thought of joining 
Brother Jones' Excursion Party should address him on the subject at 
once for full particulars respecting Excursion ticket over this run, sleeping 
car accommodations and meals en route. 

So far from urging any of the friends to take this Convention Trip, 
we on the contrary suggest that each sit down first and count the cost; 
that each one considering it make the matter a subject of prayer, that 
special opportunities for serving the Lord through Eureka Drama, Pilgrim 
service and otherwise be not neglected, unless for what is believed 
to be excellent reasons, pleasing to the Lord. Whatever is done should 
be done speedily, as Brother Jones must negotiate with the railroads, etc. 
Address Dr. L. W. Jones, Chicago Temple, 700 Wabash Ave., Chicago, 111. 



R5650 : page 83 

PATIENT ENDURANCE THE FINAL TEST 

"Let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be 
perfect and entire, wanting nothing."— James 1:4. 

THE Scriptures everywhere represent patience 

as an important element of character. In 

every phase of human experience we can 

see its need. To be just under present conditions, 

one must be patient, not rash; for it 

would be unjust to be impatient and severe 

with the unavoidable imperfections and 

weaknesses of our fellowmen. Therefore 

the spirit of a sound mind demands that we 

be patient in dealing with fallen humanity. 

God Himself possesses this quality of patience, and has 

long exercised it. In dealing with the world in the next 

Age the Church will need to have much patience, and 

under our present environments we need it constantly in 

order to develop the character necessary for a place on 

the Throne with our Lord. 

Patience is closely allied to love and mercy. If God 
were unloving, unmerciful, He would be without patience. 
In man's present blemished, fallen condition, patience is 
sadly lacking, although it is often exercised outwardly for 
policy's sake. This Godlike quality, like all the other 



qualities of character inherent in God and in all perfect 
beings created in His likeness, has been largely obliterated 
in humanity by the fall of the first pair. 

In the New Testament there are two Greek words 
translated patience. One of these words signifies forbearance, 
longsuffering. The other carries the thought 
of cheerful or hopeful endurance. The latter is the word 
used in our text, and has a much deeper significance than 
attaches ordinarily to our word patience. This constancy 
—the endurance of evil in a cheerful, willing manner- 
represents an element of character, and not merely a 
temporary restraint of feeling or of action. It signifies 
a development of heart and character which manifests 
itself in an endurance of wrong or affliction with contentment, 
without rebellion of will, with full acquiescence in 
the requirement of Divine Wisdom and Love, which, 
while permitting present evils, has promised in due time 
to overthrow them. 

It will surely be profitable for us to cultivate carefully 
this element of Christian character of which our Lord 
speaks in such high commendation, and without which, 
His Word assures us, our character cannot be perfected. 
The Christian requires patient endurance to put on the 
whole armor of God, and having put it on, to keep it 
securely buckled. We need it in dealing not only with 
others, but also with ourselves, with our own blemishes. 
We should always take into account the various circumstances 
and conditions surrounding ourselves and others. 
As we look around, we see that the world is in a condition 
of blight, of sin. This knowledge should give us 
great sympathy with humanity, without which we would 
have but little patience. All of our brethren in Christ, 
like ourselves, are by nature members of this fallen human 
race. Therefore we should have a great deal of patient 
endurance with the Lord's people, as we would have them 
exercise this grace toward us. 

THE PATIENCE OF GOD 

As the quality of justice will always persist, so will 
the quality of patience, though not in the sense of patient 
endurance of evil. God patiently works out His own 
glorious designs, in perfect equipoise of mind. At present 
this requires the exercise of patient endurance with evil, 
sinful conditions; and in the Ages of glory to come God 
will, we believe, still work out His purposes in perfect 
patience, probably in worlds yet uninhabited. 

But in the exercise of patience under present evil conditions, 
Wisdom must have a voice. God has declared 
that in His Wisdom the time will come when He will 
cease to exercise patience toward the world. That is to 
say, He will no longer bear with the world in their present 
sinful, imperfect condition. That time has almost arrived. 
The great cataclysm of trouble, now about due, will sweep 
away the entire present order preparatory to the establishment 
of the Kingdom of God under the whole heavens. 



Then God will give men the fullest opportunity of coming 
into harmony with Himself and righteousness before He 
will deal with them summarily. 

The time is coming when there will be no more sin. 
God will have a clean universe by and by. But He will 
first give everybody an opportunity to rise out of sin. If 
they will not avail themselves of the opportunity, then 
God's patience, longsuffering, will cease to be operative 
toward such. This will not mean that God's patience has 
ceased, but that its activity has ceased in that direction. 

God's patience has arranged the thousand years of 
Messiah's Reign for man's blessing, and His Wisdom has 
decided that those thousand years will be sufficient for the 
elimination of evil. Whoever will not learn to live 
righteously under those favorable conditions would never 
learn, and it would not be the part of Divine Wisdom 
longer to exercise patience with such. Likewise also, in 

R5650 : page 84 

our dealings with ourselves and others, there is a limit to 
the proper exercise of patience— longsuffering. We should 
not be patient with ourselves beyond a certain point. 
There are circumstances in which we would properly feel 
that we should have known better and should have done 
better than we did. 

LET US JUDGE OURSELVES 

If a child of God realizes that he has been derelict 
with himself, he should say, I will not be patient with 
myself any further. I will take myself in hand and conquer 
this weakness which I have permitted in a measure 
to assert itself to the weakening of my own character and 
probably to the discomfort and pain of others. I cannot 
do this in my own unaided strength, but by the grace of 
the Lord I am determined to overcome in this matter. 

Parents require much patience, forbearance, in dealing 
with their children. The limit of patience might differ in 
regard to different children. Therefore the wise parent 
will judge how nearly each child has been doing the right 
thing, and how well each has received and profited by instruction. 
If he finds that any child of his is wilfully 
doing wrong, he should not continue to be patient, but 
should administer the rod. This would not mean that the 
parent had ceased to be patient. He might have patience 
the next day with the same child, and subsequently the 
application of the rod might come again. We are rather 
to be too patient, too sympathetic, than to have too little 
patience, too little sympathy. Remembering our own 
weaknesses, we are to exercise patience toward others 
who are seeking to overcome their imperfections, even as 
we are seeking to overcome our own. We all need that 
patience, forbearance, be exercised toward us. 

OUR LORD'S LESSONS ON PATIENT ENDURANCE 



Recurring to the word patience as used in our text, let 
us glance backward to our Lord's Parable of the Sower, as 
recorded in Luke 8. In verse 15 we read, "That on the 
good ground are they, which in an honest and good heart, 
having heard the Word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with 
patience," patient endurance, constancy. The thought 
here is that to be of the fruit-bearing class which the 
Lord will approve and accept in His Kingdom we must do 
more than to receive the Word of His Testimony, even 
though we receive it with joy. It means more; for the 
stony ground class at first thus received it. For a brief 
time these seemed to give evidence of fruitfulness and 
vigor; but when the hot sun of persecution arose, they 
withered away, because of lack of depth of soil. 

In this parable the Lord shows that patient endurance, 
constancy, is the final test of character. It follows after 
the receiving and the sprouting of the seed; it follows 
after love, hope, joy and faith have caused the seed to 
spring forth and begin to bear fruit. Patient endurance, 
then, is necessary in order that the fruit may be developed 
and thoroughly ripened, that the grain may be made ready 
for the garner. Ah, how important this grace is seen to 
be, in the light of God's Word! But remember that the 
endurance must be cheerful. We cannot suppose that He 
who judges the thoughts and intents of the heart would 
be pleased with His children, even when He saw them 
bearing much for His sake, if they endured it in an impatient 
or dissatisfied or unhappy frame of mind. 

Those who thus endure surely would not be copies of 
God's dear Son, whose sentiment found expression in the 
words, "I delight to do Thy will, O My God!" All of the 
Royal Priesthood are sacrificers, as was our great Chief 
Priest; and God who accepts our sacrifices through the 
merit of our dear Redeemer, informs us that He loves a 
cheerful giver— one who performs his sacrifices gladly, 
with a willing heart. This does not mean that our bodies 
will never grow weary; but that our spirit will rejoice in 
the privilege of suffering weariness of the flesh in so 
noble and wonderful a service. But if our Father should 
see best to lay us aside from active work for a time, when 
our hearts are longing to serve, this too will be an opportunity 
to endure cheerfully His will for us. It may also 
be a test of our full submission of our wills to His, and 
thus be an important stepping-stone upward toward the 
Kingdom glories and privileges. 

The other instance in which the Lord used this word 
patience, or patient endurance, is recorded in Luke 21:19. 
He had just been telling His followers that they must expect 
tribulations as the result of being His disciples during 
the present time, when sin abounds, when Satan is the 
prince of this world. They must expect opposition from 
various quarters; but He assured them that nevertheless 

R5651 : page 84 



they would be fully under Divine care and protection, even 
though persecutions would be permitted to reach and to 
affect them. Then follow the words, "In your patience 
[patient endurance, cheerful constancy] possess ye your 
souls."— Luke 21:19. 

Our faith and our trust in the Lord and His gracious 
promises should be so strong and unwavering that they 
will far more than counterbalance the oppositions of the 
world, of false brethren, and of Satan's blinded servants. 
So implicit should be our faith in our Father's love and 
care that all these persecutions will be recognized and 
rejoiced in as the agencies of His providence in chiseling, 
shaping and polishing us as living stones for the glorious 
Temple which He is constructing, and which is now so 
soon, we believe, to be set up. 

Viewing our trials from this standpoint, we can indeed 
rejoice and can possess our souls, our lives, as New 
Creatures, even amidst tribulations, with cheerful endurance. 
Yea, we may realize that the soul, the real being, to 
whom God has given the "exceeding great and precious 
promises" of the future, cannot be injured by the persecutions 
of the flesh, or by anything that man can do unto us, 
so long as we are faithful to the Lord, accepting every 
experience that He permits to come to us as ministrations 
of His providence for our ultimate good and His glory. 

THE NECESSITY FOR PATIENT ENDURANCE 

Let us here examine carefully into the reason why it 
is necessary for us to develop this grace of patient endurance. 
It appears that the development of this quality 
is one of the conditions which God has attached to the call 
to joint-heirship with our Lord in the Kingdom, and one 
of the same conditions required of Him. The wisdom of 
this is manifest when we consider the work to which we 
are called— the work of blessing all the families of the 
earth, as God's Millennial Kingdom, in joint-heirship with 
the Only Begotten Son of God, our great Redeemer. That 
will be a mighty work; and it is eminently proper that 
Jehovah should require that those whom He shall account 
worthy of that exalted position shall not only appreciate 
His goodness and His glorious character, and prefer His 
service to sin and iniquity, but demonstrate their thorough 
loyalty to the principles of righteousness and to His will 
to the extent of a joyful willingness to suffer on behalf 
of these principles. A transitory endurance of one or two 
or three brief trials would not prove the individual to 
have an established character for righteousness; but a 
patient, cheerful, endurance even unto death would be 
necessary to demonstrate such a character. 

We might illustrate this with the diamond. Suppose 

R5651 : page 85 

that we were able to make diamonds out of some plastic 
material with the brilliancy of the real diamond; and suppose 



that they became hard, but not so hard as the genuine 
diamond. Would these imitation diamonds have the value 
of the true diamond? By no means. If they were subjected 
to severe pressure, they would be crushed. And so 
with the Christian. If we supposed him possessed of every 
grace of character that could belong to the sons of God, 
save this one of firmness, endurance, he would not be fit to 
be amongst the Lord's jewels. Hence we see the necessity 
of the Lord's demand that patient, cheerful endurance 
shall be a characteristic of each one who shall be accepted 
to a place in His Royal Diadem. 

The importance of this quality in the Christian character 
is again emphasized by the Apostle Paul. In His 
Epistle to Titus (2:2), when enumerating the character-qualities 
of an advanced Christian, he declares that they 
must be "vigilant, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in love, 
in patience." The final test of patient endurance must be 
passed before we can be accepted as of the Very Elect. 

The same Apostle in writing to Timothy, thus reminds 
him, "Thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, 
purpose, faith, longsuffering, love, patient endurance." We 
need this important grace more and more as we speed 
along on our race course and near the end of the way. 
Feet grow weary; trials and testings abound; therefore we 
need to "gird up the loins of our mind" and, looking to 
our great Exemplar for the needed inspiration and 
strength, to set our faces like a flint for the home stretch. 

TRIALS ABSOLUTELY ESSENTIAL 

Our ability and strength to patiently endure should increase 
as we progress in the narrow way. We should 
grow "strong in the Lord and in the power of His might." 
But we cannot possibly develop this essential trait of 
character without trials— experiences intended to call for 
the exercise of cheerful endurance. So let us not think it 
strange if we are called upon to pass through protracted 
trials which make necessary the nerving of ourselves to 
bear. But let us repeat that the virtue is not merely in 
the bearing; for the world has much to bear, but it is 
particularly in the manner in which we endure. At heart 
we must be sweet and submissive— in fullest harmony with 
the Lord's processes of development. This may be hard 
at times; but His grace will be sufficient, if we constantly 
apply for it. "Having done all," let us "stand!" 

Ah, yes! We can see a new reason for the Lord's arrangement 
that we should have our trial as our Master 
had His— under an evil environment— that we might not 
only have all the necessary qualities of Christian character, 
but have them rooted, grounded, fixed, established. 

The Apostle James likewise draws our attention to the 
importance of this quality. He says, "The trying of your 
faith worketh patience"; that is to say, if our faith stands 
the trial, it will work out in our character this patient 
endurance. On the other hand, if we do not attain this 
development, it will mean that our faith has not stood the 



test satisfactorily, and that we are not fit for the Kingdom. 
Thus we see clearly what a great mistake has been made 
among Christian people in general in supposing that 
religion is a thing to be gotten suddenly as an answer to 
prayer, or by going to the mourner's bench, or by standing 
up for prayers, or in response to some Divine or human 
appeal— just as one would get a dollar and put it into his 
pocket. On the contrary, the step of repentance from 
sin and justification is only the beginning, and not the end, 
of the Christian way. The next step is consecration of 
ourselves and our all to God. But this also is far from 
the end. Not only must we go on and on, to the attainment 
of faith, fortitude, self-control, meekness and love, 
but having attained all these, we must patiently endure. 
We must "run with patience [cheerful endurance] the race 
set before us." Or, to use another figure of speech, it is 
merely starting in the School of Christ; merely having 
our names enrolled as pupils, to be taught of the Lord. 

"THE HOUR OF TEMPTATION" 

The Church of the Philadelphia period were promised 
of the Lord that because of their faithfulness, because 
they had "kept the Word of My patience," they should be 
kept from "the hour of temptation" which was to come 
upon all the world a little later. The Church of Laodicea 
—the Church of our day— is not kept from entering into 
the "hour of temptation"; but we may be sure that we 
will be kept while in it, if we are faithful and true. Our 
dear Lord's special message to the Laodicean phase of the 
Church has been, "Behold, I stand at the door and knock. 
If any man hear My Voice, and open the door, I will come 
in to him, and will sup with him, and he with Me. To 
him that overcometh, will I grant to sit with Me in My 
Throne."— Revelation 3:20,21. 

Though we are not spared from this hour of temptation, 
we have a counterbalancing blessing as a result of 
living in the time of our Lord's parousia.* We may have 
His instruction, His dispensing to us of spiritual food, 
"meat in due season," in a manner and to a degree never 
before enjoyed by His saints. And, as we might expect, 
this greatest favor is offset by the subtle and severe trials 
and testings of this special "hour of temptation." If there 
was ever a time when patient endurance was needed by 
the Lord's faithful, it is now. If ever they needed the 
counsel, "In your patience possess ye your souls," they 
need it now. Those who are able to patiently endure will 
stand in this evil day. All others will fall. As the Apostle 
forewarned us, the fiery ordeals of this day "will try every 
man's work, of what sort it is." 

We find this quality of patient endurance lacking everywhere 
throughout Christendom today, even among the 
majority of the professed followers of Christ. It is becoming 
more and more scarce. Few wish to endure anything— 
for righteousness' sake, for Christ's sake, or for 
any one else's sake; and if endurance of anything unpleasant 



is absolutely necessary, the trial is borne with 
much of impatience, complaint and chafing. Moreover, a 
spirit of defiance and rebellion against everything like 
self-denial or resignation, a spirit of intense bitterness, is 
daily growing in the hearts of mankind. 

This general tendency of the civilized world today 
toward non-endurance, impatience and rebellion against 
restraint necessarily has its influence upon those who are 
seeking to walk in the narrow way. Only by Divine grace 
can this tendency be successfully resisted, and progress be 
made toward the development of the likeness of Christ. 
This special grace, needed today by the Lord's children, 
will be withheld from those who are not walking close to 
the Lord, following in the footsteps of Jesus. It is because 
the professed followers of Christ are living so far from 
Him that we see today the tendencies are developing which 
we have noted amongst those who profess His name. 

This spirit so prevalent is at the bottom of mob violence 
which is kept down largely by military force, in the outbreaks 
against law and order which we hear of so frequently. 



*Any one interested in the Scriptural evidences that our Lord has 
now returned in the manner foretold, as "a thief in the night," will be 
sent the "Parousia" booklet, upon receipt of 6c in stamps with name and 
address. Direct request today to THE WATCH TOWER, Brooklyn, N.Y. 

R5652 : page 86 

We may expect this spirit to continue to grow. 
There is a feeling amongst the masses that in the past 
they have been too patient, not sufficiently aggressive— 
the feeling that if they had taken things into their own 
hands long ago present conditions might have been averted. 
But those who have kept the Lord's Word of patient endurance, 
who have sought from Him the wisdom from on 
High, which is "first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy of 
entreatment, full of mercy and of good fruits," have 
learned that He has a due time in which His purposes shall 
be accomplished, and they are willing to abide His time 
patiently, knowing that it is best. They have learned that 

"God's plans, like lilies white, unfold; 

We must not tear the close-shut leaves apart, 
Time will reveal the hidden heart of gold." 

ONE OF SATAN'S SPECIAL DECEPTIONS 

The Apostle counsels us respecting this "hour of 
temptation" which is now upon us. Its besetments and 
trials will be many, and some of them will be so subtle 
and deceptive that all who are not thoroughly rooted and 
grounded in the Truth will be carried away by the false 
arguments of those whom Satan is now permitted to use 
as his agents in trying all those who dwell upon the face 



of the whole earth. 

Amongst these subtle theories of the Adversary, none 
seems more deceptive than Christian Science, falsely so 
called; for it is neither Christian nor scientific. Backed 
by the power of the Evil One, it is able to promise its 
dupes that if they will affirm an untruth, and stick to it, 
they shall have relief and cure of certain ailments and 
bodily afflictions. Those who have not learned to endure 
patiently all that the Lord permits them to experience in 
the way of pain and sickness— all that cannot be relieved 
by rational and reasonable methods— will be ready to accept 
almost any relief which the Adversary may bring to 
their attention. And as they learn to deceive themselves 
in respect to pain and sickness, and gradually to pervert 
words from their real meaning, and to ignore and deny 
facts, they become in time so confused in their minds that 
truth appears to them to be falsehood, and falsehood appears 
to be shining Truth. 

SOME BEING FREED BY THE TRUTH 

These deluded ones are led into this deception partly 
through curiosity. It seems so strange to them to hear 
one say, "There is no death; all is life! There is no pain; 
all is health! There is no evil; all is good!" They say to 
themselves, "These statements are certainly very inconsistent, 
yet I am curious to know how people reason them 
out. What is their philosophy?" This is just what the 
Adversary desires. He wishes thus to attract their attention, 
that step by step he may lead them from one falsity to 
another, until the whole brain and conscience are subverted. 
They have accepted darkness for light, lies for 
truth. For this they are rewarded with physical relief- 
small recompense! 

This is the reward of selfishness, of unwillingness to 
suffer anything they could escape by any means. They 
preferred their own way, the way most attractive to the 
fallen flesh. They chose this rather than the Truth, 
which did not appeal to their flesh. They were ready to 
exchange the testimony of the Lord for the sake of 
physical ease and comfort, or to satisfy morbid curiosity. 
Thus they escaped troubles and pain which, if endured 
patiently and joyfully, would have worked out for them 
blessing and strengthening of character. Some who have 
been thus enslaved by the great Adversary, a very few, 
are being freed by the power of the Truth at this time. 
But it is a very difficult task to be thoroughly accomplished. 
In some cases the experiences undergone in the 
efforts to break the bonds so tightly binding them have 
been very painful, and accompanied by buffetings from 
the Evil One and his hosts, who have so long held 
them in bondage. But it is well worth the struggle and 
the pain to be free from all such slavery. 

ST. PAUL'S PICTURE OF PRESENT CONDITIONS 



The hour of trial is not coming alike upon all, for all 
of Christendom are not upon the same plane— mentally, 
morally or physically. The trial as it is coming upon 
Christendom in general, however, is pictured by the 
Apostle Paul in 2 Timothy 3:1-5. He here enumerates 
certain characteristics of this "hour of temptation." He 
says, "This know also, that in the last days perilous times 
shall come; for men shall be lovers of their own selves- 
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to 
parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, 
truce-breakers, false accusers [enticers to strife], incontinent 
[not under restraint, impetuous], fierce, despisers 
of those that are good, traitors [those who cannot be 
trusted, would sell out their best friends for selfish considerations], 
heady, highminded, lovers of pleasure more 
than lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying 
the power thereof." 

This is a graphic picture of present-day conditions in 
the Christian world, so-called. Because they received not 
the Truth in the love of it, therefore God has sent them 
"strong delusions, that they should believe a lie," and 
should be condemned thereby. This hour of temptation 
has not yet reached its greatest intensity, but we believe 
this stage will be reached in a very short time. Blessed 
are all they who have made the Lord, "even the most High, 
their Habitation." These shall not be moved; yet many 
of them will pass through most severe trials and temptations. 
Through the mails we learn of the struggles and 
prayers of many of God's children— some because of their 
own imperfections and frailties, and some because of the 
imperfections of others; and still others are tried because 
of earthly cares and burdens which they seem unable to 
fully overcome or to cast upon the Lord. 

LET US HAVE THE PROPER FEAR 

We sympathize with these dear ones, and counsel them 
as best we can, remembering the Master's words, "Blessed 
are ye that weep now; for ye shall laugh." (Luke 6:21.) 
Our heart is especially solicitous for those whose letters 
give evidence that they are in temptation, but realize it 
not— who are being swallowed up of ambition or business 
or other "cares of this life and the deceitfulness of riches" 
—whose love for the Truth seems to be growing cooler 
instead of hotter, and who seem to feel less and see less 
than they did years ago. These seem to be sleeping when 
they should be watching and praying; and this hour of 
trial, we fear, is finding them unprepared; while some who 
are weeping, praying and striving are more like our dear 
Master in Gethsemane; and like Him, they will be 
strengthened for the final trial. 

Let us each, dear brethren, be very solicitous for ourselves 
and for each other, and counting the prize held out 
to us as far dearer and more precious than all else beside, 
"Let us fear, lest a promise being left to us of entering 
into His rest, any of us should seem to come short of it." 



Let us so love all the Lord's dear children that their welfare 

will be our chief concern; and this will mean our 

own spiritual health. Yet we must not allow our love 

even for the brethren to hinder our fullest confidence in 

the Lord's love and wisdom in the choice of His Bride, 

even though siftings should take from us some whose fellowship 

we have cherished. 

R5652 : page 87 

Let us patiently hold on our way— this blessed way! 
Let us do with our might what our hands find to do. Soon 
will come the Harvest Home! Soon, if faithful, we shall 
gather, as a glorious company, to go out no more forever. 
We shall come with rejoicing, bringing our sheaves with 
us! But let us remember that "we have need of patience, 
that after we have done the will of God, we might receive 
the promise!"— Hebrews 10:36. 

"How light our trials then will seem! 

How short our pilgrim way! 
The life of earth a fitful dream, 

Dispelled by dawning Day! 



"Then peace, my heart! and hush, my tongue! 

Be calm, my troubled breast; 
Each passing hour prepares thee more 

For everlasting rest!" 



R5652 : page 87 

THE IMPORTANCE OF SELF-CONTROL 

"He that hath no rule over his own spirit is like a city which 
is broken down and without walls."— Proverbs 25:28. 

THE word "spirit" is used in a variety of ways. 
We speak of a horse as having a fiery spirit 
or as having no spirit. We speak of the 
angels as being spirits. We sometimes speak 
of the spirit of life. We also speak of the 
spirit of the human mind— that is evidently 
the thought that is here presented. The 
words of the text are equivalent to saying, 
He that hath no rule over his own mind, his 
thoughts, is like a city that is broken down. 

What would a broken-down city be like? In olden 
times, when civilization had not reached the degree to 
which it has now attained, there was but little police protection, 
and marauders were numerous. Those who were 
disposed to get their living by stealing had excellent opportunities. 



R5653 : page 87 

It was necessary that cities be surrounded 
by walls as a protection against enemies. Any city with 
broken-down walls would have great reason to fear such 
marauders. It would invite attack and be certain to meet 
with disaster some time. 

The wise man has here likened such a city to a broken 
down human will. The will is to be continually on guard 
over the mind and to allow nothing to enter there except 
through the regular gates— Conscience and Judgment. 
These gates are to be watched so closely that they may 
admit only such thoughts as would be non-injurious, 
profitable, wise— in harmony with the Word of God. 
Every human being should have a will and should keep it 
in good repair, should see to it that it does not get broken 
down; otherwise shipwreck of character will follow. 

By the will is not meant merely a wish. There is a 
decided difference between a wish and a will. Some wish 
that they possessed a million dollars, but they have not the 
will even to try to get it. Some have a wish to get up at a 
certain hour in the morning; but the wish does not get 
them up, because the will is broken down. They say to 
themselves, "Oh, a little more sleep, a little more slumber, 
a little more folding of the hands in sleep ! " They have no 
control of themselves. They may think they will gain this 
control by setting an alarm clock. By and by the alarm 
clock does no good; they do not hear it at all. 

CONTROL IN SMALL THINGS GAGE OF CHARACTER 

Whoever allows his will to become broken down as to 
the time he will arise in the morning has a more or less 
weak will in all matters. We should make reasonable 
regulations for our time of rising and of retiring. Having 
used our best judgment as to what should be done, we 
should see that it is done. Unless the doing of this should 
be found harmful to ourselves or to someone else, it 
should be carried out. 

It is important to carry out the dictates of our best 
judgment so that the will may be strong, so that the individual 
may not be a vacillating character. The same 
principle applies to our choice of food. Some will say, "I 
know that this dish does not agree with me; but it comes 
to the table, and it seems to agree with others. I cannot 
eat it without subsequent discomfort; but I like it. I wish 
it would not come to the table!" So he partakes of it and 
suffers the consequences. He has the desire for the food, 
but not the will to resist taking it. The proper course for 
each one is to see to it that he does not eat what he knows 
is injurious to him, whatever others may be able to do or 
may choose to do. 

Indecision and lack of character in little things affect 
all the greater things in life. The person who gets up 
irregularly is apt to be irregular in business. The person 
who cannot determine what he should eat is likely to be 



subject to caprice, to be weak in all his decisions. Such a 
one will be likely to let some salesman influence him as 
to what he will buy. Some are too largely subject to the 
control of others. 

A FIRM WILL-NOT OBSTINACY-ESSENTIAL 

An old adage has it that "A wise man sometimes 
changes his mind— a fool never." Ruling our own spirit 
does not mean that we are to go to extremes and say, 
"Well, I said I wouldn't; and I won't!" There may be 
good reasons for changing our mind, and then it would 
be our proper course to make that change. God is seeking 
for the class of people who properly rule their own minds. 
If they learn to rule their minds before they come into the 
family of God, it will be that much the better for them. 
But at any rate, the only way they can get into the Kingdom 
will be by developing character. 

The Bible tells us particularly what things are of the 
flesh, and what are of the Holy Spirit, the holy mind, of 
God; what things, therefore, constitute the holy disposition 
we should have. It tells us that we should put away 
anger, malice, hatred, bitterness, wrath, anger, strife; and 
that we should put on meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering 
brotherly-kindness, love. These lessons must be 
learned. We cannot say that the flesh will ever be brought 
under complete control; but the will must be there, and as 
much control of the flesh as is possible by Divine help 
should be added day by day. 

The Lord is seeking people of strong will, strong character. 
Therefore there must be a positive turning to the 
Lord and a definite covenant with Him at the first, or else 
we are not acceptable to the Father. Then after we come 
into His family we find that some things that we thought 
all right are all wrong and must be corrected; and in proportion 
as we have in our past life ruled our own minds, 
controlled our fleshly appetites and impulses, in that proportion 
we shall make slow or rapid progress in the new 
way. How much of consecrated time may we use for 
business, for pleasure, or in one way or another? How 
much of consecrated money shall we spend on ourselves? 
All this is to be regulated by our Covenant with God. We 
must seek first the interests of the Lord and His Kingdom. 
These must be first in all our arrangements, and earthly 
things must be secondary. Hence the importance of fixed 
character, a will prompt and unflinching for God. 



R5656 : page 88 

DAVID ANOINTED KING 
-APRIL ll.-l SAMUEL 16:4-13.- 
A MAN AFTER GOD'S OWN HEART-ANOTHER PHASE OF SAMUEL'S 



CHARACTER-SAMUEL SENT TO BETHLEHEM -ANOINTING 
THE SUCCESSORS OF PRESENT INSTITUTIONS- 
DAVID A TYPE OF THE CHURCH IN THE FLESH- 
DIVINE METHOD OF SELECTION OF THE ELECT. 

"Man looketh on the outward appearance, but 
Jehovah looketh on the Heart."— 1 Samuel 16:7. 

KING SAUL'S rejection by the Lord because of 

disobedience meant not only his own ultimate 

removal from the throne, but that his sons 

should not succeed him in it. Furthermore, 

it meant also the Lord's selection of another 

man, another family, for the office of ruler in 

Israel and representative of the Lord upon 

the throne. The Lord's choice was David, 

to whom the Prophet Samuel had indirectly 

referred, saying, "The Lord hath sought Him 

a man after His own heart, and the Lord hath commanded 

him to be captain over His people, because thou [King 

Saul] hast not kept that which the Lord commanded 

thee."-l Samuel 13:14. 

At the time of the events of today's Study, David 
was about twenty years old; consequently the Prophet's 
words must have been uttered about the time of David's 
birth. Thus we have another illustration of God's foreknowledge 
and design in respect to those whom He especially 
uses in His service. Similarly God's choice of 
Jacob was declared before he was born; and similarly the 
Apostle Paul was chosen from before his birth. We are 
to separate from this declaration any false thought respecting 
the Divine choice, and note that none of these 
was chosen to eternal life, but each of them, all of them, 
chosen and fitted for special service. 

This gives us a suggestion of the possibility of paternal 
and maternal influence affecting the natural disposition 
of a human being from before his birth. He still 
has a will, however; and even though favorably endowed, 
it remains with himself to determine, to will, whether or 
not he will walk in the Lord's ways and to what extent he 
will be obedient. There is no coercion of the will; for 
the Lord seeks such as worship Him in spirit— willingly, 
heartily— and in truth. 

David's great-grandmother was the gentle Ruth, who 
gleaned grain probably in the very field with which David 
was familiar. His great-grandfather's name was Boaz, 
a page of whose history is recorded in the Book of Ruth. 
Like Boaz, David's father Jesse was doubtless one of the 
Elders of the city of Bethlehem, respected and honored 
as a noble man. Of his mother we know little, except that 
David twice mentioned her as a handmaid of God. 

SAMUEL'S FAITH TESTED 

The Prophet Samuel mourned and prayed for King 
Saul, and apparently was disappointed that this man, of 



whom he had expected such great things and under whose 
guidance he had anticipated great prosperity for Israel, 
should be rejected. Quite probably fearful forebodings 
of a civil war to result from the installation of a new 
king perturbed the Prophet's mind. He knew that Saul 
would not quietly submit to laying down the scepter which 
he had taken up with so great modesty, in obedience to 
the Divine arrangement. The Prophet's mental eye could 
see the probability of civil strife, which might rupture the 
nation and cause great trouble. He should have had 
greater trust in the Wisdom and the Power of the Almighty, 
but his trouble was more or less like that which 
assails all of the Lord's people even today. 

The lesson to our hearts should be that we will implicitly 
trust the Lord to manage His own affairs; that we 
will trust Him where we cannot trace Him and will be 
obedient to His directions; and that so far from mourning 
at the execution of His plans we will rejoice, knowing 
that all things are working together for good to them 
that love God— that all things will ultimately work blessings 
for those who are in accord with the Lord— blessings 
for the future life, if not for the present. 

When sent to anoint David, the Prophet Samuel exhibited 
a fear not elsewhere noticeable in his character. 
He did not hesitate to perform the Lord's bidding, but 
intimated that he clearly understood that it meant the 
risk of his own life— that King Saul would kill him as a 
traitor if he should anoint a successor to the kingdom. 
The Lord made it clear to him that it was not the intention 
to make the matter known at once, and directed him 
to go to Bethlehem and make a sacrifice there and, incidentally, 
to improve the opportunity of finding and anointing 
the one who in due time would be made known and 
exalted to the throne. At the time, he was merely to 
perform the initial work, which David's father and 
brethren would not understand, thinking perhaps that 
the anointing meant a special blessing or a commission 
from the Lord to engage as a member of the school of 
the prophets or something else of this kind. Quite probably, 
however, the Prophet informed David privately of 
the meaning of the anointing, just as he had privately 
informed Saul when he secretly anointed the latter to 
the office of king of Israel. 

GOD'S CHOICE OF KING 

Our Study begins at the point when the Prophet 
Samuel had arrived at Bethlehem. The Elders were in 
fear, thinking that his presence signified some sin on their 
part, or on the part of some of their fellow-citizens, which 
God had sent him to reprove and to punish. Hence they 
inquired whether or not he came peaceably— whether or 
not his presence meant a blessing or the infliction of a 
penalty. Their fears were allayed when they heard that 
his mission was a peaceable one— to offer a sacrifice 
unto the Lord. 



Some time before this, the Ark of the Covenant had 
been captured by the Philistines. The Tabernacle services, 
thus discontinued, had not yet been reestablished, 
and for this reason this sacrificing was performed by the 
Lord's especially appointed servant. The command to 
the people of Bethlehem to sanctify themselves if they 
would be participators in the blessings of the sacrifice 
signified that they should wash their persons, put on 
clean clothes and draw nigh to the Lord with their hearts. 
Thus they typically represented that justification and 
sanctification which the Church of this Age has enjoyed. 

The Prophet seems to have taken supervision of the 
family of Jesse to the intent that he might without public 
display find the man whom the Lord had chosen, and 
might anoint him to the office and give him the Divine 
blessing in preparation of it. Jesse properly introduced 
his sons to the Prophet according to the order of their 
birth— his eldest, Eliab, first. As he was of fine appearance 
the Prophet naturally assumed that he was the Lord's 
choice; but as he looked to the Lord for direction in the 
matter he got the response— in what manner we know 
not— which constitutes the Golden Text of this Study. 

Judged from the human standpoint of appearance, age, 
ability, etc., Eliab was the most suitable person in Jesse's 
family to be the king over the nation, but not so in the 

R5656 : page 89 

Lord's sight. The Lord was looking at the heart, and 
had already selected David as a man after his own heart, 
although, at this time being under age, his father had 
not thought worth while to send for him to be present at 
the feast. As one after another of Jesse's sons appeared, 
the Prophet found not him whom the Lord's Spirit indicated 
as the one to be anointed. Then he inquired, "Are 
all thy children here?" Jesse suddenly remembered that 
he had another boy, his youngest, who was in the field 
with his sheep, and sent for him. 

THE ANTITYPICAL LORD'S ANOINTED 

Our Golden Text appeals to all Christians in connection 
with the High Calling of the Gospel Age, and year 
by year experience shows us its general applicability. We, 
too, as the Lord's messengers, are seeking for those to 
be anointed with the oil of gladness, the Holy Spirit, 
that they may be kings and priests unto God in the Kingdom 
which He is about to establish and which will supersede 
present kingdoms. We too, like the Prophet Samuel, 
might feel afraid to proceed with this work of anointing 
the successors of present institutions, did we not realize 
that the work of sealing the Elect of the Lord, which is 
now in progress, is a secret work, which the world cannot 
understand. Indeed, none understand this matter of 
the sealing, the anointing of the Holy Spirit, except those 
who have received it; and they are all of the David class. 



The name David signifies Beloved; and as it applied 
especially to our Lord and Master, of whom it was said 
by Jehovah, "This is My beloved Son," so also it applies 
to all the members of His Body, each of whom must be 
beloved, else he cannot be acceptable as a member. Of 
such the Head says, "The Father Himself loveth you"; 
and again, He says that we should love one another as 
He has loved us. It is not too much to say that all who 
receive this anointing of the Lord must ultimately be of 
this David, or beloved, character. The spirit of love must 
be in them— love for the Lord and love one for the other; 
else they are none of His. 

In seeking the Lord's anointed, who shall by and by 
reign in Millennial glory for the blessing of the world, 
as antitypes of David, we notice that as he was counted 
by his brethren as too insignificant to be considered in this 
connection, so also are those whom the Lord is choosing 
and anointing for His Heavenly Kingdom. Our Lord 
Jesus was disesteemed of His brethren, and when the 
suggestion was made that He should be the Lord's 
Anointed, His people hid, as it were, their faces from 
Him— disdained Him, despised Him, and considered Him 
hopeless respecting anything great or glorious— "a root 
out of a dry ground." The same has been true respecting 
the members of His Body, the elect Church. They also 
have been despised and rejected of men; and of them the 
Apostle declares, "We are made as the filth of the world, 
and are the offscouring of all things"— for Christ's sake, 
for the Truth's sake.— 1 Corinthians 4:13. 

WHO CAN READ THE HEART? 

Again he declares, "Ye see your calling, brethren, how 
that not many wise men after the flesh, not many 
mighty, not many noble, are called." St. James asks, 
"Hath not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith 
and heirs of the Kingdom which He hath promised to 
them that love Him!" This principle of the Divine 
selection of things that are not esteemed amongst men, 
to bring to naught the things that are esteemed by men, 
is noticeable throughout this Gospel Age. Often have 
we, like the Prophet Samuel, looked about amongst men 
seemingly eligible to a place in the Kingdom— socially, 
intellectually, morally, educationally— and in the esteem 
of men, and have expected that surely the Lord would 
sanction their anointing with the oil of gladness and grant 
them a knowledge of the Truth pertaining to the Kingdom, 
only to find ourselves mistaken and to get a fresh 
lesson on the fact that God looketh not on the outward 
appearance, but on the heart. 

We concede that we are unable to read the heart; but 
we are fully satisfied to accept the Divine decision in 
such matters and to trust that when in due time all the 
secrets of this present life shall be disclosed we shall 
then be able to understand the meaning of the Lord's 
selections more completely than we do now. We shall 



then be able to see what a difference there was between 
the hearts of those whom the Lord accepted and the 
hearts of those, outwardly humble, whom He did not so 
highly favor in respect to the Kingdom call. Meantime, 
we must simply wait and trust the Lord and accept 
His decisions, as expressed by our dear Redeemer when 
He said, "I thank Thee, Father, Lord of Heaven and 
earth, because Thou hast hidden these things from the 
wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes; even 
so, Father; for so it seemed good in Thy sight." 

Instructed respecting the Divine methods, we are not 
to despise the least, the most ignoble or illiterate of those 
who give evidence of a purity and honesty of heart toward 
God, and to whom He seems to give the anointing of His 
Spirit and the "ear to hear." Rather, while making known 
the Message to all as we have opportunity, we are to rejoice 
especially with those upon whom the Lord's favor 
is manifested, regardless of their earthly surroundings, 
etc. ("The Lord knoweth them that are His"); and it is 
for us to recognize, to honor and to co-operate with all 
such, as the ambassadors and representatives of our Lord 
and Master. 

Often have we thought, as we have looked over a congregation 
of the Lord's people and beheld some not prepossessing 
in personal appearance, some not well educated 
or refined, some ignoble— but nevertheless bearing the 
marks of the anointing of the Lord, the light of the Truth 
shining in their faces, the confidence and hope of the 
Truth inspiring them, and their lives indicating a transformation 
from the kingdom of darkness into the Kingdom 
of God's dear Son— often have we thought that had 
the Lord sent us forth to seek His Bride, we might have 
ignorantly passed by some of His choice jewels and have 
gathered in some whom He rejects as unworthy— because 
we are unable to read the heart. This thought should 
make us very humble, gentle and meek toward all, and 
very trustful of the Lord and very much inclined to look 
for His leading in respect to our labors as His servants- 
just as the Prophet Samuel looked to the Lord in connection 
with the anointing of David. 

A PICTURE OF THE MILLENIUM 

Samuel's words, "We will not sit down until he come 
hither," referred to the feast of which they were about 
to partake. It was the custom that, after the sacrifice had 
been offered, the sanctified persons present and those in 
spirit sharing in the sacrifice might join in a feast, eating 
the flesh and thus celebrating a communion with the Lord. 
It was this feast that the Prophet decided should not be 
commenced until David's arrival. Indeed, by reason of 
being the Lord's anointed, he would be the most important 
person present at the gathering. 

Perhaps in this also we can see a figure of the Lord's 
blessing in the Divine Plan. A feast of fat things has been 
designed for the whole world of mankind. But the feast 



cannot be participated in until the justifying and sanctifying 
sacrifice has been killed. More than this, the feast 

R5656 : page 90 

cannot be commenced until first the Anointed One shall 
come and shall receive the anointing. The anointing began 
with our Lord, the Head of the Church, and throughout 
the Gospel Age has been flowing down upon the members 
of His Body, the Church. The Sacrifice has been 
killed; and we, as members of Christ, have been participating 
in the sacrifice. Shortly the whole matter will have 
been accomplished; and then, as the Lord's anointed, the 
feast of fat things will be spread— the Anointed One, 
Head and Body, being the principal in that great antitypical 
feast. 

The blessing and power of the Lord accompanied 
David's anointing in some manner— just how we may not 
understand; for the manifestation of the Spirit was not 
the same then as it is with the Church, since Pentecost. 
(John 7:39.) However, in some manner God's blessing 
and power were with David, enabling him to progress in 
knowledge, etc., and preparing him for the duties of the 
office to which he had been anointed. May we not consider 
as an antitype to this, the anointing which comes 
upon the Church from the time of her acceptance with 
the Lord? Ours is not a physical anointing nor are the 
blessings conferred of a temporal character. It is as 
New Creatures that we are anointed, that we grow in 
grace, knowledge and love; and it is as New Creatures 
that by and by we shall be perfected in the First Resurrection 
and come to the Throne with our Lord and Master 
as our Head. 



R5653 : page 90 

"JEHOVAH IS MY SHEPHERD" 

-APRIL 18.-PSALM 23.- 

THE INFLUENCE OF THE PSALMS-THE MOST TOUCHING OF 
THEM ALL-DAVID A SHEPHERD-HIS INTEREST IN HIS SHEEP 
-SUGGESTIVE OF THE HEAVENLY SHEPHERD'S INTEREST 
IN HIS FLOCK-HIS SHEEP SHALL NOT LACK-HE GIVES 
THEM REST-HE FEEDS THEM-HE REFRESHES THEM 
WITH THE WATER OF LIFE-HE RESTORETH MY SOUL -HE 
LEADETH ME-EVEN THROUGH THE DARK VALLEY I WILL 
FEAR NO EVIL-HIS ROD AND HIS STAFF-HIS TABLE FOR 
HIS PEOPLE-THE ANOINTING HE GIVES-GOODNESS 
AND MERCY EVER. 

"Jehovah is my Shepherd."— Psalm 23:1. 

IT IS safe to say that no other collection of 



poems has accomplished as much good as the 

Book of Psalms. Its sentiments seem to 

touch the soul at every turn— in joy, in sorrow. 

Referring to the Twenty-third Psalm, 

Beecher wrote, "It is the nightingale among 

the Psalms. It is small, of a homely 

feather, singing shyly out of obscurity; but 

it has filled the air of the whole world with 

melodious joy"; and Spurgeon said, "This 

is the Pearl of Psalms, whose soft and pure radiance delights 

every eye." 

Only the people of God, in covenant relationship with 
Him, can properly appreciate this Psalm and apply its 
gracious sentiments to themselves. The Psalmist David 
could do this, because he belonged to the favored nation 
which God had taken into covenant relationship with 
Himself at Mount Sinai. The Israelites had covenanted 
to walk in the Lord's way and to obey His statutes; and 
God in turn had covenanted with them that He would, in 
proportion as they would do this, bestow His blessing upon 
their every interest. And perfect obedience to that 
Covenant and its Law would have been rewarded with 
everlasting life. We see, as the Apostle explains, that 
such a complete obedience was impossible. "By the deeds 
of the Law shall no flesh be justified in Thy sight." 

Comparatively few of the Jews even did their best to 
live up to the requirements of the Law; but the Prophet 
David evidently was one of these, however far short he 
came of perfection; for the Lord declared him "a man 
after His own heart." If he made failures, he confessed 
them, repented, received his punishment, and rejoiced in 
restoration to the Lord's favor, striving the more in the 
future to maintain his fellowship with God. It is interesting 
for us to note the kind of man with whom the Lord 
is well pleased— the kind of sheep in which the Great 
Shepherd is interested. And of this same class, of course, 
were others— the Prophets and lesser personages— all who 
endeavored to live godly. 

THE GREAT SHEPHERD AND HIS FLOCK 

In an important sense this Psalm is applicable to our 
Lord Jesus and His Church. All the features of the 
Psalm are applicable to our Redeemer Himself as well as 
to His followers, whom He styles the sheep of His flock. 
To His Church He is the Representative of the Father, so 
fully, so completely, that He could say truthfully, "He 
that hath seen Me hath seen the Father." No human 
being could see the Heavenly Father and live, as the 
Scriptures declare; and those who saw and understood 
Jesus to be the Son of God, caught the best possible 
glimpse of the Heavenly Father. And so we all see Jesus 
as the Representative of the Father, the Son of the great 
King, the Son of the great Shepherd, Jehovah. 

Jesus and His Church are more particularly the sheep 
of Jehovah's flock than were the Israelites of the Jewish 



Age; for the relationship of the Jews was through Moses, 
while the relationship of the Church is through Christ and 
the superior Covenant which centers in Him. It is well 
that we see this clearly; else how could we know whether 
or not we might apply the gracious sentiments of this 
Psalm to ourselves? It would not be right for a worldly 
person to apply this Psalm to himself. He would be deceiving 
himself; for he is not one of Jehovah's sheep. 
Nothing is more clear than this. Jesus declared that there 
is only one way of entering the sheepfold; namely, through 

R5654 : page 90 

the door. And He declared Himself to be the Door. 

HOW TO BECOME A TRUE SHEEP 

By nature we are sinners under Jehovah's sentence of 
death, and not His sheep. He has purposed a great Plan 
for the world in general, which will begin to operate as 
soon as Messiah's Kingdom is established. However, in 
the interim He is receiving special sheep— during this 
Gospel Age; and Jesus tells how, saying, "If any man will 
come after Me [be My disciple, My follower, My sheep], 
let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow 
Me." Self-denial is the first step— self-renunciation, giving 
up of the will to God. The Covenant reads, "Gather 
My saints together unto Me; those who have made a 
Covenant with Me by sacrifice." All who would be the 
Lord's sheep must make this Covenant of Sacrifice; it is 
the condition under which they may be accepted. 

Moreover, as the Jews could come only through their 
appointed mediator, Moses, so we can come into this higher 
sheepfold only under the antitypical, greater Moses, 
Christ. There is none other name given. Once having 
taken this step, once having come into the sheepfold by 
the Door— in the approved manner— we have the Message 
of God, saying, "All things are yours; for ye are Christ's 

R5654:page91 

and Christ is God's." What this means is described in 
this Psalm.— 1 Corinthians 3:22,23. 

ALL WANTS ABUNDANTLY SUPPLIED 

The Lord's sheep, abiding in perfection of relationship 
with Him, will lack nothing. Their every need will 
be supplied. This may not mean greater earthly wealth 
or name or fame or luxury. The Lord's sheep are New 
Creatures, spirit beings, who are temporarily dwelling in 
the flesh like other people, but who really are waiting for 
their change, to be completed by a share in the First Resurrection. 
The Lord's blessings to Natural Israel were 
earthly blessings, supplying their every earthly need; but 
His blessings to Spiritual Israel are spiritual favors. "No 



good thing will He withhold" from these— yea, even 
chastisements and sorrowful experiences that may be necessary 
for their spiritual development. 

The Psalm assures us that, as the Lord's sheep, we 
shall be provided with green pastures and the cool, refreshing 
waters of Truth. Moreover, while thus being 
spiritually fed and refreshed, we shall have the peace of 
God, as is implied in the suggestion that the sheep will 
lie down in the green pastures. But alas! Not all of the 
sheep have full confidence in the Shepherd and are fully 
resigned to have no will but His. Some are continually 
getting into difficulty, because they neglect the green pastures 
and cool, refreshing waters of Truth found in the 
Word of God— because, goat-like, they sometimes wander 
off into the desert, straying far from the Shepherd and 
attempting to feed themselves on the indigestible things 
of the present life, on which no spiritual nature can thrive. 

Yet even such straying sheep the Shepherd will not 
leave, if they have become truly His. He goes after 
them, as the Psalm represents. His rod and His staff 
are their comfort. With the rod he beats off their enemies, 
the wolves that would injure; and with the crook 
of His staff He wisely and carefully assists the entangled 
sheep out of its difficulties— out from amongst the cares of 
this life, the entanglements and deceitfulness of riches, 
and the besetments of sin and of Satan. Many of the 
sheep of the Lord's flock thus can sing, "He restoreth my 
soul"— He brings me back to Himself; He makes me 
again to know, to appreciate, to enjoy His provision for 
me and to see how much better it is than anything I 
could have provided for myself. 

A further experience is next brought to our view— 
the Shepherd's leading. "He leadeth me in the paths of 
righteousness." He causes me, even by my own stumblings 
and difficulties, to learn to appreciate the desirableness 
of His ways and the undesirableness of every 
other way. All His ways are perfect, are righteous. He 
leads us not contrary to our wills, but in harmony therewith, 
to prove what is the good, next the acceptable, and 
finally the perfect will of God.— Romans 12:2. 

THE VALLEY OF DEATH'S SHADOW 

All of our lives we have been in the shadow of this 
great Valley of Death. Only father Adam was ever on 
the mountain-tops of life. He lost his footing there, and 
descended gradually the slopes into this Valley of the 
Shadow of Death. We, his children, were all born here. 
We are dying daily; we are surrounded by dying conditions. 
We have merely the hope that the Lord will lead 
His sheep back to the heights of life. He is now leading 
His sheep of this Gospel Age— the Church, the Body of 
Christ. By and by He will lead the world, during His 
Millennial Kingdom; as He declared, "Other sheep I have, 
that are not of this fold; them also must I bring,. ..and 
there shall be one fold and one Shepherd."— John 10:16. 



"Oh, sometimes the shadows are deep, 
And rough seems the path to the goal!" 

The end of this Valley of Shadow is near, not merely 
in the sense that we shall soon reach the end of life's journey, 
but especially in the sense that the New Day is about 
to dawn, of which the Lord, our Shepherd, declared the 
result: "The Sun of Righteousness shall arise with healing 
in His beams." (Malachi 4:2.) The final result will 
be that there shall be no more sighing, no more crying, 
no more dying; but the whole world will begin to emerge 
from the Valley of the Shadow of Death. For a thousand 
years they will be rising again to the glorious heights 
of human perfection from which Adam fell, and the right 
to return to which is secured for all by the death of Jesus, 
"the Just for the unjust." 

THE CHURCH'S BETTER TABLE 

But this precious Psalm seems especially to apply to 
the Church, as we have said. Thus we appropriately read 
that the Lord's people of the present time have an especially 
prepared table, where they may partake even in 
the presence of their enemies. That will not be true in 
the future; for no enemies nor anything to hurt or injure 
shall then be permitted. (Isaiah 1 1 :9.) But how true it 
is that the Lord's consecrated people, even when misunderstood, 
misrepresented, defamed and opposed, are still 
privileged to feast at the Lord's Table! The table represents 
God's provision for their needs— the promises of 
God, the assurances of His favor, etc. 

Another evidence that the Psalm belongs especially to 
the Church of this Age is the statement, "Thou anointest 
my Head with oil." Jesus, the Head of the Church, was 
anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows. That 
holy anointing oil used on the priests and kings of Israel 
typified the Holy Spirit, which came upon the Church 
representatively in Jesus. And this same anointing oil 
has come down over all the members of the Church, 
which is the Body of Christ, as we read in Psalm 133:2. 

THE CUP BOTH SWEET AND BITTER 

"My cup runneth over." The word cup is used in the 
Scriptures to represent a draft, sometimes sweet, sometimes 
bitter, sometimes both. The intimation is that the 
Lord's Cup signifies bitter experiences and trials in the 
present time; as Jesus said, "The Cup which My Father 
hath poured for Me, shall I not drink it?" And this was 
the Cup— His Cup— which He offered to His disciples and 
which we, in becoming His disciples, propose to share with 
Him, and which is symbolically represented in the Communion 
Cup.-l Corinthians 10:15-17. 

It is sweet and precious, in many senses of the word 
to be privileged to participate in the sufferings of Christ, 



in any sacrifices or services for the Lord and His Cause. 
The sweet mingles freely with the bitter. But the Lord 
promises that in the future the Cup of new wine in the 
Kingdom shall more than compensate for any bitterness 
of the present time. Our Cup is full, but we would not 
wish it one drop less. 

"Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the 
days of my life." How precious the thought— God's goodness, 
God's mercy, with all those who are truly His in 
Christ— following us day by day, moment by moment, and 
according to the Scriptures making all things work together 
for our good! Then the grand finale is signified, 
"I shall dwell in the House of the Lord forever"— in the 
Heavenly House, of which the Redeemer said, "In My 
Father's House are many mansions;. ..I go to prepare 
a place for you," and "I will come again and receive you 
unto Myself." Then, at His Second Coming, with our 
glorious change, we shall enter the Father's House in the 

R5654 : page 92 

fullest sense of the word, on the spirit plane, which flesh 
and blood does not inherit. 

This shall be the everlasting portion of God's Elect— 
the Church. The great blessings subsequently to come to 
the world— earthly blessings— will in no sense interfere 
with, but enhance, the glory of the Church; for she will 
be engaged with her Lord in dispensing blessings to the 
earthly sheep.— Galatians 3:29. 



R5655 : page 92 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

"HE SHALL COME FORTH AND BLESS THE PEOPLE" 

QUESTION.-"Unto them that look for Him 
shall He appear the second time." Who are 
these who will look for our Lord? 

Answer.— The Apostle is here (Hebrews 9:28) 
tracing the work of Christ as the 
great High Priest. He represents our Lord 
as having offered the Sin-offering, on the 
Day of Atonement, in its two parts— the 
bullock and the goat— and as being now in 
the Most Holy.* When He has accomplished 
His work, He will appear the second time— not 
to repeat any of the offerings of the Gospel Age, not as a 
Sin-offering— but He shall appear unto salvation, to all 
those who look for Him. We can see that His words 
might apply to the Church. They will know of His 
second appearance. They will have an appreciation 
of that fact before He will be revealed to the world. He 
will appear to them that look for Him. 



But we are to remember that our Lord's going into 
the Most Holy at the close of the antitypical Day of 
Atonement with the blood of the Lord's goat class, would 
indicate the death of that goat. The under priests will 
be with Him, as members of Himself. Then He shall 
come forth the second time, after this second presentation 
of the blood, not to offer a sacrifice— for the sacrificing 
will all be finished— but to bless the people. 

Who then are these who look for Him and to whom 
He will appear the second time, unto salvation? We 
answer that in the Time of Trouble, and subsequently, 
the whole world will begin to look for the Deliverer. All 
nations will be desiring Him— not as a Sin-offering again, 
but for their salvation. As mankind will get their eyes 
open to their need of salvation, they will be looking for 
this deliverance by The Christ in glory. They will never 
see Him with their natural eyes. But they will look for 
Him in the same sense that we now see Jesus— they will 
see Him with the eye of faith. 

THEY SHALL "FALL UPON THEIR FACES" 

At that time many nations shall say, "Come, let us go 
up to the Mountain of the Lord's House. He will show 
us of His ways, and we will walk in His paths." (Isaiah 2:3.) 
Another Scripture assures us that, when He shall 
appear, we also, the Bride class, shall appear with Him in 
glory. It is after the sacrificing is all finished and the 
Church glorified that He comes forth the second time 
unto salvation, saving and blessing all the people. The 
high priest in the type did not return into the Most Holy 
again, but lifted up his hands and blessed the people. 

R5656 : page 92 

Then the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the people, 
and the people gave a great shout and fell upon their 
faces. (Leviticus 9:23,24.) So the people of the world 
will prostrate themselves before the great Messiah. And 
this will be the work of Christ during the thousand years 
—uplifting mankind and giving them the benefit of the 
Atonement Sacrifice. 



*THE TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF THE BETTER SACRIFICES, an illustrated 
booklet of 13 1 pages, explains fully the interesting rites and ceremonies 
of the Hebrew Tabernacle in the wilderness and also throws a new refulgent 
light upon their typical signification. Send 6c in stamps for 
sample copy. Address THE WATCH TOWER, Brooklyn, N.Y. 

MANY CHRISTIANS NOT YET ENLIGHTENED 

Question.— Is there any one at the present time outside 
of Present Truth who has the Holy Spirit? 
Answer.— There are various degrees of the Spirit of 



holiness which may be possessed by the child of God at 
various times in his experience. We may ourselves have 
more of the Holy Spirit now than we have ever had 
before, implying that there was a time when we did not 
have so much. Or there may be some who have less, 
implying that they have not been growing spiritually, and 
are grieving the Holy Spirit with which they were sealed. 

We are not to think that all who are begotten of the 
Holy Spirit are exactly on the same plane, in either their 
spiritual appetites or their development or their knowledge 
of God's Plan. We grow in grace as we grow in 
knowledge. If our measure of grace lessens, the knowledge 
begins to fade. The more grace we have, the more 
understanding is ours. As a matter of fact, the whole 
world has been laboring under such delusions that we 
are surprised, when we "wake up," to see how little we 
did know— to see how ignorant we were of some of the 
precious messages God has given us. 

And as we were children of God before we received 
full knowledge, so we believe it is possible for others to 
be children of God without having the full knowledge. 
We are living in the end of the Harvest time, when, we 
believe, the Lord is causing the knowledge of the Truth 
to encircle the world. And yet the Adversary is raising 
"dust," calumny, to hinder the people from appreciating it. 

It is in very rare cases that God does as He did with 
Saul of Tarsus— strike him down with a great light, 
brighter than the sun at noonday. And it is because we 
believe that there are still children of God attempting to 
live on husks and skimmed milk— that there are such 
brethren in Christ who need the assistance we are able 
to give them— that we are trying to help them. Otherwise 
we would abandon all special effort at propaganda, 
knowing that there will be favorable conditions for all 
as soon as the Kingdom shall be established. 

The Bible speaks of the Great Company class as the 
"great multitude," as though the foolish virgin class were 
larger than the wise virgin class. And the Scriptures 
indicate that the Great Company class will not all have 
fled from Babylon before its overthrow. "Come out of 
her, My people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, 
and that ye receive not of her plagues." This call has 
been going out for now thirty-seven years. It is God's call. 

The Scriptures show us that some will come out, and 
others will not come out, will not be released from 
Babylonish fetters. These foolish virgins will see that 
their lack of love and zeal has lost them a place in the 
Bride class. But they are virgins, nevertheless, and will 
have a place, or portion, as the companions of the Bride. 
They will follow her into the King's Palace. They will 
be bridesmaids, if you please— a position of lesser honor; 
but they will attain everlasting life. So we have reason 
to believe that the numbers of God's people begotten of 
the Holy Spirit and still in Babylon are considerable. 
If we were in their place and they in our place, we feel 
sure that they would make heroic efforts to help us out 



of Babylon; so we are doing likewise. 
R5656 : page 93 
HOW FAR SHALL WE SACRIFICE LEGITIMATE PLEASURES? 

Question.— What are the rights and privileges of the 
flesh— not sinful— which are to be sacrificed by the New 
Creature in Christ Jesus? 

Answer.— There are certain rights and privileges 
which belong to all human beings. There are tastes and 
desires that are not sinful. It is not sinful to eat and 
enjoy that which is wholesome and nutritious; not sinful 
to have preferences as to what one shall eat. It is not 
sinful for one to have strawberries in the winter when 
that fruit is expensive, if one has the money to buy them 
and if he obtained the money rightfully. It would not 
be sinful to pay fifty cents or a dollar a box for them. 
It is no crime to have a fine house, servants, a pleasure 
yacht, an automobile, etc. If there are entertainments, 
concerts, operas, and these are of good moral tone, one 
has a perfect right to engage a seat for the same at five 
dollars, and to employ a taxicab in going. One as a 
natural man has a perfect right, if he is able, to any of 
these things, which are not sinful in themselves. Things 
that are sinful should, of course, always be avoided. 

But when one undertakes to become a follower of 
Christ, he accepts instead of his own will the will of 
God. And as Christ pleased not Himself, but used 
His time, His influence, His life, for the good of others, 
so those who become His disciples will forego their 
rights and privileges, whenever these would conflict with 
their service to God. The Christian could not reason 
the same as he did before he made his consecration. He 
could not say, I will spend five dollars to go to the opera; 
but he will be obliged to say, My means are consecrated 
to the Lord. The same principle will control his judgment 
as to whether he shall have an automobile or not; 
whether he shall have a fine house or shall own any 
house; whether he shall have the finest food; whether he 
shall wear fine clothing, or plainer clothing, etc. It will 
control his judgment as to his use of consecrated time. 

But no one is to judge another in regard to the use 
of money or time in his possession as the Lord's steward. 
It is for the individual himself to decide how he will use 
these. And it is the Lord who will decide whether he 
has been a faithful steward or an unfaithful one. The 
Lord will decide that those who, like Jesus, shall sacrifice 
the enjoyable earthly things, that thereby they may 
the better glorify God, shall have the more than compensating 
spiritual blessings, and shall receive the reward 
of the Kingdom and its positions of honor. 



R5654 : page 93 



PREACHERS BACK OF MALICIOUS ATTACK 

ATTACKS now being made upon Pastor Russell 

in various newspapers were intended to have 

commenced November 1 . However, the war, so 

closely coinciding with the presentations of 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, temporarily intimidated 

those intent upon the assassination of his 

reputation. The great war threatened disaster 

here through financial complications which 

pressed everybody for awhile. The National 

Banking Reserve arrangement gave temporary 

relief, and shipments of grain at high prices 

have greatly stimulated business. Pastor Russell's enemies no 

longer fear in "looking after those things coming." Instead, 

they say, "This is only what the world has had before, but is 

on a more gigantic scale; it is not the prelude to Armageddon 

that Pastor Russell claims. All things will continue as they 

were. Our institutions will prosper and will not be swamped 

in anarchy, as he declares the Scriptures to teach." 

This boldness of feeling leads to aggressiveness. The 
preachers have approached some of the prominent newspapers. 
Newspaper men, not specially religious, are deceived 
by the preachers into supposing that there is something substantial 
in their claims. They wish to curry favor with the 
preachers, and improve the opportunity of hitting somebody 
when there is a religious excuse for so doing. As the Master 
foretold, they are saying "All manner of evil falsely" against 
the Pastor. This is for Christ's sake in the sense that it 
is to injure the Pastor's work, to hinder it— because he is 
telling the Truth; because the people are hearing the Truth, 
and therefore their shackles of ignorance and superstition 
are falling, their eyes of understanding are opening, and the 
lost key of knowledge is coming into their hands. 

We need not repeat explanations of matters nineteen years 
old and every way honorable and creditable to the Pastor, 
when rightly understood. But we should, perhaps, explain 
the latest device of the Adversary. It has been published 
and re-published everywhere that the Pastor had "abducted 
Ruth Galbraith," seventeen years old; that he was holding 
her from her freedom; that a Judge of a Philadelphia Court 
had issued a writ of Habeas Corpus commanding the Pastor 
to bring Ruth before him; Ruth being heir to some money 
that the Pastor sought to get control of. 

The whole matter is absolutely false from first to last. 
No Judge ever issued such an order. Ruth Galbraith was 
neither abducted nor restrained of her liberty. With her 
mother's consent she visited her sister, Mrs. William Hollister, 
who is a member of the Bethel Family. For a while 
she boarded and lodged in the neighborhood, but not in 
Bethel. Later, Pastor Russell was asked if Ruth might take 
her meals at Bethel. The explanation was made that Ruth 
was anxious to stay for a while in Brooklyn— that her health 
was not the best; that her brother had consumption; that 
Ruth's health demanded the change; that her mother had permitted 



her to come to Brooklyn on a visit; that meantime 

her monthly allowance from her father's estate had entirely 

stopped, and that she was without money to pay her board. 

The request was granted, she staying as the guest of her 

sister. Meantime Ruth's mother desired her return home, 

but Ruth refused to go. Called to Philadelphia in an endeavor 

to get her monthly allowance from the Executor, 

Ruth was accompanied by her sister and brother-in-law, 

William Hollister. Thereupon the mother's Attorney obtained 

a writ of Habeas Corpus on Mr. Hollister, requiring 

him to produce his sister-in-law in a Philadelphia Court. 

The Pastor at no time had anything to do with Ruth's 
leaving home, nor with her remaining away from home, nor 
with any of her affairs. 

Seeing how wonderfully the Adversary can accomplish 
evil purposes, circulate falsehoods and find agents for these 
services, proves to us that Satan is not yet bound; and that 
he has little difficulty in finding human servants. (2 Corinthians 4:4; 
Romans 6:16.) This fact should make us extremely 
skeptical respecting whatever we hear that is uncomplimentary 
to anybody. How do we know but that one-half, 
or more, of all the disreputable things mentioned in 
newspapers are as absolutely false and foundationless as 
this and other matters that appertain to Pastor Russell? 
We think it due to Pastor Russell and to the readers that 
this statement should appear in these columns, much as we 
dislike anything of a personal nature— always seeking to reserve 
these columns sacredly for the dissemination of the 
Divine Word and its interpretation. 

The slandering of God's people for righteousness' sake 
is represented in the burning of the "Lord's Goat" on the 
typical Atonement Day. Whatever ignominy befalls one 
member of the Body is shared by all. Whatever shame the 
Lord thus permits He could hinder; hence it must serve 
some good purpose— in testing our patience, love, loyalty, obedience, 
humility or what not. Let us not forget for one 
moment the Text for 1915— "The Cup which My Father hath 
poured, shall I not drink it?" 



R5656 : page 94 

INTERESTING LETTERS 

MORE VALUABLE THAN A YEAR IN COLLEGE 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The EUREKA DRAMA is now being shown here in one of 
the best halls of the city. Parts I. and II. have been shown 
already to a packed house each time, and an appreciative 
audience. Part III. is to be given tonight, D.V.; and request 
has been made for the hall, to give the three parts over 
again next week. Then later we expect to visit Trinidad, 
Grenada and other places of the West Indies. Follow up 
work is being planned for here, and a one-day Local Convention 



to be held next Sunday. I enclose a clipping from 
the Advocate. With much Christian love, 
Yours in the Master's service, by grace, 

ADDISON B. BLAKE. -Barbadoes, B.W.I. 
The clipping follows: 

"THE PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION" 

The beautiful PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, being now exhibited 
in all the large cities of America and Great Britain, 
presents, in startling and instructive motion and colored pictures- 
scientific, historical and Scriptural— the results of 
years of labor. The DRAMA begins with pictures showing 
this world's creation and preparation, including Edenic scenes 
and Adam's transgression. Step by step the ages are traversed, 
and in marvelous imagery, in pictures based on Bible 
prophecies, is portrayed the perfect man of the future, in 
full possession and full enjoyment of the promised unending 
Earthly Paradise. 

The PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION is shown free of all cost, 
under the auspices of the Associated Bible Students. This 
Association is backing and financing the DRAMA, which is 
supported by voluntary contributions. It has been well said 
that the four parts of the DRAMA and their lectures are more 
valuable than a year's course in college. Part I. traces Creation 
from star nebulae to the Deluge and its causes, and 
onward to the time of Moses. Part II. begins with Moses 
and carries us down through the Bible record of Israel's 
experiences to Jesus' miracles. Part III. leads our minds 
from Hosanna, through the Dark Ages of ignorance, superstition 
and cruelty, down to and into the future Age. The 
fame of the beautiful slides and films has reached far and 
wide. 

There are so many loud calls for the DRAMA it is impossible 
to meet them all immediately. Therefore Stereopticon 
views, in three parts taken from the DRAMA, are also being 
used at present in connection with the phonograph, in the 
smaller cities and villages. We are glad to welcome the visit 
of the latter form of the DRAMA to Barbadoes, and hope to 
see the complete DRAMA in the near future. 
Barbadoes Advocate. 



page 94 

COLPORTEURING WITH CREATION SCENARIO 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Early in the summer I took up sale of the SCENARIO, amid 
the hills and dales of this mountainous country. Used a 
bicycle first, for several hundred miles, then horse back; but 
in the hot weather Brother Cossar and I traveled together 
in his motor car. We had some happy experiences, telling 
to those who appeared to have the listening ear the wonderful 
story of God's love for the human family, His gracious provision 
for our redemption and recovery from the fall. We 



found some who were indeed Truth-hungry; and the Lord 
was pleased to use our imperfect service in bringing Truth 
blessings to some dear children of God. 

Stopping at a house where I had sold a SCENARIO and had 
induced the woman to buy a copy of Volume I. as well, a 
woman of beautiful character saw the little karatol volume 
and began to read it. Finding out who sold the book and 
the SCENARIO, she determined to come on to Penticton and 
seek a personal interview. I was rather surprised when I 
returned, to find her as a guest of my wife, but expecting 
to leave in a day or two, as the declaration of war in Europe 
had completely upset her business. A delayed letter compelled 
her to remain with us for about two weeks. This 
gave her just the opportunity she needed for reading the 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. She really had nothing else she 
could do. Of course, she met with us in the class and in 
devotional exercises. Her visit was a blessing, for we rejoiced 
to note how readily our dear Sister came into the 
light of Present Truth. This is one of several very happy 
experiences we have had during the past summer. 

A remarkable thing about the Sister's experience, which 
is a valuable lesson to "Truth people," is that she had lived 
with her married cousin in Seattle, who had read most of 
the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and professed to accept and 
rejoice in the Truth, but who retained her connection with 
her own Church (Congregational). Her influence for the 
Truth appears to have been nil while she retained her Church 
connection. 

When those who are connected with the nominal Church 
systems get a measure of light on Present Truth, I believe 
one of the first duties is to completely and quickly get out 
of Babylon. What our Lord has rejected should be rejected 
by His followers. 

Permit me to express my deepest gratitude for the ministrations 
of our beloved Pastor through THE WATCH TOWER, 

as well as the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, and also the PHOTO-DRAMA, 
and my confidence in our Pastor's faithfulness to 
the end of the race. When the Chief Shepherd shall be 
manifested, ye shall receive the Crown of Glory which fadeth 
not away. I am sure that many of the Lord's faithful followers 
will be filled with joy when they see Brother Russell 
honored in reward for faithful service on earth. 

Praying daily for our Heavenly Father's blessing and 
guidance to rest upon you all at Brooklyn, and the dear 
saints of our Lord Jesus everywhere, 

Your brother in Christ, 

THOS. C. WANLESS.-B.C, Canada. 



SAVED BY THE PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

As I advance farther and farther into the Light, I feel 
that I must write and tell you of the wondrous blessing that 
has come into my life through your instrumentality and that 



of all the Brothers and Sisters in the Truth whom I have 
been privileged to meet personally. 

I had almost been drawn into the quicksands of infidelity 
and feel that I was saved by the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, 
which was shown here last summer. I feel as though the 
DRAMA was sent here for my special benefit; and how I do 
thank and praise the Heavenly Father for it! I now have 
that peace which the world cannot give and which I would 
not part with for all its riches. 

I have the six volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and 
have read them, a veritable feast, after starving so long. 
Am searching the Scriptures daily and my Bible has become 
the dearest book in the world to me, whereas before it was 
never looked at. 

I have had a great desire to write and tell you what joy 
and peace have come into my life through your instrumentality, 
but have refrained because of the thought of the tremendous 
amount of work you are doing. But I feel sure you 
will be glad to hear that another soul has found peace through 
your efforts. 

God bless you and all the workers, and may we all stand 
steadfast in the Faith till we hear our blessed Master say, 
"It is enough; come up higher"! 

Yours in His service, MRS. LOIS GARDNER.-Mo. 



R5657 : page 94 

A "TRUTH" BABY 

MY VERY DEAR PASTOR:- 

I am sending my baby's photo to wish you the very happiest 
of new years; I hope and believe that the year will indeed 
"Ring in The Christ that is to be." 

I think you may be interested in this baby's history, as it 
seems to prove your theory that "Truth" babies are better 
than other ones. When my other children were born, my surroundings 
were much as you advocate in Volume VI. They 
are very good children, and the girl has recently consecrated 
herself to the Lord. 

I think it was about fifteen months before my last dear 
child's birth that I read THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES, rejoiced 
greatly and immediately gave myself to the Lord- 
as did my husband. During the interval before baby's birth, 
we moved twice— the second time into a tent, as no houses 
were available. City street improvements exposed me to the 
most terrific and incessant noises, and once, in blasting, the 
tent was thrown down without warning. Then we had a 
heavy snow which bore down our tent, compelling us to go 
out into two feet of snow, in the night! I tried to be "worth 
while" and smile when everything went wrong. The power 
of the Truth was greater than I knew, for baby has the best 
nature of any of my children— he is really unselfish; people 
have remarked upon it to me. 

When he was born I had another trial; his arm was 



paralyzed and hung helpless. I knew Restitution was coming 
and although I found it hard to say, "Thy will be done," 
when I said it from my heart, that night the arm distinctly 
moved. It is now as the other. Hoping I have not taken too 
much of your time, I remain, 
Your sister in Christ, ELEANOR I. CHILDE.--B.C. 

R5657 : page 95 

"TOILS OF THE ROAD WILL SEEM NOTHING WHEN --" 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in our Redeemer's name! Ever since I read 
THE WATCH TOWER of Dec. 1 . I have felt that I must write 
and tell you how much I appreciate it. THE WATCH TOWERS 
are all rich, but this one seemed to impress me so much, and 
especially the first two articles--"SPIRIT-BEGOTTEN SONS OF 
GOD AND THEIR DEVELOPMENT," and "TEMPTATIONS, PECULIAR 
TO THE NEW CREATION." 

Oh, how the dear Lord is blessing us with meat in due 
season for the Household of Faith, through that honored 
Servant! I have so many things to be thankful for. Not 
long since husband and the children opposed me in the 
Truth, thought mamma was foolish and really cranky about 
her religion; but now they are in sweet accord and are learning 
to love the Lord, the Truth and the Brethren, and you 
may know that I greatly appreciate the fact. 

My trials have seemed very crushing of late, but I consider 
them all as blessings, and thank the Lord for all my 
experiences. It seems so natural for us to want every one 
to love us and to think and speak well of us. But we know 
that when we earnestly contend for "the faith once delivered 
to the saints" it cannot be. But how glad I am that I can 
suffer a little for Him! The sufferings of this present time 
are nothing to compare with the glory that shall follow. 

My only fear is that I shall not do my duty to the Lord. 
I know He is going to do His part. There are times when 
it seems He has hidden His face from me, but I know He 
is only seeing if I will trust Him where I cannot trace Him. 
And if I did not get my polishing in this way, it would have 
to come in some other; and the Lord certainly knows best. 

Yours in His Service, MRS . HOMER GRUVER. 



EUREKA DRAMA SUCCESS 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

We are indeed rejoicing in the blessed privilege of service 
in the Eureka Drama work. The Heavenly Father is surely 
blessing us, and the public is very appreciative. We have 
been in the work about four weeks, and have served thirteen 
places and about 4,000 people. 

At one place, after the third part, a dear brother's wife 
stated that she had made a full consecration of her all and 
desired to be immersed. This was a cause of rejoicing for 



the dear brother, and all rejoiced with him. 

Of course, we are having some trials, but that only makes 
us the more determined to press on. With much Christian 
love to all, 

I am your servant in Christ, JOS. ISAAC, JR.— Texas. 

"I HAD SOUGHT THE WORLD AROUND, 
PEACE AND COMFORT NOWHERE FOUND" 

A WATCH TOWER reader sends us the following interesting 
letter from a leading educator of Kentucky— a further evidence 
that a gleaning work is in progress: 
MR. JAMES H. WARE, 
, Ky. 

DEAR FRIEND :- 

Hardly could you have more effectually surprised me, or 
more thoroughly pleased me, than you have in presenting me 
with this handsomely bound set of Bible Students' Helps. 

I read (tried to read) the Bible through at 14 years. I 
tried it again at 44, and again made a prayerful effort at 55 
to read the Bible and Apocrypha. 

I also have studied ten of the great Religions, read many 
infidel authors and much materialistic philosophy; yet these 
six little volumes are clearly exhibiting to me more truth than 
I had discovered in all this study. 

I can read any of the poets, philosophy, or deep-laid allegory; 
but I had failed to read the Bible so as to agree with 
current orthodoxy. And you may know how rejoiced I am 
that finally you have placed me in company with Truth-Seekers 
who discover to me vividly and fearlessly the ways of God 
that I in much fear had seen, because it seemed that no other 
corroborated my discovery. 

I think I prize your present more highly than any gift I 
have ever received. Thanking you, W. H. PEPPER.— Ky. 



AS TO SECURING HALLS FOR EUREKA DRAMA 

DEAR FRIENDS :- 

It may interest you to know of the method we have 
adopted for securing halls for the EUREKA DRAMA work. 
When we first started, some one would go ahead and secure 
halls in advance and advertise. This method, we found, had 
difficulties and was expensive. 

Now we have adopted a different method, which seems 
thus far to have worked well, at small expense. We now 
make arrangements for halls by telephone, which costs, in 
most cases, not more than fifteen cents, and is sometimes 
free, according to distance. These arrangements are made 
not more than a few days in advance; then we move to our 
town or village in the morning and the first thing we do is 
to put up our posters and window cards, and advertise from 
house to house and in the rural districts through the schools. 
In the evening we have our show, and usually have crowds. 



Yours, in the Master's service, C. F. DUWE.— Ohio. 



R5661 : page 95 

THE FAITH THAT OVERCOMES 

When peace, sweet peace, enfolded me, 
When darkness turned to light, 

When, by Faith's miracle, I stood 
All blameless in His sight, 

What more, O soul of mine, couldst ask; 
Is not the wonder done? 

Lord, justifying Faith is much- 
Grant Faith to overcome! 

Then as I passed beyond "the door," 

And paused beside "the bread," 
And by the light of "candlestick" 

My Father's counsel read; 
Then crossed in "wedding robe" and stood 

Where Love's pure incense burns, 
Here still, my heart in need, cried out 

For Faith that overcomes. 

And when the brighter light did shine 

And God's "own servant" led 
With kindly hand, and seated me 

At "feast of fat things" spread, 
What more, O heart insatiate? 

Dost longing still return? 
Yes; wisdom from on High is good, 

But Faith must overcome. 

And when the fiery darts fell thick 

And trembling heart and hand 
Could scarcely bind the sacrifice 

With Love's unyielding band; 
While mental anguish scarce could bear 

The fire that needs must burn, 
With streaming eyes I plead for Faith, 

For Faith to overcome. 

And when in "pastures green," I lay 

Me down by "waters still," 
To read and pray and gather strength 

For coming good or ill, 
Yet still a note of warning rang— 

The journey ne'er is done; 
Improve the time, build up thy Faith, 

The Faith to overcome. 

Ah! ever thus it must be so; 
The Bride's Gethsemane; 
The Bridegroom trod this way before; 



Wouldst thou more favored be? 
Nay, Father, nay! Thy will be done, 

His course my feet would run; 
But Father, dear, I pray Thee, hear; 

Give faith to overcome. 

So on I go, through weal and woe, 

His faithful child to be, 
To tell the Story, ever new, 

To poor humanity. 
With one hand wide I'll scatter Truth 

From morn till set of sun, 
And keep the other lifted high 

For Faith, to overcome. 

And O, some day I'll enter in, 

His beauteous face I'll see; 
Somewhere within the Father's House 

He has a place for me. 
And as I bow low at His feet 

And hear His sweet "Well done!" 
I'll say, Dear Lord, for every step 

Thou gav'st Faith to o'ercome. 

MARY SANGSTON. 



page 96 
International Bible Students Association Classes 

MEMORIAL SUPPER AT NEW YORK CITY TEMPLE. 
West 63rd Street-Nr. B'way. 



Last year the Memorial Supper was celebrated on its anniversary at 
the Brooklyn Tabernacle; but this year we propose to celebrate it at the 
New York City Temple, which has nearly double the capacity. While we 
would gladly welcome all Christian believers who acknowledge the value 
of the death of Christ as the redemption-price for the world, and who 
have fully consecrated their lives to walk in His steps, nevertheless we 
do not urge the present at the Temple of those who can conveniently 
meet with their local Classes on this occasion. It is a family celebration; 
and, while all of the Lord's people are of one family, there is a particular 
sense in which each little group or class of Bible Students is a family 
in the Lord— an Ecclesia. In celebrating this Supper, each should 
do his part in making the home celebration an impressive, soul-satisfying 
one— not forgetting the presence of the Lord; as He said, "Where two 
or three of you are met in My name, there am I." 

The Associated Bible Students of New York City will, of course, 
feel perfectly welcome to bring any of their Christian friends with them, 
but it is hardly an occasion for inviting in those who have not yet made 
a consecration of their hearts to the Lord. We hope to meet, as usual, 
at 7:45 p.m. and to begin the service proper at 8 o'clock, Sunday evening, 



March 28th. 



I. B. S. A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 

VOL. 2, STUDY 7 

Week of April 4 Q. 14 to 19 Week of April 18 Q. 28 to 30 

Week of April 11 Q. 20 to 27 Week of April 25 Q. 31 to 37 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each. 



page 97 

VOL. XXXVI APRIL 1 No. 7 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 99 

Religious Influences and the War 99 

World's Debts Never to Be Paid 100 

Bible Students and the Future 101 

Sell the Philippines to Japan 101 

World's Peace Endangered 101 

Some Radical Suggestions 101 

Jewish Palestine Emigration 102 

Why the World Has Not Restitution 103 

Victories Over Modern Giants 104 

The Faith of One Persecuted 105 

A Friend in Need— A Friend Indeed 106 

Seedtime and Harvest of Character 108 

Thought the Beginning of Character 108 

"Choose Ye This Day Whom Ye Will Serve" 109 

A Worthy Example Set 109 

The Scripturally "Wicked" 110 

Interesting Letters 110 

Entered Upon Her Last Test Ill 

Echoes Sentiments of Many Prisoners Ill 

page 98 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5665 : page 98 

COLPORTEUR SUCCESS IN GOOD TERRITORY 

The European War and the peculiar financial conditions 
resulting everywhere are very favorable to our Colporteurs. 
They find the ears of the public much more often than ever 
before for the explanations of the present "distress of nations 
with perplexities," and the outcome, which the Bible alone 
tells. The Lord is blessing the Colporteur work wonderfully, 
as He has done from the beginning. The interested 
can now be sold the entire set of six volumes with a year's 
subscription to THE WATCH TOWER, for $2.65 almost as 
easily as previously one volume could be sold— provided 
the purchaser has money; otherwise he may be able to purchase 
only one volume. The success of the Colporteurs in 
introducing the six volumes with THE WATCH TOWER has 
done much to increase our WATCH TOWER subscription list. 
Every arrival of THE WATCH TOWER is a fresh reminder in 
respect to the books, which are valueless unless read. 

Colporteur territory has divided itself up into three divisions. 
It is poor where business is closed down or where 
crops have been a failure during the past year. Colporteurs 
should not attempt to continue in such territory, but should 
inquire for something better. Medium territory would be 
that in which the Colporteur, with energy and perseverance, 
can make ends meet. Any having this territory should use 
it and not attempt to find the best, as thereby he might 
make a mistake. "Be content with such things as ye have," 
where they are at all endurable. Good territory is very 
scarce. It includes the rice and sugar countries adjacent to 
New Orleans, Louisiana and Mississippi. It includes also territory 
contiguous to establishments manufacturing fire-arms, 
also the districts where wheat and corn crops were good last 
year. This includes portions of Kansas, Nebraska, Northern 
Missouri, Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, etc. While Colporteurs in 
medium territories are advised to stay where they are, those 
in bad territories, not able to make expenses, are advised to 
seek new fields. Address the WATCH TOWER SOCIETY-Colporteur 
Department. 



page 98 

PUBLIC MEETINGS AND CONVENTIONS 

Our recent suggestions seem to have been misunderstood. 
It is not our thought that it is desirable to have Conventions 
with a view to interesting the public. Conventions are 
merely for the interested. This should never be lost sight 
of. The Conventions this year should not be held in large 
auditoriums, but in such as would reasonably accommodate 
the interested. Our thought is the holding of little Conventions 
all over the country, at which friends within a 
radius of 100 miles could gather for mutual encouragement 
and refreshment, depending on their own speakers and those 
of the vicinity, or a Pilgrim appointed to assist. 

The thought is to hold these little Conventions in many 
cities, in conjunction, however, with one large public meeting. 
For this public meeting only the best Auditorium 
should be engaged. The little Conventions might preferably 
close with the Editor's visit and a discourse for the 
interested on the same day that he would give the public 
address. All attempts to get up Convention programs, use 
large halls, and try to get the public in, we advise against. 
Do nothing of the kind. And if the Class arranging for the 
public meeting has a good hall, not above the second floor, 
clean, desirable, they should see Brother Russell about announcing 
a "Follow up" Meeting for the Sunday following 
the meeting which he addresses; but this would be wise only 
under the conditions named and if a Brother capable of giving 
a good address can be arranged for. 

Classes arranging for public meetings by Brother Russell 
and desirous of having little meetings with the friends of 
the vicinity in advance, should send invitations to the near-by 
Classes, advising them of the time, place and other arrangements. 
In many cases a One-Day Convention will be 
all that will be possible or desirable. For instance, if Brother 
Russell's meeting for the public is at night, he may be relied 
upon for a secondary meeting for the interested. The remainder 
of the time might be utilized for testimony meetings 
and addresses by other brethren. 

Already this plan has worked excellently in about twenty 
cities. The Convention Tour to San Francisco and the return 
journey will include about as many more. Later on, 
should opportunity offer, Brother Russell will be available 
for other circuits of about a week or ten days, visiting one 
city each day and speaking twice. Requests for such visits 
should be addressed to the Society, care Pilgrim Department. 



R5657 : page 99 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
INFORMATION from Great Britain describes 



matters there as prosperous. Business 

flourishes, supported mainly by the 

orders for war materials for the Government, 

building of war vessels, etc. The 

streets have much the ordinary appearance, 

except that more black is worn by 

the women, as indicative of mourning, and 

more military uniform is to be seen. 

Newspaper reports respecting the sinking 
of vessels by German submarines might give the 
impression that Great Britain is cut off from communication 
with the outer world and that few ships enter 
and leave her ports. Such, however, is not the case. 
Approximately three thousand vessels entered and left 
British ports last month, while only about four sustained 
injury from the German submarines. The good business 
condition and rise in the price of food are leading to 
labor troubles, strikes for shorter hours and better 
wages. The demands are being met very conservatively. 
Wages of British mechanics are still much below the 
American level. 

Conditions in Russia, except in the war zone, are 
said to be good. The Government, which has for years 
had control of the liquor traffic, has entirely suppressed 
it. The effect upon the Russian people is said to be excellent, 
tending toward their enlightenment of mind and 
tending also, with the war demands for labor, toward 
their financial prosperity. 

That part of France, which is outside of the war-zone, 
seems to be fairly prosperous also. 

Germany, according to all accounts, is not nearly as 
badly off as we might suppose from press reports. The 
business of the country goes on with remarkable regularity, 
notwithstanding the war; nevertheless, lacking an 
outlet for her manufactures, German activities are 
mainly concerned with Government orders for war materials 
and home necessities. The food, being under 
Governmental control, is limited, but is said to be sufficient 
for the absolute needs of the people. All food 
supplies are being conserved, as in the case of a besieged 

R5658 : page 99 

city. Clocks have been set forward one hour to 
favor earlier rising and earlier retiring, thus effecting 
the saving of petroleum. 

Great suffering and distress is reported from the war-zone— 
Belgium, Northern France, Western Russia, 
Eastern Germany and the Carpathian and Balkan Mountains. 
These war-swept districts have suffered terribly— 
the fortunes of war sometimes sweeping one way, sometimes 
the other, but always with terrible severity, not only 
as respects the soldiers, but also the inhabitants of the districts. 
Conditions in Servia are said to be terrible also. 

The Dardanelles, controlled by Turkey, constitute a 
new war area. Great Britain has long upheld the Turkish 



Government and hindered Russia from gaining access 

to the Mediterranean Sea and the world by water. 

Russia long ago would have devoured Turkey at great 

cost; for Constantinople would have given her one of 

the most important sea-ports in the world. Now England 

and France must help their ally, Russia. Since 

they cannot utilize Constantinople themselves, they are 

anxious that Russia shall not have it. They will propose 

that the Dardanelles be maintained a free waterway, 

like the Suez Canal and the Panama Canal. 

Whether or not this will satisfy Russia is doubtful; and 

a quarrel amongst the Allies may result. If a quarrel 

seem unavoidable, it may be determined that the Dardanelles 

are impregnable and Turkey be allowed to hold 

on to her possession. 

Meantime the Allies are seeking for further assistance 
to blockade thoroughly and starve out Germany. To 
this end Italy and Greece are being urged to join in the 
war, the inducement being that in the settlement Italy 
shall receive certain Austrian Provinces and Greece be 
allowed to take over a large share of Turkey's domain 
—to keep Russia out. Selfishness, statecraft, fear of 
each other and ambition for world-power are thus seen 
to be the moving principles, so far as the world is concerned 
in the present war. Switzerland, Holland and 
Scandinavia are in fear and know not what to do. The 
interests of the great belligerents may force war upon 
them, although they are striving to the best of their 
ability to remain neutral. 

RELIGIOUS INFLUENCES AND THE WAR 

At first, the influence of the war upon the people of 
Europe was terrifying. In their distress they were inclined 
to become more religious. With the progress of 
the war this spirit of fear and looking to the Lord for 
help is passing away, giving place to colder sentiments 
and greater self-confidence. War is becoming the business 
of life to those engaged in it. Each of the nations 
involved sees matters from its own viewpoint. Each 
honestly believes that it is right. Each has the courage 
of its convictions and is ready to die for them. 

The Germans hold that the Allies, jealous of their 
frugality and prosperity and thoroughness, have long 

R5658 : page 100 

been preparing to crush them, to annihilate them. They 
claim that if they had waited until the French army 
had been mobilized on their western frontier, and the 
Russian army on their eastern frontier it would have 
been too late for Germany to successfully defend 
herself; that it was necessary for her to take the steps 
she did take and to take them with the promptness with 
which she took them, in order to strike first at France 
and then at Russia, whose soldiers represented double 



the number of her own. 

The Germans feel a special bitterness toward the 
British, believing that they are at the bottom of the 
Alliance and its schemes for the destruction of Germany. 
The Kaiser is evidently sincere in the thought 
that he and his people are God's ordained agencies 
for the propagation of system, law, economy and prosperity 
throughout the world. The Germans believe their 
cause to be just and that surely they will succeed. It is 
freely declared by them that, should they not succeed, 
they would altogether doubt the existence of God. 

The Allies, also, feel that God is for them. Germany's 
preparation of a great army, they claim, was not 
in self-defense and to protect her life, but for aggressive 
warfare upon her neighbors. They claim that Germany 
stands for militarism and that its successful military 
rule throughout the world, the rule of force, would 
be much more injurious than the rule of naval force. 
Whatever the leaders think and know as respects motives 
for the war, and whatever their conclusions respecting 
how it must end in the annihilation of Germany, 
the public undoubtedly believe that the cause of 
the Allies is every way just and must surely have God's 
favor and blessing. The Russians, we are told, are content 
that they are serving God while obeying the commands 
of the "Little Father," the Czar. They are content 
to die. They refer to going to the front and into 
the tomb as "Off for America." In other words, having 
a glimmering of a future life and refusing to take the 
doctrine of eternal torture seriously, they conclude that 
dying is like setting sail for an unseen country. 

The French soldiers are taking the matter of warfare 
as light-heartedly as possible— much as one might 
take to a hunting expedition where the chances were 
recognized to be rather doubtful. 

The great generals of the war are saying freely that 
the war is only beginning; that the Winter time has interfered 
with operations and that as soon as the Spring 
floods are past, the bitterest warfare ever yet known to 
the world may be expected. 

Meantime, Japan finds the present a favorable opportunity 
for gaining the mastery of the yellow race— of 
mastering China. Her Allies, of course, would not approve 
of this course, but Japan well knows that they are 
powerless to interfere. As to the objections of the 
United States, they will not be worthy of consideration; 
for the distance across the Pacific is so great and the 
Japanese navy is more than a match for what United 
States war vessels could be spared for Far Eastern waters. 
It would, indeed, tickle Japanese pride to have a 
conflict with the United States navy in Eastern waters, 
where they would be so far from fuel and other supplies 
as to be defeated. It would put Japan in the front 
rank of "Christian Nations" and the Philippines could 
be her reward. The Allies probably would be pleased 
to see the United States humiliated and sharer with them 



in the weakening influences of the present warfare. Undoubtedly 

Germany also would be glad to see the United 

States involved in war, as it would hinder further supplies 

of war materials going to the Allies. If the United 

States shall keep clear of entanglement under all these 

conditions it will be marvelous, almost indicating a Divine 

supervision of its affairs. 

"MEN'S HEARTS FAILING THEM FOR FEAR" 

As it is, the United States, indeed all the countries 
of America, North and South, and all the world except 
the warring nations, are experiencing most peculiar conditions 
because of the financial disruption created by the 
war. Not only Canada, but also Central and South 
America, China, Australasia and India, have been financed 
in the past by the nations now at war; especially by Great 
Britain. Their bank balances and loans are all interfered 
with by the war and by the necessity on the part of the 
warring nations of using their capital at home. The United 
States is not financially powerful enough to meet the conditions 
and supply money to the remainder of the world, 
previously dependent on Europe. Indeed stocks and bonds 
to the amount of five thousand millions of dollars are held 
in Europe against American improvements, etc. As the 
war progresses and Europeans need money, they may be 
expected to sell these American securities in American 
Exchanges. We have not the money to thus pay our unmatured 
obligations. Already our banks are full to overflowing 
with stocks and bonds— some excellent, some medium 
value, some worthless. Consequently gold will 
probably go to a premium in the United States as it is 
already at a premium in Canada. This will bring great 
distress everywhere, in connection with the liquidation 
of maturing obligations, bonds, mortgages, etc. No wonder 
financiers are perplexed— "men's hearts failing them 
for fear and for looking forward to those things coming 
on the earth"!— Luke 21:26. 

THE WORLD'S DEBTS NEVER TO BE PAID 

The London Economist roughly estimates the debts of 
the warring nations at the close of February as follows, 
in millions of Pounds Sterling. For a rough estimate in 
dollars, multiply by five: 

Debt Loss of Total 
(Expressed in Millions) Old New Revenue Debt 
L. L. L. L. 

Great Britain 661 312 nil 973 

France 1,315 363 50 1,728 

Russia 890 520 50 1,460 

Germany 240 520 50 810 

Austria-Hungary 490 363 50 903 

Servia 26 26 4 56 

Belgium 148 26 .. 174 



The article says: "In the case of the five leading 
belligerents, we take the National Debt before the war, 
and add our estimate of the war expenditure, and also 
an estimate of the loss of ordinary revenue, which must, 
of course, be added to the debt. The figures for Servia 
and Belgium are guesswork, and may be very wide of 
the mark. The figures for the belligerents will, we fear, 
prove well within the mark. Both the old and the new 
debts are a mortgage on the future industry of Europe. 
A population which will have lost a large percentage of 
its best workers will have to find much larger annual 

R5659 : page 100 

sums than ever before in interest. In case of failure 

the State will have to pass into the hands of the receiver, 

and in its ruin great commercial and financial 

houses will be involved. We are all slaughtering one 

another's customers, and every week of international 

warfare spreads destruction among the fortunes of individuals. 

There is even a sense in which one may say 

the greater the success the greater the embarrassment. 

The debt of the German Empire, like the German Empire 

itself, is a new creation. The State debts of Prussia, 

Bavaria, Saxony, etc., are, separate and together, 

R5659 :page 101 

much larger. Austria-Hungary, again, is not a unity 
like France. Suppose either Germany or Austria become 
dismembered by external force, or exploded by 
revolution, what becomes of their national or Imperial 
debts, or of the indemnities which the Allies might hope 
to exact? The more one looks into the financial and 
political future of Europe after the war the darker and 
more obscure do its problems appear. But that is all the 
more reason why independent men with knowledge and 
penetration and foresight should exercise their minds 
upon the political economy of this war. Never has there 
been such a collision of forces, never so much destruction 
in so short a time. Never has it been so difficult or 
so necessary to measure the calamity, to count the costs, 
to foresee and provide against the consequences to human 
society. Philanthropists profess to hope that the 
peace settlement will bring with it a great international 
reduction of armies and armaments, which will enable 
the nations to support their new war debt, and so to 
avoid the bankruptcy court. No doubt the fear of bankruptcy 
will count for something; otherwise the peace settlement 
might be expected to breed another series of 
preparations for another series of wars. But those who 
know the forces which really control the diplomacy of 
Europe see no Utopias. The outlook is for bloody revolutions 
and fierce wars between labor and capital, or between 
the masses and the governing classes of Continental 



Europe." 

BIBLE STUDENTS AND THE FUTURE 

In all the Continental Armies our Brethren, known 
as Bible Students, are to be found— not willingly, but by 
conscription. However opposed to the taking of life, 
they are subject to the powers that be in everything 
that does not conflict with conscience. Before the war 
we recommended to the Brethren that in the event of 
hostilities they should, so far as possible, if drafted, request 
positions in the hospital service or in the supplies 
department, where they could serve the Government efficiently; 
whereas, if they were ordered to the firing line, 
they would not be obliged to shoot to kill. We have reasons 
for believing that these suggestions are being followed 
and that meantime the Brethren are using the opportunities 
for proclaiming to their companions in military 
service the blessed message of the soon-to-be-established 
Kingdom of Christ, for the blessing of all the 
families of the earth. 

We have exhorted the brethren to strict neutrality 
so far as the combatants are concerned, whatever might 
be their natural inclination through accident of birth or 
association. To Bible Students none of the belligerent 
nations are wholly in the right, and none of them entirely 
to blame. Let us more and more seek to take the 
Bible view of the great Armageddon, of which we are 
now having the prelude. It is the outgrowth of our 
civilization, developing in the soil of selfishness. We are 
seeing fruits which have been ripening for forty years. 

We are never for a moment to forget that if the 
nations were Christian nations, as some of us once supposed, 
they would be bearing the fruits of the Spirit- 
meekness, gentleness, patience, kindness, love. How great 
the mistake! Christendom— Christ's Kingdom— has not 
yet been established. It awaits the Lord's time and the 
manifestation of His power and great glory in its establishment. 
These are kingdoms of this world, actuated by 
the principles of selfishness and deceived by Satan, "the 
god of this world." 

The Battle of Armageddon, to which this war is 
leading, will be a great contest between right and wrong, 
and will signify the complete and everlasting overthrow 
of the wrong, and the permanent establishment of Messiah's 
righteous Kingdom for the blessing of the world. 
All these things are probably easier to be seen from this 
side of the ocean than by the dear friends who are 
nearer to, and more directly influenced by, the war and 
their national, personal interests. Nevertheless, it is important 
that we all keep clearly before our minds that 
this is not the war of the Church, but the war of the 
world with carnal weapons; and that our sympathies are 
broad enough to cover all engaged in the dreadful strife, 
as our hope is broad enough and deep enough to include 
all in the great blessings which our Master and His Millennial 



Kingdom are about to bring to the world. 

Meantime, another danger to the Lord's consecrated 
people lies along the lines of worldly-mindedness— neglecting 
the things of the Kingdom in favor of the things 
of this present life. Our Adversary is still alert. We, 
also, must be alert as children of the Light, children of 
the Day, soldiers of the Cross. There never was a better 
opportunity than now for lifting high the royal banner 
of our Redeemer. More people have ears to hear 
and sharper ears to hear than ever before. Thousands 
are anxious for the Message which we have to give them 
and which they do not find elsewhere— the Message of 
Hope, the Message which explains that the present reign 
of evil, and the past six thousand years of the reign of 
sin and death, have reached their culmination, and how 
and why they are about to be brought to an end by the 
great Redeemer, in fulfilment of our Heavenly Father's 
glorious plans which He purposed in Himself from before 
the foundation of the world. 

SELL THE PHILIPPINES TO JAPAN 

Two years ago, on our return from the Orient, we 
sent the below letter of suggestion to the Government 
with copies of it to the newspapers, some of which published 
the letter, which read as follows:— 

Brooklyn, May 26, 1913. 
Honorable Wm. J. Bryan, 
Secretary of State, U.S.A. 
Dear Sir:— I am addressing you, and through you the 
Honorable President of this Nation, and the Honorable Members 
of its Congress, upon a subject which I believe to be of 
prime importance to our Nation and to the world. I would 
have preferred to make this communication a private one, but 
believe that its object will be much better served if it be 
known at home and abroad that the suggestion comes from 
a native citizen, a minister and ambassador of Christ, rather 
than if the same suggestion were to emanate from some Official 
of our Government or from a politician. 

THE WORLD'S PEACE ENDANGERED 

A year ago I visited Japan and observed the congested 
conditions there prevailing, and learned that her population 
is increasing very rapidly, while every foot of arable land is 
under "intense" cultivation. Japan's need for room for her 
overflow population has already led her to grasp Korea, and 
it is no secret that she longs for possession of the Philippine 
Islands, and would be glad of a reasonable pretext for taking 
possession of them. Many broad-minded Americans have 
suggested that the United States has no desire to acquire 
colonies in an imperial sense, and that, therefore, the Philippine 
Islands should be surrendered to the Filipinos. The only 
objection urged against this move is that the Filipinos are 
not as yet sufficiently advanced in civilization to properly govern 



themselves. And those most intimate with the situation 
have not the slightest doubt that if the United States withdrew 
from the Philippines, the Japanese Government would 
immediately take control, and shortly the Philippine Islands 
would be inundated with Japanese— undoubtedly much to 
their benefit, as the latter people are more thrifty and prudent 
and energetic than the Filipinos. 

SOME RADICAL SUGGESTIONS 

I suggest that the United States Government select from 
amongst the Philippine Islands one island suitable as a naval 

R5659 : page 102 

base, and tender to Japan the opportunity to take over the 
Philippine Islands at precisely the same they have cost the 
United States. This would give our neighbors of the Far 
East exactly what they want, at no price at all compared with 
the cost of war. Additionally, it would make them our 
friends, and surely all Americans desire a world-wide friendship 
with all nations. I advise that this step be taken speedily, 
because there is a "jingo" party in Japan bent upon the 
acquirement of the Philippines, which party will always be 
ready to take advantage of such trifles as the California Alien 
Law to incite hatred against the United States and to force 
their Government, against its judgment, to seize the Philippines. 

It is human nature for the Japanese to want those Islands 
—to feel that they need them. It is practical common sense 
to say that they can take them whenever they are ready. The 
United States could not retake the Philippines except at the 
expense of many lives and thousands of millions of dollars— 
if at all. 

Our Japanese neighbors, flushed with their victory over 
the Russian Navy, and courageous and proud-spirited, anyway, 
realize fully their ability to capture the Philippines and 
probably to hold them; but they do not realize that a war 
with America would be a very different one from that with 
Russia— that American pride and valor would spend thousands 

R5660 : page 102 

of lives and thousands of millions of dollars rather 
than surrender to Japan. Pride, courage, self-esteem, confidence, 
on both sides are the real dangers. Surely wisdom 
should dictate to both Nations that, in the interest of peace, 
cause for friction should be as far as possible eliminated. I 
believe that no more fair, no more just, no more honorable 
method for adjudicating this matter can be found than that 
we are suggesting— the sale of the Islands at cost to the 
Japanese. 

Japan would give the Filipinos a splendid government- 
better, I believe, than would any other nation under the sun 
except our own Government. No one can visit the Philippines 
without feeling pride for what America has done for 
that people— and done in so unselfish and noble a manner, as 



an elder brother amongst the nations helping a younger 
brother. Under no circumstances would I favor turning the 
Philippines over to the domination of a barbaric people. The 
Japanese are not barbarians, but highly civilized. 

My discourse in Washington on the 25th, "Peace Desirable, 
War a Necessity," was evidently misunderstood by some 
of my peace friends. While I claimed that nations have never 
been able to avoid war, and that they never will be able to 
wholly avoid it until the inauguration of Messiah's Kingdom, 
nevertheless I believe that all lovers of peace should unite 
their hearts and voices and pens and every energy in removing 
all unnecessary friction between nations, by doing in 
advance those things which would make for peace, and by 
promoting them. For instance, if the move I am suggesting 
were delayed until the Japanese had made an attack upon the 
Philippines, it would be too late. American pride would never 
consent to an overture of sale under stress; nor would the 
Japanese probably be willing to purchase then. NOW seems 
to be the psychological moment, and, as stated at first, it 
seems best that these suggestions should come from an ambassador 
of Christ, rather than from a politician of any party, 
so that partisan feeling may not interfere, but our nation as 
a whole approve and uphold and carry speedily forward this 
peace-promoting measure. I call for its endorsement by peace 
societies and all who believe that war should be only a last 
resort. Faithfully yours, 

A servant of the Lord Jesus Christ, 

(Signed) C. T. RUSSELL. 



JEWISH PALESTINE EMIGRATION 

The following is a synopsis of an article which appeared 
in the Algemeen Handelsblad of March 6, 1915, 
published in Amsterdam: 

"In Jewish circles the Jewish question is believed to 
be nearing a crisis. Poland, one of the countries suffering 
most from the present war, has millions of Jewish 
citizens. They are mainly artisans and commissionmen, 
and have with many others practically lost their all. 
While others have the hope of recuperating after the 
war is over, the Jews see none because of a strong 
Polish boycott of Jews. Already articles appear in the 
Russian press and in the English press, as Russia's ally, 
expressing the wish that Jews be obliged to emigrate 
from Poland after the war. 

"Since Palestine has become part of the war-territory, 
the antagonism in the Jewish world against Zionism 
is disappearing, all seeming to be actuated by greater 
love for the Land. Conditions in Palestine are not what 
the news items, mainly from English sources, would 
cause one to think. The Turk is more favorable to the 
Jewish inhabitants than to those of other nationalities. 
When a local official tried to hinder the Zionists he was 
sharply reprimanded from Constantinople. The German, 



Italian and especially the United States representatives 
have contributed a great deal to bring about 
the good will of the Turk for the Jews. On Dec. 17 the 
Jaffa officials had 600 Russian Jews transported to Egypt, 
but the same day the United States representative, Mr. 
Morgenthau, brought influence to bear on Constantinople 
which caused the transportation of Jews, citizens of 
countries at war with Turkey, to be stopped; and now 
they are permitted to remain, although watched by the 
authorities. It seems now that even the Anglo-Palestine 
Company at Jaffa, the Zionist Bank, will be allowed 
to continue its business. Economically Palestine is suffering. 
Although the model-farms and the reforesting 
enterprises are still going on as usual, the individual 
owners of orange groves and vineyards are suffering 
on account of the cessation of export trade. Besides, 
there is practically no import, causing unemployment. 
But those who are well informed are hopeful for the 
future, the present need being money. 

"America has in a comparatively short period received 
one million Jews from other countries. Representative 
Morgenthau is helping the members of his race 
in Palestine in working out the policy of the United 
States Government. 

"All of the interest manifested at present by the 
prominent Jewish American financiers is largely selfish. 
Not only so in the United States, but in all of Western 
Europe as well. A sudden extensive emigration of 
Polish and Russian Jews would seriously disturb the economical 
structure in those countries. And Jews and 
Gentiles are concerned over the possible catastrophe of 
emigration of large numbers of Jews from Poland and 
Russia. In Jewish circles they are earnestly preparing 
to organize the emigration. This has been the desire of 
a few for some years, but now that the danger of losing 
their own well-established positions comes home to them, 
it is becoming the desire of the majority of influential 
Jews, and union on that point is in sight. Regulating 
emigration will probably include diversion of the already 
over-population of Jews in New York City. 

"The Zionists in the Netherlands are at work with 
might and main to bring together a Palestine fund— a 
drop in the bucket; but American Jews also are working 
along this line and the hope is entertained that the non-nationalists 
among the Jews will join in, understanding 
the necessity and urgency of the case." 



"God's ways are equal: storm or calm, 
Seasons of peril and of rest, 

The hurtling dart, the healing balm, 
Are all appointed as is best. 

In judgments oft misunderstood, 
In ways mysterious and obscure, 

He brings from evil, lasting good, 



And makes the final gladness sure. 
While Justice takes its course with strength, 

Love bids our faith and hope increase: 
He'll give the chastened world at length 

His afterward of Peace." 



R5660 : page 103 

WHY THE WORLD HAS NOT RECEIVED RESTITUTION 

ACCORDING to the Bible presentation our 

Lord died for the sins of the whole world 

when He gave His life as an offset for 

Father Adam's life, which had been forfeited 

because of sin. The death of our 

Savior will be sufficient for the whole world, 

because the whole world are sharers in 

Adam's penalty by heredity. The merit of 

Christ's death, sufficient for the sins of 

Adam and for the sins of the whole world, 

has not yet been applied, or paid over, either for Adam 

or for the world. It has merely been put into the 

Father's hands, without application for anybody. 

The Scriptures show us for what purpose the application 
is to be made; namely, that after our Lord's Second 
coming and the setting up of His Kingdom He will apply, 
for the full satisfaction and requirements of Divine Justice, 
the entire merit of His sacrifice on behalf of Adam 
and his race. The full penalty of original sin will thus 
be paid, the race of Adam will be released from that condemnation, 
and forthwith the work of Restitution will 
proceed. Meantime, while waiting for the application of 
the blood to the world, the Father imputes that merit of 
Christ on behalf of the Church. 

CHRIST'S MERIT IMPUTED TO THE CHURCH 

In thinking of this subject, this word impute should be 
considered. To impute is not to give. To give Christ's 
merit would mean to make it applicable to Adam and all 
the race. Jesus is not ready yet to give it to Adam and all 
the race; for to release Adam and his race just now from 
the present conditions would not be the best plan. 

In commercial usage the word imputation has a similar 
thought of endorsement. If a man endorses a note 
for a thousand dollars, he does not give even one 
penny, but he imputes the value of the money. This 
transaction illustrates the work of imputing merit to the 
Church. The Church is not qualified to enter into a sacrifice 
with God. God is unwilling to receive as a sacrifice 
anything that is imperfect. But Jesus, having a credit in 
the hands of God, imputes a share of that merit to those 
who present themselves in consecration. On the strength 
of that merit, He becomes a surety, or guarantor, to those 



who wish to become His disciples. No more than this 
would be necessary; for their consecration is to sacrifice, 
and they need merely to sacrifice what they have. Since 
our Lord imputes of His merit to the Church, which 
offsets what they have not, whatever they are lacking 
by reason of heredity, when they shall have finished 
their contract this merit will be released, just as when the 
note is paid, the endorser is free. 

R5661 :page 103 

THE RELEASE OF THAT MERIT 

Our Lord Jesus becomes the Guarantor, or Endorser, 
or Imputer, of His merit to all who make a consecration 
to God. This includes not only the Little Flock, but also 
the Great Company, who will be partly faithful and who 
will need this imputation to complete their Covenant; 
it also includes those who later become wilfully unfaithful 
and will go into the Second Death. When all these 
things shall have been accomplished, then this merit of 
Christ, having been fully released from all this imputation, 
will be applied in full measure to the sealing of the New 
Covenant, of which Christ is the Mediator. Then His 
Kingdom will be the Mediatorial Government for the 
blessing and uplift of the world. 

The proposition made to the followers of Christ is 
that they will lay down their human lives sacrificially, just 
as Jesus did His— in whatever way God's providence may 
mark out for them. But those who present themselves to 
God in consecration are members of the sinner race of 
Adam. God properly declines to deal with these repentant 
sinners thus. He says, Your lives are already under condemnation; 
already they are three-fourths gone; in any 
event, you could not present more than one-fourth of the 
sacrifice that is absolutely required. However, God's 
Plan has provided that Jesus can become Surety for those 
who desire to become His footstep followers in sacrifice. 
On His account their sacrifices are accepted as a part of 
His sacrifice, that they may also share in His glory. 

PHILOSOPHY OF JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH 

The philosophy of the matter is this: Jesus already 
has in the Heavenly Father's hands— that is in the hands 
of Justice— a meritorious credit to the value of His human 
life, which He laid down sacrificially in obedience to the 
Divine wish. That sacrifice, sufficient for Adam and 
every member of his family, is waiting in God's hands to 
be applied in due time— at the time appointed for the beginning 
of Christ's Millennial Reign for the blessing, uplifting, 
Restitution, of the world. A certain portion of 
that blessing or merit of Christ is due to come to each 
member of Adam's race in Restitution. A certain portion, 
therefore, would in due time apply to those of Adam's 
children who, having now forsaken sin, become members 



of Christ by consecrating to death. 

As the Advocate for those who desire to become His 
followers, Jesus appropriates, or imputes, to them merit 
which is to His credit in God's account. That imputation 
is equivalent to the Restitution blessing which otherwise 
they would have received during the Millennium. This 
imputed merit, equal to all their imperfection, is, therefore, 
said to justify these from all sin, from all condemnation. 
Thus justified by faith these are accepted 
by God, and their sacrifices accepted of Him as part and 
parcel of their Redeemer's sacrifice. 

Not until all the merit of Christ thus imputed to the 
various persons who have made consecration during this 
Gospel Age shall have been released will the full merit of 
Christ's sacrifice be available for actual Restitution for 
Adam and all of his race. The portion of merit imputed 
to each individual follower of Christ is released when that 
follower dies, because the imputation was merely to permit 
the sacrifice of the offerer to be acceptable to God. 
The offerer first gave up his earthly hopes and prospects 
—the Restitution privileges secured by Jesus for all men. 
That much he sacrificed instantly at the moment of his 
consecration, and so disposed of it. His consecration, 
however, includes all that remains of his talents and 
powers, vitality and strength, even unto death. Our Redeemer's 
endorsement for the Church acts as an embargo 
on the ransom-price which must be paid to Justice as a 
whole to secure for man restitution privileges. 

IMPUTATION OF MERIT ILLUSTRATED 

To make an illustration: Suppose that A had deposited 
a million dollars in the bank, intending it for a 
specific purpose at a stated time. Meantime some of his 
friends are needing money or credit. A says to the 
banker, I do not wish to disturb the million dollars which 
I have on deposit; but on the strength of its being in your 
possession, you will be very pleased, I am sure, to extend 
credit to some of my friends if I endorse their notes. The 
banker of course would say, Yes. The endorsed notes 
would be discounted, and A would be liable to the full 
amount of these notes if they were not paid at maturity. 
There would, therefore, be an embargo upon his million 
dollars' credit, to the extent those notes were not paid. 
But when all the notes were paid, the million dollars 

R5661 :page 104 

would be as free from obligation as if those notes had not 
been made and A's credit had not been imputed to anybody. 

So it is with us who become Christ's disciples. Jesus 
endorses our notes. He becomes our Surety that we will 
fulfil our engagement, that we will lay down our lives. 
Until our lives are laid down, this imputation constitutes 
an embargo on Christ's merit which is in reservation to be 
applied on behalf of the world. But just as each one of us 



dies, all imputation of merit in behalf of that one is at an 
end, because his contract is fulfilled. In the case of those 
who do not lay down their lives willingly as per covenant, 
Jesus, as the Endorser, will, nevertheless, see to it that 
they lay down their lives; some of them in the great Time 
of Trouble will come through great tribulation, and their 
death will bring them also some measure of blessing; 
others will die the Second Death. 



R5662 : page 104 

VICTORIES OVER MODERN GIANTS 

--APRIL 25.-1 SAMUEL 17:1-54.- 

GIANTS OF OLD-DAVID AND GOLIATH-NOT BY HUMAN MIGHT, 
BUT BY GOD'S SPIRIT, OR POWER-FIGHTING THE GOOD 
FIGHT -NOT WITH CARNAL WEAPONS 
-POWER OF THE PEBBLE OF TRUTH. 

THE first giants mentioned in the Bible were 

those who had human mothers, but whose 

fathers were materialized fallen angels, as 

recorded in Genesis 6.* These, however, 

all perished in the Deluge of Noah's day. 

From time to time since then, there have 

been human giants found in Asia. Og, king 

of Bashan, had an iron bedstead thirteen 

feet long. In their report on Canaan, the 

spies told of seeing giants there— the sons 

of Anak. Goliath, the giant of Gath, whom David slew, 

was probably a descendant of this family. 

We have had giants in recent times, also; Byrne, an 
Irishman, eight feet four inches; Middleton, an Englishman, 
nine feet three inches; Lushkin, the Russian, eight 
feet five inches; Chang, the Chinese, seven feet eight 
inches. Pliny declared that Gabbaras was nine feet nine 
inches tall. There is, therefore, no room for discrediting 
the story of David and Goliath. 

David, a youth of probably twenty years, visited the 
army of Israel, in which three of his brothers were soldiers, 
taking food and delicacies for their refreshment. 
To his amazement he found the army of Israel facing the 
army of the Philistines, who had invaded from the west. 
They were not fighting, each apparently fearing the other. 
A champion from the Philistines came forth every morning, 
a giant in size and strength, wearing a bronze armor 
weighing two hundred and twenty pounds, and brandishing 
his spear, the head of which weighed twenty-five 
pounds, and the shaft of which was nearly three inches 
thick. He defied the Israelites, declaring that a battle 
between individuals would settle the war. He defied not 
only the nation of Israel, but its God. 

Young David was amazed that this had progressed so 



long, and that nobody accepted the challenge. A believer 
in the true God, he realized the Covenant between God 
and his nation. His faith in the Almighty was such that 
he accepted the Divine promises implicitly. He wondered 
at the lack of faith manifested by his brothers and his 
countrymen. He intimated that, backed by God's promises, 
he himself dared to meet that Goliath. 

King Saul of Israel had let it be known that great 
honor would come to the one who would meet the challenge 
of the foe. Young David was brought before him; 
but, anxious as he was for a champion, the king realized 
that the sinewy youth before him would be no match for 
the giant strength of Goliath, one blow from whose spear 
would destroy him. Then the stripling pleaded his cause. 
He declared that, as keeper of his father's sheep, he had 
time and again delivered them from the mouth and the 
paw of the lion and the bear. He had the courage, and 
above all he had the faith in God. As God had blessed 
him in his daily duties of the past, He would give him 
strength for victory in the duty of the hour, the meeting 
of the defiance of the giant and his insult to Jehovah. 

The king was impressed. He would lend David his 
armor— the best in Israel. But after trying it, young 
David declined it with thanks. He was not accustomed 
to such armor and could be himself better without it. He 
took with him merely his shepherd's staff, to which he 
was accustomed, and his sling. Passing over toward the 
side of the Philistines for the combat, he chose five 
smooth pebbles from the brook. This slight armament, 
with God's blessing, was more than sufficient; for he 
needed to use only one of the pebbles. 

The giant was indignant, saying, "Am I a dog, that this 
boy should come out to meet me with a stick?" According 
to tradition, as the lad approached the giant laughed, 
throwing his head backward. His helmet fell off; and he 
was exposed to the sure marksmanship of his despised opponent. 
There were no newspapers in those days, nor 
public libraries; and he knew not of how mighty a place 
sling-stones occupied in warfare even then, and that often, 
in skilled hands, they were almost as effective as are the 
rifles of today. The giant stunned, his armorbearer fled; 
and young David quickly dispatched him and took his 
armor as a trophy. The Philistines surprised, dismayed, 
fled, Israel pursuing them to their own fortified city. 

HOW TO MEET MODERN GIANTS 

Following Jesus' death, a new Divine order of things 
was ushered in. Those who have faith in God still have 
battles to be won, but not with carnal weapons. Their 
victories, nevertheless, are based upon the same principle 
which operated favorably with David. Faith in God is 
lying at the basis— the realization that the cause in which 
they fight is one approved of God. A courage proper to 
their faith— a faith gradually developed in previous victories 
over lesser foes, as in David's case— helps to give 



courage and strength for battling with the most terrifying 
giants we may encounter. 

Remembering this, each Christian should be daily on 
the alert to overcome the little weaknesses, the little frailties 
—to become conquerors in the little battles with selfishness, 
anger, malice, envy, evil-speaking. Victories over 
these, and experiences gained with God's help in overcoming 
these, give preparation step by step for the greatest 
trials and the grandest victories. 

When we learn of the Divine promise, "To him that 
overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in My Throne," it 
gives us the thought that a great victory must be won to 
prove ourselves worthy of the great honor to which God 
has called His Church. And this victory, as we are happy 
to learn, is not always to the strong, but to those whom 
God will bless. And the conflict which God approves and 
will reward is not strife with friends or neighbors, however 
unreasonable they may be, but strife against unrighteousness, 
against sin, against everything which the 
Divine Law opposes. This strife and victory belong, first 
of all, in our own hearts and minds and, secondarily, 
will extend, as the Lord's providence may indicate, in battling 



*For further explanation send 6c. in stamps for booklet, "Spiritism 
-Proofs that it is Demonism." Address, WATCH TOWER, Brooklyn, N.Y. 

R5662 : page 105 

against public evils and in support of public and 
civic righteousness. 

We are not, however, to forget that the great giant of 
sin and iniquity, which has dared the people of God for 
centuries, will be smitten down only at God's appointed 
time, and by the antitype of David. The name David signifies 
Beloved. The antitypical Beloved is The Christ- 
Jesus the Head, the Church His Body. Shortly, a sling-stone 
of Truth is to smite down the great opponent; and 
the antitypical David will begin the Millennial Reign 
which is to lift up the world and bless it. As members 
of this David class, we must have the overcoming spirit, 
and its supporting faith and trust in God's promise and 
power. 



R5662 : page 105 

THE FAITH OF ONE PERSECUTED 
-MAY 2.-1 SAMUEL 19.- 



SAUL'S JEALOUSY OF DAVID-ATTEMPTS TO INJURE HIM -FREQUENT 
DELIVERANCES SUPERHUMAN-SATAN OUR GREAT ENEMY SEEKS 
OUR INJURY-DEVOTION TO GOD AND RIGHTEOUSNESS SECURES 



US DELIVERANCE-WHY SUCH EXPERIENCES ARE PERMITTED- 
THE ARMY AND THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL PRAISED AND IDOLIZED 
THE YOUTHFUL DAVID. 

"Whoso putteth his trust in the Lord 
shall be safe."— Proverbs 29:25. 

WARS with the Philistines continuing, David 
was made a regular soldier, with a command 
over a regiment and closely in touch with 
King Saul himself. Victory after victory 
came wherever David was engaged, and 
King Saul saw the admiration of the people 
turned from himself to David. The 
sentiment reached a climax when, returning 
from one of the victories, the women and 
girls of a village came forth singing: 

"Saul hath slain his thousands, 
But David his tens of thousands!" 

The flame of jealousy took full possession of the king, 
and thenceforth his one purpose seems to have been to 
destroy David. It was a secret withheld from him that 
David was already anointed by Samuel to be his successor. 
He merely knew that Samuel the Prophet had told 
him that, as a consequence of his failure to carry out the 
Divine instructions regarding the Amalekites, the kingdom 
would be taken from him and his family and given to another. 
He possibly hoped that this might never come 
true— that his son Jonathan might be his successor. 

Jealousy is the bitter fruit of selfishness gone to seed. 
It unbalances reason, extinguishes happiness. It subjects 
its possessor to horrible melancholy, so that when it is in 
control he is really crazy. Not only is this illustrated in 
King Saul's case, but it is more or less illustrated in the 
experiences of every human being. Who does not by 
experience know what jealousy is? and the more he knows 
of it the worse. It has made murderers of children, as 
well as of grown-ups. It has wrecked homes, as well as 
business enterprises. It is the most terrible, and at the 

R5663 : page 105 

same time the most foolish, manifestation of selfishness. 
Every one recognizing it in himself should be alarmed— 
should throttle it promptly, seeking victory through 
vigilance, and if a Christian, through prayer. 

SAUL'S JEALOUSY WAS CRAFTY 

When under control of these fits of jealousy, King Saul 
is described as having had an evil spirit from the Lord, 
but more properly, we shall say, an evil spirit opposite 
from the Lord's— the reverse of the Lord's Spirit of 
kindness, justice, love. When the king was laboring under 



these fits of melancholy which followed the cessation of 
the Philistine wars, young David could sometimes soothe 
him by skilful playing on a harp; yet he knew the king's 
treacherous mood and, keen eyed, on two occasions caught 
the king with his eye in time to hinder Saul from throwing 
at him a javelin-scepter which he usually carried. 

Intent upon drawing David into a quarrel which might 
be construed as traitorous and justifying his death, the 
king promised him his elder daughter to wife, and then 
gave her to another. David, however, was discreet, and 
merely commented that he was not of a sufficiently noble 
family to expect such honors; neither was he able financially 
to give a sufficient dowry for a king's daughter. 
Another trap was to betroth to him the king's younger 
daughter, Michal. Young David again told of his unworthiness 
of the daughter and his lack of wealth for 
dowry, whereupon Saul stipulated that the dowry should 
be the evidence of the killing of a hundred Philistines. 
No doubt he hoped confidently that in the attempt to meet 
this requirement David would lose his own life; but instead, 
young David killed twice the number and received 
Michal, Saul's daughter. 

The king, getting more insanely jealous, told his son 
Jonathan and his courtiers in general that David must be 
destroyed. The sentiment of Jonathan was as loving and 
brotherly as his father's was cruel, jealous, selfish. It was 
Jonathan who would lose by David's attainment of the 
honor of the kingdom. Hence the love of Jonathan has 
become a proverb. Additionally, he had the true spirit of 
manhood and brotherhood, the spirit of a peacemaker. He 
interceded with his father for David. His language is a 
beautiful model of filial respect as well as of devotion to 
his friend David. He said, "Let not the king sin against 
his servant, against David; because he hath not sinned 
against thee, and because his works have been to theeward 
very good: For he did put his life in his hand, and 
slew the Philistine, and the Lord wrought a great salvation 
for all Israel; thou sawest it, and didst rejoice; wherefore 
then wilt thou sin against innocent blood to slay 
David without a cause?"— Verses 4,5. 

The plea of the peacemaker was successful. The king 
relented. David was brought back and became again a 
member of the household. But it was only for a time. 
The king was not without some noble sentiments, but they 
were not deep enough. They did not control his life. 
On the contrary he was under the control of the evil mind, 
the selfish mind, the jealous mind, which is far from, and 
opposite to, the mind, the Spirit, of God. 

Ere long, in a jealous fit again, the king not only made 
the motion to throw the javelin, but threw it with deadly 
aim and smote into the wall just behind where David sat; 
for David was quick and dodged it. David went to his 
room; but a guard had been stationed there, instructed that 
upon his coming forth he was to be killed. His wife informed 
him and assisted him to safety by letting him down 
out of a window. Possibly the house was built upon the 



wall, as in the case of St. Paul's similar deliverance. 

TWO HUNDRED MURDERS FOR A WIFE 

Scoffers seize upon one feature of this lesson to condemn 
the Bible as encouraging murder and with being, 
therefore, in conflict with righteousness and in conflict 
with a God of righteousness. They say, "Here we find 
David, a Prophet, described as being very discreet and as 
having the Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of a sound mind; 

R5663 : page 106 

and yet we see him taking the lives of two hundred human 
beings as the price of a wife, and not a word in the Scriptures 
in condemnation." 

Such charges and arguments should be met in a reasonable 
way— they should not be passed over with the remark, 
"No use reasoning with you; you are an infidel." 

He that doeth righteousness is righteous; he that doeth unrighteousness 
is unrighteous. This Bible proposition applies 
to God and to David, as well as to others. But, when 
inquiring respecting it, we should approach our subject 
with unprejudiced minds. Instead of condemning from 
the standpoint of prejudice, we should rather inquire how 
this course can be made to square with the principles of 
justice, which the Bible everywhere maintains. 

In the first place, we must have in mind the difference 
between being a Jew under the Law Covenant and being 
a Christian under the headship of Christ. Second, we 
should remember that the Bible does not teach that those 
who die still live and pass immediately into everlasting 
torture. It teaches that the dead are really dead, and 
that the hope which God holds out for them is a resurrection 
from the death state in the future under more 
favorable conditions, under the blessed influences of Messiah's 
Kingdom. The Bible informs us that the penalty of 
sin is death— not torment after death. It informs us that 
this penalty was justly inflicted upon Father Adam because 
of his intelligent and wilful sin. It tells us that the 
human family are dying because, by laws of heredity, the 
seeds of sickness, imperfection, death, are in us, from the 
hour of our birth. 

From this viewpoint, our entire world is a world of convicts 
under death-sentence. This accounts to us for the 
different treatment which God accords to humanity from 
that which He gives to angels— joy, peace, life, perfection. 
This accounts to us for God's permitting various death-dealing 
circumstances to have control— famine, pestilence, 
earthquakes, cyclones, etc. When we come to see that the 
same God who justly condemned all through one man's 
disobedience has made a provision for the justification of 
all through the obedience of Christ unto death, then we 
see things in a new light. When we learn that Messiah's 
Kingdom is to be set up for the very purpose of bringing 
light, knowledge of God and full opportunity of return to 



His favor and everlasting life, our hearts rejoice. 

Coming back to our first proposition, we realize that we 
are not to judge David and people of his time as we would 
judge ourselves of this Gospel Age. He must be judged 
by the Law, under which he and his nation were placed at 
Mount Sinai— "an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, a 
man's life for a man's life." The Israelites were informed 
that the people of the Land of Canaan had allowed their 
cup of iniquity to come to the full (1 Samuel 15:2,3); and 
that the children of Abraham were given that entire land, 
with the Divine approval of their taking possession of it 
as quickly as possible. They were fully commissioned to 
slay all their enemies there as being enemies of the Lord, 
not even being told that the Lord had a future provision 
for them all in Messiah's Kingdom. 

The Philistines were in the Land of Canaan, where they 
not only held their own portion, but had invaded the portion 
which Israel had already conquered. They had 
caused loss of many lives in Israel. It was in full accord 
with the Divine instruction to the Israelites that the Philistines 
and all other occupants of Canaan should be utterly 
destroyed. David, therefore, was merely carrying out 
what all Israelites recognized as being the Divine instruction 
respecting the Divine Program. From this viewpoint 
alone can the Lord's instructions and the conduct of 
the Israelites in the past be recognized as proper. 

Under the New Dispensation which began with our 
Lord's redemptive work and the Pentecostal blessing, the 
Lord's people of this Age, the Church, are under new 
orders, and by word and by example they are to illustrate 
the principles of mercy as in previous times the Jews were 
commanded to illustrate the principles of Divine Justice. 
We are to love our enemies, to do good unto them that 
hate us and that persecute us and say all manner of evil 
against us falsely. Thus we shall be the children of our 
Father who is in Heaven, and manifest that we have been 
begotten of Him by His Holy Spirit. But the Jews were 
not children of God. They were a "House of Servants." 
(Hebrews 3:5.) They never thought of speaking of 
themselves as sons of God. When Jesus declared Himself 
to be the Son of God they were indignant, said that He 
blasphemed, and took up stones to stone Him. 

The first human son of God was Adam, and when he 
sinned, he was cut off from that relationship to God; and 
none others from Adam's time down to Jesus' time were 
ever recognized or spoken of in the Bible as sons of God. 
They were sinners, strangers, aliens, foreigners, convicts, 
under death sentence. But with Jesus came not only the 
new teaching but the new relationship. "Moses verily was 
faithful as a servant over all his House; but Christ as a 
Son over His own House [of sons]; whose House are we, 
if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the 
hope firm unto the end."— Hebrews 3:5,6. 



R5664 : page 106 

A FRIEND IN NEED--A FRIEND INDEED 

--MAY 9.-1 SAMUEL 20.- 

JONATHAN'S LOVE FOR DAVID-A MODEL OF FRIENDSHIP-ITS 
TEST-ITS ENDURANCE-ITS BASIS-FRIENDSHIP BEING 
LOST-SELFISHNESS AN IMPENDING DANGER-"EVERY MAN'S 
HAND AGAINST HIS NEIGHBOR"-THE HEAVENLY MODEL. 

"A friend loveth at all times."— Proverbs 17:17. 

HISTORY records noble examples of friendship; 

but supreme amongst these is the story 

of our lesson— the friendship, the love, of 

Jonathan, son of Saul and prospective heir 

of the throne of Israel, for David, his rival 

in the hearts of the people and in the Divine 

Program. The purity and unselfishness of 

his friendship demonstrates to us a nobility 

possessed by some in those days, which we 

might not have suspected and which is quite in conflict 

with the Evolution theory. 

The loving spirit of Jonathan stands out all the more in 
contrast with the jealous spirit of his father, King Saul. 
Apparently his first meeting with David was after the 
latter's victory over Goliath. Instead of thinking of David 
as a rival, who should be crushed, the noble Jonathan took 
off his own princely robe and gave it to him, together 
with his sword and his famous bow. 

Rev. Alex. Whyte remarks, "Jonathan was the eldest 
son of Saul; and he was thus the heir-apparent to the 
throne of Israel. Handsome and high-mettled, full of 
nerve and full of heart, Jonathan was the pride of the 
army and the darling of the common people. His comrades, 
for his beauty of person and swiftness of foot, were 
wont to call him The Gazelle. But for his father's great 
and disastrous transgressions, Jonathan might soon have 

R5664 : page 107 

been the second king of Israel, second in succession to 
Saul, but second to no king that ever sat on a throne in 
those great qualities of mind, heart and character that 
give stability to a throne and add lustre to a crown." 

Well was it written by one of the ancients, "Life hath 
no blessing like an earnest friend"; and a poet has written: 

"Life offers no joy like a friend; 
Fulfilment and prophecy blend 
In the throb of a heart with our own— 
A heart where we know and are known." 

"A FRIEND IN NEED, A FRIEND INDEED" 



Jonathan's friendship, love, was not of the effervescent 
kind. It was the genuine article. He did not love merely 
in word, but in deed and in truth— not merely when his 
father favored his friend and when the public acclaimed 
him and when he would thus have favor with others; but 
he loved him just the same when the king became the 
enemy of his friend and sought his life. Indeed, it may 
be said that no friendship could be surely counted upon 
until after it has been tried. The friendship which will 
not endure trial, testing, the friendship which will make 
no sacrifices is not the kind to be modeled after. 

Jonathan had love of the kind the Lord admonishes His 
followers to have— the love which in honor prefers one 
another. While other loves have been great, this one 
doubtless stands preeminent above earthly love, especially 
because it was founded on a religious basis. It was 
because David loved the Lord, and sought to be guided by 
His will as that will was manifest at that time, that he 
would wait— that he conducted himself with wisdom, as 
the record declares. And it was because Jonathan discerned 
this spirit of wisdom, because he realized David was 
guided by the spirit of righteousness, that he loved David. 

Indeed, we may be sure that in proportion as we understand 
the Bible and receive the spirit of the Truth, in that 
same proportion we shall be able to appreciate and to copy 
and to exemplify the best there is of principle— whether 
of friendship, or of duty to a monarch, of duty to our 
family relationship, or of duty toward our God. There 
are many influences operating toward a spirit of selfishness, 
avarice, jealousy, while the influences making for 
true friendship, true love, all the best qualities of heart 
and head, are from the Lord. 

We have already noted in a previous lesson how 
Jonathan acted as peacemaker between his father the king, 
and David. Today's lesson brings to our attention another 
occasion on which Jonathan acted the part of a true 
friend. David realized that his life was in danger and 
mentioned his fears to Jonathan. The latter was at a 
loss to believe that his father would break his word, yet 
was impressed by David's attitude. The feast of the new 
moon was at hand; and David was expected to sit at the 
royal table, King Saul at the head, Prince Jonathan at 
the right hand, the captain of the host at the left, and 
David occupying the fourth place, opposite the king. In 
harmony with an arrangement made between the friends, 
Jonathan was to ascertain his father's intentions definitely 
and to communicate these to David. 

On the first day of the feast the king said nothing, although 
Jonathan, to attract attention to the matter and 
thus to draw out his father, chose a convenient time for 
taking David's seat. Finally the king asked for the "son 
of Jesse," as though he hated the very name "David." 
Jonathan replied that David had gone to keep the feast at 
Bethlehem by his permission. 

The king had apparently been foiled in his intention to 
kill David at this time and vented his wrath upon his son, 



whom really he greatly loved. He addressed him as an 
unruly son, unworthy of his mother, thus implying that he 
ignored him as his own son. In his anger he threw a 
javelin at his son, probably not with the intention of 
striking him, but merely of venting his ferocious jealousy. 
Jonathan's speech in return shows that he was thinking 
less of what he himself was risking for his friend and 
more in respect to the injustice being done that friend. 
"So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and 
did eat no meat the second day of the month; for he was 
grieved for David, because Saul had done him shame." 
It is a beautiful friendship which in stress forgets self 
and thinks only of the interests of the friend. As though 
in contrast with all the human loves and friendships, we 
read of Jesus, "Greater love hath no man than this, that 
a man lay down his life for his friends." Nevertheless, 
in the case of Jesus, it meant more than any earthly love 
or friendship; for "while we were yet sinners, Christ died 
for us." The Apostle declares that the Lord thus set an 
example to all Christians, that they should "lay down their 
lives for the brethren," be ready to die the one for 
the other. This is the Heavenly love, the Divine friendship, 
of which the love of Jonathan may be taken as a 
sample, next to the example of our Lord and the Apostles. 

"IS IT NOT BEYOND THEE?" 

The next morning David, having returned from his 
home, was to get Jonathan's judgment respecting the 
king's sentiments. The agreed-upon signal was that 
Jonathan with his bow and arrows should go into the field 
near to a great rock; and in connection with his archery 
would call out, "Is it not beyond thee? Make haste!" if 
the message was that David should flee. And so it was done. 
But the two friends could not think of parting, 
perhaps forever, without having personal contact. Jonathan 
went over to the rock behind which David hid. The two 
embraced, after the manner of the East, kissing each 
other Goodbye— true lovers, with a manly, noble love. 

Here it was that Jonathan indicated his faith in God's 
providence in respect to David, and asked him to make a 
covenant with him that whatever should occur he would 
deal graciously with him and his family, saying, "Go in 
peace, forasmuch as we have sworn both of us in the 
name of the Lord, saying, The Lord be between me and 
thee, and between my seed and thy seed, forever. And 
he arose and departed; and Jonathan returned to the city." 

Bible history shows us that David never forgot the obligation 
he thus undertook to be a friend to the family of 
Saul. The custom of the East at that time was that a 
new dynasty coming into power should utterly destroy all 
the males of the dynasty which was being overturned. 
But this was not so in David's case. 

It was on the occasion of Jonathan's death with his 
father on the field of battle shortly after, in conflict with 
the Philistines, that David expressed the beautiful words: 



"O Jonathan, on thy high places thou wast slain! 

I am distressed for thee, my Jonathan, my brother! 

Pleasant hast thou been to me exceedingly! 

Wonderful was thy love to me, passing the love of women!" 

We trust that none can read this story without being 
influenced favorably toward friendship, to be a truer, a 
nobler, a more faithful friend than otherwise; but especially 
should Christians get a blessing from this story of 
Jonathan's love, leading on as it does to the love of Christ 
and to the injunction that they should be copies of God's 
dear Son; and that their friendship should be loyal, true, 
enduring, especially one for the other, as the Apostle exhorts, 
"Doing good unto all men as we have opportunity, 
especially unto the Household of Faith." 



R5665 : page 108 

SEEDTIME AND HARVEST OF CHARACTER 

"Be not deceived,. ..he that soweth to the flesh shall of the 
flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit, shall of 
the Spirit reap life everlasting."— Galatians 6:7,8. 

THE APOSTLE here brings to our attention 

the fact that there is danger of some of the 

Lord's people being deceived. Some might 

think that they could live according to their 

earthly desires, fleshly desires, and then attend 

meeting, or observe other religious 

forms, and it would make them all right 

with God. Others might deceive themselves 

into thinking that they might live according 

to the flesh, and then by going to 

the Lord in prayer they might have the matter all forgiven 

and corrected, and still be as far along spiritually 

as those who live daily a life of faithfulness to God. Another 

error which has deceived many is the teaching that, 

after living according to the inclinations of the flesh in 

sinful ways, they can go to the priest and obtain absolution, 

and that this will make them all right again. 

Now these are deceptions. God has established a general 
principle which applies both to the Church and to 
the world. This general principle operates along the lines 
of sowing and reaping. Suppose a man unfamiliar with 
the nature of certain seeds should sow seed of thistles or 
of tares. A little later he might visit his field and say, 
"This seed seems to have been all right. I see nothing 
wrong. It has not hurt the ground in any respect; the 
field looks as well as if I had sown timothy seed or clover 
seed. The plants are green and thrifty, and indeed make 
quite a fine appearance." But later in the season the nature 
of the crop would make very manifest the dire mistake 



in the choice of the seed sown. 

In the natural world men are sure to reap in kind as 
they have sown. They would not expect to sow tare seed 
and reap a crop of wheat. The law of cause and effect 
is no less inexorable in the spiritual realm. And so the 
Apostle says that "God is not mocked"— do not think that 
you can do an evil thing and get good results. Whoever 
"sows to the wind shall reap the whirlwind"; whoever 
sows to the flesh will reap accordingly; whoever sows to 
the Spirit will reap in kind. 

THOUGHT THE BEGINNING OF CHARACTER 

What is meant, then, by this word "sowing" when referring 
to spiritual things? Apparently it means a course 
of life, or conduct, that would bring good results or a 
course that would bring evil results. We sometimes hear 
the expression, "That young man is sowing his wild 
oats." The thought is that the conduct of such a one is 
evil; and that the conduct of the individual will react 
upon his character. We might go further and say that 
all conduct must be incited by previous thought. In other 
words, our thoughts are the initiative in what we are! 
To illustrate: When God would create the world He 
first had a Plan respecting it. All that He has been doing 
since has been the following out of a Plan that He 
originally had. We might say that it was the good 
thoughts of God which led to the good results. 

So it has been in the case of Satan. Satan's course in 
the world has been that of sowing evil things, sowing 
tares. His course has been fatal to himself and injurious 
to others, and it was the result of the wrong thought 
he had before he committed the sin. He had said in his 
heart, "I will ascend into Heaven; I will exalt my throne 
above the stars of God;... I will ascend above the 
height of the clouds; I will be like the Most High." 
(Isaiah 14:13,14.) He had a covetous spirit, a selfish, 
presumptuous spirit, a spirit in opposition to God. 

These two spirits are still operative in the world- 
God's Spirit and the spirit of the Adversary. In referring 
to things pertaining to humanity, the Apostle speaks 
of this Adversary spirit as being the spirit of the flesh- 
not that it is the spirit of the flesh in its original perfection, 
but the spirit of the fallen flesh. It is the spirit of 
Satan, which has become dominant in the human family. 
The Apostle addresses the words of our text particularly 
to the Church, but with a good application to the world 
also. If any of the Lord's people who have been enlightened 
and made partakers of the Holy Spirit should 
live according to the flesh chiefly, they would surely not 
receive the prize of the High Calling. If they wish to 
attain glory, honor and immortality, they must live according 
to the Spirit of God, the spirit of God's Law, 
the spirit of righteousness. They must conform their 
lives to the life of Christ their Exemplar, or they can 
never hope to attain the things promised them. 



Because of the imperfection of the flesh inherited 
through Father Adam, the Lord's children can never in 
this life attain the perfection that they would wish. There 
will be blemishes and weaknesses of brain, of thought, 
and of the entire body. But they should live as nearly 
up to the standard as possible, and the Lord will compensate 
for their unintentional weaknesses. His grace will be 
sufficient for them to enable them to overcome. But if 
they sow to the flesh, they will reap in the flesh— they 
will reap the evil. However, if they are still loyal to the 
Lord, and repent of their derelictions, striving to overcome, 
He will overrule these experiences for their good. 

LOYAL HEART THE FIRST REQUISITE 

It is therefore for the Church to sow according to the 
Spirit, to conduct themselves according to the Spirit of 
God, who is a righteous Spirit Being. In order to do 
this, we see that the heart must be right. So the getting 
of our hearts right is the very first thing the Lord sets 
before us. We cannot even become His children until 
our hearts are right. We must turn from sin and accept 
the atonement of the great Sin-Bearer. Then we must 
heed the words of our Lord, "If any man will be My disciple, 
let him deny himself, take up his cross and follow 
Me." In so doing we are sowing to the Spirit. If we 
continue thus to sow, we shall reap the great reward- 
all the glorious spiritual things the Lord has promised 
to His faithful ones of the Gospel Age. 

But in proportion as we are derelict, as we sow seeds 
of evil, in that same proportion shall we be sowing to 
corruption. This does not necessarily mean the Second 
Death; but there will be corrections and stripes for the 
things which are improper. Whoever, therefore, sows a 
little to the flesh will reap accordingly. If he continues 
to sow according to the flesh, he will reap a much larger 
measure of results— greater corruption. And if his life 
be given over to sin, if he has abandoned the life of the 
Spirit entirely, the effect will be the Second Death, which 
is the extreme penalty of wilful opposition to God. 

Hence, sowing to the flesh might or might not mean 
certainly to reap the Second Death. It would surely 
mean to reap difficulty, tendencies away from God, in proportion 
to the evil sowing. With the spirit-begotten it 
would surely lead to the Second Death if the course is 
not changed. We see this matter illustrated in many 
Christian people. They begin the Christian course, and 
live to a considerable degree to the Spirit of God, yet 
they occasionally give way to the things of the flesh and 
more or less encourage the fleshly mind. They do not 
perhaps realize any immediate results, but there are evil 
seeds sown. These evil seeds, evil thoughts in the mind, 
even if afterwards repented of, may more or less corrupt 

R5666 : page 109 



the mind all the rest of life; they tend away from 
the Lord, away from the Heavenly things, and make so 
much more to fight against. The Christian should see to 
it that all of his course in life, his desires, his thoughts, 
are brought into accord with the spirit of a sound mind, 
the Spirit of God, the Holy Spirit. 

Sowing to the Spirit and sowing to the flesh would, 
we understand, mean either to live according to God's 
way or, on the other hand, to live according to the spirit 
of the Adversary— to sow seed that will result either in 
the blessed fruits of the Holy Spirit of God or in the 
fruits of the fallen flesh— the corrupted, Satanized spirit 
with all its accompaniments. If we live according to our 
flesh, it will mean corruption, moral and spiritual degeneration; 
for we are in the corruptible condition. 

PRESENT COURSE OF WORLD TO BEAR ON FUTURE 

In their present condition the world cannot hope to 
gain everlasting life; for they have not come into relationship 
with the Life-Giver, although God has provided, 
as the Church knows, an opportunity for everlasting life 
to the whole world of mankind. But while the world is 
not yet on trial for this everlasting life, nevertheless their 
conduct has a decided bearing on their future. If now 
they are living according to the lines of selfishness— self-gratification 
—they will reap correspondingly, according 
to the influences that are at work in them. And this will 
leave them in a more and more corrupted condition as 
they continue so to live, and they will have more to overcome 
in the next Age, if they would ever gain everlasting 
life. They would be much more advanced and advantaged 
if they would follow the things of righteousness, 
if they would cultivate the principles of justice and love; 
and they will be much more degraded and handicapped if 
they follow the things of selfishness and impurity. 

We might carry the matter clear back to Eden. In 
the case of Father Adam, when he sowed to self-gratification, 
when he ate of the forbidden fruit, he followed 
the wrong course; he failed to follow his best judgment, 
his conscience; he followed inclination. As a result he 
brought upon himself the death penalty, which gradually 
led to extinction of life; and all his posterity have shared 
his condemnation. Sad was the sowing, and most bitter 
and far-reaching has been the reaping. But through the 
mercy of God even man's terrible experiences with sin 
will prove a very valuable object lesson to angels and to 
all of God's intelligent creatures throughout eternity. 



R5666 : page 109 

"CHOOSE YE THIS DAY WHOM YE WILL SERVE" 

"No man can serve two masters. ..Ye cannot 



serve God and Mammon."— Matthew 6:24. 

THE THOUGHT which our Lord apparently 

wished to impress upon His disciples was 

that there is a principle involved in service 

—that no one can possibly render full service 

to two opposing interests, two opposing 

masters; for the one would surely be neglected 

in the interest of the other. There 

would be more or less of a preference 

shown. After making a general observation 

regarding the impossibility of serving 

two masters, the Lord applied this principle, saying, "Ye 

cannot serve God and Mammon"— God and selfishness, 

righteousness and unrighteousness. Man was originally 

God's servant. It was natural for him to appreciate the 

Divine character and arrangements and to render willing 

service. But mankind were deceived as they got under 

the control of the great Adversary, being influenced by 

the powers of evil, the chief effects of which have been 

ignorance, superstition and selfishness. 

One of the deplorable conditions of the present time 
is that from birth selfishness is almost forced upon one. 
Man learns to give his time, his influence, for selfish purposes 
and projects. He fails to see that God is the One 
who should be served at any cost. But men were born 
and shapen in iniquity. They are servants of Sin, slaves 
of Sin. But our Lord Jesus pointed out that through the 
knowledge of Himself and compliance with His terms of 
discipleship, there came a release from this slavery, an 
opportunity to pass over to the side of righteousness. 

However, an opportunity to take a stand for right 
came before our Lord's day. As a knowledge of God 
was granted to any people, they had an opportunity to 
assert themselves on the side of right. At the time when 
the Law Covenant was given, God set forth the principles 
of righteousness in that Law. The whole nation of 
Israel accepted God as their Savior, and entered into 
a Covenant with Him that they would be His loyal people. 
Yet after they had done this, the influences of evil 
in their flesh became manifest. They sought to be the 
servants of God and at the same time of self, dividing 
their interests between God's affairs and the affairs of self. 

A WORTHY EXAMPLE SET 

Jesus pointed out this particular fact, and told the people 
of His day that it was impossible to perform this half-hearted 
service— they could not serve two masters, for 
nobody would be pleased. If they were to serve Mammon, 
serve the Present Order of things, then they could 
not be pleasing to God. If they wished to serve God, 
serve righteousness, to whatever extent they did this they 
would be displeasing to the world; they must be servants 
of either the one or the other; the two services combined 
would be impossible. 



The example of our Lord Jesus when He came to 
earth, was in harmony with this position; for He fully 
renounced the world and made absolute consecration of 
His life to God and His service. Thus He set us an example. 
All who have the same spirit should walk in His 
steps. This was in accordance with the Jewish Law: 
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, 
with all thy mind, with all thy being, with all thy 
strength." Any one who kept this Law would not be 
serving self; for his service would be all for God. 

Those who are following in the Master's footsteps are 
all for God, or, as we sometimes sing, "All for Jesus." 
As we follow the example of Jesus, and walk as He 
walked, we are rendering whole-hearted service to God. 
The result of serving this Master will be a great reward. 
"Him hath God highly exalted, and given Him a name 
above every name." And the Church has been invited to 
follow Him. So we should serve God in everything, with 
all our heart, mind, soul, strength. This is our commission. 
This we are to do to the point of sacrificing all 
earthly interests and of laying down our lives for the 
brethren. This course, followed faithfully to the end, 
will bring us to the same reward that Jesus received- 
glory, honor, immortality. 

RENDERING UNTO CAESAR HIS OWN 

It may be asked how this text comports with the Apostle's 
suggestion that one who was bound when he received 
the Truth should not seek to be free. (1 Corinthians 7:20-22.) 
These words of St. Paul express the 

thought that when the Truth finds us it does not necessarily 
change our earthly relationships; that if a man 
were a slave, for instance, and the Truth of God reached 
him, he should not rebel against his earthly master. He 
is not to think of this new relationship to God as changing 

R5666 :page 110 

the color of his skin or his earthly relationship. The 

Apostle is speaking of the body and not the heart when 

he says, "Seek not to be loosed." Our bodies may be 

enslaved for one reason or another. It might be a bondage 

like that of olden times— captured service. Or it 

might be that we had become the servants of those who 

were willing to pay for our services. While we are not 

to do anything contrary to the Divine Law or to our consciences, 

yet we are to serve our earthly masters faithfully. 

They have purchased our time, or a large measure 

of it; and we must render to them conscientiously 

all that is theirs by contract. If one is a servant in a 

military way, or in any other way, he should be faithful. 

This will not interfere with one's service to God; for 
our Lord has instructed us to "render unto Caesar the 
things that are Caesar's." Whoever is faithful in this is 
doing the will of his Heavenly Master. There would be 



no conflict, but full harmony. The only conflict would be 
if the master on earth should wish us to do something 
contrary to the commands of our Master in Heaven. We 
are to suffer anything rather than do what our Heavenly 
Lord would not approve, and thus defile our consciences. 
Looking into the future, we see that the present master, 
ruler, of this Old Order is soon to be bound, that 
he may deceive the nations no more for a thousand years, 
and that the new Ruler, the new Master of the world, is 
to be The Christ— Jesus and His Church. We ask ourselves 
how this principle will apply then. The answer is 
that there will be only the one Master to obey. There 
will be no rendering unto Caesar then. All will be made 
fully aware that this Master is the only one who has the 
power, the right to command. The knowledge of God's 
glory shall fill the whole earth— the knowledge of God's 
Righteousness, the knowledge of God's Power, the knowledge 
of God's Wisdom, the knowledge of God's Love. 
Whatever He commands is the right thing, as every one 
will then learn and fully understand. 

R5667 :page 110 

THE SCRIPTURALLY "WICKED" 

In the Scriptures Satan is represented as the deceiver 
of mankind. He puts light for darkness and darkness 
for light. God's proposition through Christ is that during 
the thousand years of the Millennial Reign, the whole 
world will be brought to the true knowledge of God, an 
accurate knowledge. Deception will be no longer permitted. 
The world will see what righteousness really is, 
what its rewards really are, and how desirable it is. As 
a consequence, the majority will then, we think, be glad 
to give heed to the one Master. The exceptions are represented 
as having the same disposition as Satan; and 
whoever will have that disposition will be destroyed. 
When a person comes to know the right and when the 
right is made reasonable, and possible for him, and he then 
prefers to do wrong rather than right, let him die the 
death. This will be the sentence. Such will be counted 
"the wicked," the incorrigible. 

The word "wicked" from the Scriptural standpoint, 
means those who do wrong intentionally. So all the 
wicked, knowing the wrong to be wrong, and doing it 
wilfully and purposely, shall die the Second Death. In 
due time none shall be left alive except those who serve 
the one true Master. The difficulty with mankind at present 
is ignorance, which God has not yet lifted from the 
world. He has permitted the ignorance and darkness of 
the present time that the world may learn its lesson of 
the exceeding sinfulness of sin, and be the better prepared 
for the lessons that are to follow. "The god of 
this world hath blinded the minds of them that believe 
not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should 
shine unto them." But these blinded minds shall soon 



have the obstructions removed that they may see. 

Those who have become children of the light, who 
have accepted the Lord Jesus and become His disciples, 
and who now see clearly the Divine will and Plan, have 
much more responsibility than those who have never 
seen. We also have greater prospects of blessing— not 
only the present joy, comfort, peace and knowledge, but 
additionally the hope of making our "calling and election 
sure," of attaining to joint-heirship with the Master. God 
will leave the scattering of the darkness for Christ to do. 
God has let the world go on its way, meantime providing 
the Savior, the Deliverer— The Christ— who will soon 
take control of the whole world. He will cause the light, 
the Truth, to shine out, to flood the earth with knowledge 
and blessing. Then with the true light shining everywhere, 
there will be no excuse for anybody who will not 
walk in it; each one must then choose finally whether or 
not he will serve the true Master. 



page 110 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
BABYLON'S SERMONS, S. S. LESSONS, ETC. 

GENTLEMEN:- 

I write to say to you that I left the Presbyterian Church 
in November. I was baptized Sunday afternoon, January 
24th, and am now enjoying full rights as a member of the 
Body of Christ with the brethren. 

This came about by my having read one of your leaflets 
during the first part of November— a leaflet which had been 
placed on our front porch by some unknown messenger- 
one of the articles printed in it describing the Mystical Babylon's 
fall with the command, "Come out of her, my people," 
etc. This struck my mind with such force that I never went 
back to our Church, my last visit being the evening before 
Thanksgiving for a prayer service. I was dissatisfied before 
I left, not only with the weak sermons— sermonettes, I called 
them— but with the weak Sunday School lessons and fully 
as weak Bible Class lessons. I was honestly hungry for 
mental and spiritual food, commensurate with the strength 
of my mind. I never found it, outside of the Bible, until 
I bought a complete set of Pastor Russell's books and read 
them through. I was extremely anxious to have Revelation 
and part of Daniel's prophecies explained, but did not know 
where to obtain the needed assistance. Now all is made 
clear and I have to exclaim over and over, "I would not take 
a fortune for them and do without them!" My experience 
is the same as that of the rest of the Class; it is hard to 
pull ourselves away (even for rest and food) from the study 
of the Bible when it is done with the aid of those valuable 
books, "STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES." Am so thankful for them. 

Last fall the Methodist minister here warned me particularly 



to have nothing to do with those books or leaflets, saying 
I would be so drawn in I couldn't extricate myself. This 
whetted my interest, but I found, unknown to myself, that 
he really told the truth; for I am drawn in, and what is 
more remarkable, I would not wish to extricate myself, if I 
could. I have the full set of books, largest size, have subscribed 
for THE WATCH TOWER and am pleased with the 
BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY also. I want some of these books 
to go to some of my Presbyterian friends by mail, sub rosa. 
Thanking you for your kindness, I am, 
Very respectfully, MRS. H. B. PORTER. 



R5667 :page 110 

THE VOW AN ADDED SAFEGUARD 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In the fulness of time the attention of the dear Brethren 
here was publicly directed to the consideration of the VOW 
as an added safeguard to the New Creature and a further 
aid to the development of the spiritual graces. Here 
the first result was to cause a division in the camp 
for the time being, some of the brethren assuming an 
attitude of determined opposition to it. The great Adversary 
is mightily afraid of that VOW. He realizes that it will 
always be a most effective check upon his machinations, and 
so he invents a hundred and one reasons why it should be 

R5667 : page 1 1 1 

avoided. We had them all: It would "despoil us of our 
liberties"; it would "hinder our fellowship"; it would "make 
business intercourse difficult"; and "marriage of the saints 
impossible." "No, we would not sell our liberties and spoil 
the loving fellowship we formerly enjoyed." "We would 
not take the VOW, even though it cast us into outer darkness!" 

Here, as always, the Adversary overreached himself, and 
reason returning, some were constrained to ask, "Could such 
a course that seems bound to stampede the Lord's flock be 
of His leading?" And so one after another was led to reconsider 
his attitude to the VOW; and as this was done, the 
opposition thereto melted away like mists before the sun. A 
dear Brother who was strong in opposition to the VOW, was 
led to see the folly of that course, and was anxious, therefore, 
to publicly intimate his conversion. This he did in a 
most noble manner. After explaining his change of front 
and the reason therefor, he came out and in the presence of 
the whole class affixed his signature to the enclosed copy. 
Of course, such action was infectious and to our great joy 
one after another followed our dear Brother's example until 
now the opposition to the VOW has vanished into thin air. 
Praise the Lord for His great goodness to us ! 

Now we, twenty-four Brothers and Sisters of the Ecclesia 
at Durban, wish to thank you for the admirable foresight 



which caused you some years ago to propound such a wise 
provision for our safeguarding in these evil days; and we 
wish to assure you that we have made this VOW our own, 
and are determined by His grace to vow and pay unto the 
Lord our God. To this end we humbly beseech an interest 
in your prayers; and in testimony of our determination we 
have set our names to the accompanying copy. May God 
give us all grace to be faithful unto death, that we may gain 
the crown of life! 

With continued Christian love to you, dear Brother, and 
to all those of like precious faith at the Bethel, I remain, 

Your Brother in our imminent Hope, 

WM. W. JOHNSON. --Natal, S. Africa. 

[New readers of THE WATCH TOWER may not fully understand 
the above letter, not having seen a copy of the VOW. 
Upon post-card request we will mail a copy of it free.] 



HELPFUL SUGGESTIONS ENDORSED 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In sending in current report I am constrained to bring to 
your notice a point of some possible moment as respects the 
arrangements for public meetings at small places. 

It appears to me that some of the dear Pilgrim brethren 
have permitted the large audiences at certain places to create 
an impression that small audiences are hardly worth while. 
In consequence, whenever there is a small attendance at a 
publicly advertised meeting, they advise the brother, "If I 
were you I should not try a public meeting here any more." 
At a number of recent appointments, friends have told me 
practically the same thing. 

I find that sometimes not a single grain of wheat will result 
from a large meeting, while at other times several grains 
will come from a small meeting. Then, in such little places, 
everyone knows everybody's business, and if a private class 
meeting is held there will usually be a few strangers. I 
don't see why it wouldn't be better to make some little public 
announcement and get twenty-five strangers instead of a few. 

In such places a public meeting is practically no trouble or 
expense. Often there is no good hall in the place, but a 
schoolhouse to be had free. 

If the Pilgrim brethren would not discourage the holding 
of public services, but would rather advise as to wisest way 
of getting results therefrom, I think it would be better. 

Another thing: A class recently visited complained about 
the way the Pilgrims had been "scolding" them. Wouldn't 
it be an improvement if all scolding was done more indirectly, 
by example and suggestion, rather than by direct and 
public criticism. 

It has done me great good to perceive the great number 
who seem to be laying hold on the Truth. Everywhere this 
is so evident. With much Christian love, 

Yours in His name, B.H.BARTON. 



ENTERED UPON HER LAST TEST 

MY BELOVED PASTOR:- 

I was very much impressed by the statement in the Dec. 
15 WATCH TOWER: "The Church has entered upon her last 
test." In applying this to myself and others, I should be 
able to notice testings of a more peculiar and stringent character 
than in the past. And I do. One is the test to be 
especially recognized and honored of the brethren. The Lord 
has given me victory. I am reconciled to God's ways. In 
watching others, I can see the same struggle. 

In our Berean Bible Class Study, with fifteen or twenty 
attending, we do not always get around to ask each a question, 
though all have an opportunity to ask questions and 
comment. This does not meet with the approval of all the 
sisters. One Sister, with some teaching ability, is offended 
because we do not comment favorably upon her questions 
and answers. She thinks that the Elders are trying to keep 
the Sisters down, that we are not asking her enough questions 
and paying due respect to her. 

We think it proper not to give too much encouragement 
where there seems to be plenty, but rather to encourage the 
quiet and backward ones. We think the Sister is in enough 
danger anyway, as she is taking upon herself to teach two 
classes of sisters. We shall strive to live and teach so as 
to have a conscience void of offense before God and man. 

May the Lord help us all, Elders and otherwise, to realize 
more fully the responsibility resting upon us, and to 
manifest a more brotherly care for each other, knowing that 
we all expect to be with the Lord in glory shortly. May 
God bless you in your service! 

Your humble Brother by His grace, . 



R5668 :page 111 

HUNGRY FOR GOD'S LOVE 

MY DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

Your sermons in the newspapers are such a comfort, and 
I am proud to know that there is a man of God who is brave 
enough to tell the Truth as he sees it. We go to church, but 
where is the comfort to be found there? Money! money! 
money! The poor man is made to feel his position in life so 
keenly that it is far better for him to stay at home and go 
out in the fields or on the water and praise God there, for 
God wants the heart and a good, pure life. 

We are hungry for God and for Christ's love— pure, sweet 
love. We go to church, but we are made to feel that we 
poor creatures need to know more of God's love! It is 
there for us, only our eyes are not yet opened. We have 
attended the same church for twenty years— Presbyterian, 
and a little over two years ago I had an awful, awful sorrow 



(I had but the two sons), when my older son was taken ill. 

Everything was done that could be done for him, but God 

called him home. His was one of the most beautiful characters. 

When he was ill and suffering, there was never a 

murmur. He was on the Produce Exchange, and his employer 

wrote him a most beautiful letter, stating that they 

had stood side by side for thirteen years and he had never 

seen a frown. 

After the funeral, and our bills were being settled, we were 
horrified when the undertaker said to my husband that the 
minister expected his pay— from five to ten dollars. What a 
dreadful thing to think that the last prayer over the remains 
of my precious boy had to be paid for! We have the receipt. 

What would our blessed Savior say to that? Oh, keep 
telling us of God's love! It will help us to bear the cross 
as we go through life. If it were only known in the pure, 
simple way, how many dear, discouraged souls it would help! 
It is not to be found in the churches of today. 

Very sincerely, MRS. E. H. LOMAS. 



ECHOES SENTIMENTS OF MANY PRISONERS 

DEAR SIR:- 

As one of more than fourteen-hundred prisoners confined 
in Clinton Prison at Dannemora, N.Y., I wish to thank you 
and all concerned in the production of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF 
CREATION. It has been a great privilege to view the pictures, 
and I have derived lasting benefit during these past four days. 

I but echo the sentiments of every prisoner within these 
walls when I say that this exhibition has given us a better 
knowledge of creation, of God and of Christ than we could 
possibly get, unaided, from any other source. It has made a 
deep impression upon all of us. It has lifted our thoughts to 
a higher, better life and has given us a far better understanding 
of things of which we have heretofore been ignorant. 

It would have pleased you to have witnessed the manner in 
which the pictures were received by the hundreds of men who 
are considered hardened criminals. 

When the motion picture of Jesus' awakening of Jairus' 
daughter and the healing of the lame and blind was on the 
screen the prisoners voluntarily joined softly in the hymn of 
the phonograph singer. This was most impressive; and the 
man must indeed be hardened whose heart would not be moved. 

Again thanking you, please accept greetings and best wishes 
for a continuance of your health. 

Sincerely yours, WILLIAM F. GILLESPIE. 



page 112 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CLASSES 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR MAY 
After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
May follow: (1) 43; (2) 273; (3) 318; (4) 303; (5) 173; (6) 24; 
(7) 83; (8) 165; (9) 330; (10) 20; (11) 327; (12) 293; (13) 119; 
(14) 7; (15) 264; (16) 221; (17) 155; (18) 188; (19) 4; (20) 54 
(21) 17; (22) 105; (23) 52; (24) 282; (25) 87; (26) 104; (27) 88; 
(28) 213; (29) 1; (30) 45; (31) 172. 



page 113 

VOL. XXXVI APRIL 15 No. 8 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

The Sum of All Graces 115 

The Spectrum of Love 116 

World's Imitation an Outward Veneer 116 

Unselfish, Sweet Tempered, Sincere 117 

Strong, Trustful, Hopeful 118 

The Editor's Proposition 118 

White Raiment of the Kingdom 1 18 

"Light Afflictions" Here— "Glory to 

Follow" 120 

As He Was, So Are We, in This World 120 

Our "Covenant by Sacrifice" 121 

"Therefore Glorify God in Your Body" 121 

"Touch Not Mine Anointed" 122 

Training for Kingdom Work 122 

Earth's Five Universal Empires 1 23 

King Saul's Last Battle 124 

Returning to Business 125 

Interesting Items 126 

War Hastening Millennium 126 

Memorial Supper Reports 127 



page 114 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 



Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



REVISED CONVENTION ITINERARY 

A few changes of dates have been necessary, as below:— 
May 9-Pittsburgh, Penna. May 20-Dallas, Texas. 

10— Altoona, Penna. " 21— Waco, Texas. 

11— East Liverpool, Ohio. " 22— Houston, Texas. 

12— Dayton, Ohio. " 23— San Antonio, Texas. 

13— Cincinnati, Ohio. " 24— El Paso, Texas. 

14-St. Louis, Mo. " 26-Riverside, Cal. 

15-Columbia, Mo. " 27-Los Angeles, Cal. 

16-Kansas City, Mo. " 28-San Diego, Cal. 

17-Coffeyville, Kans. " 29-Santa Ana, Cal. 

18— Oklahoma City, Okla. " 30— San Francisco, Cal. 

19— Denison, Texas. 
June 7th will be BIBLE STUDENTS' DAY at the Fair, where 
Festival Hall has been set apart for their use that day. Brother Russell 
expects to deliver a public address on Sunday, May 30th, at San 
Francisco and on Sunday, June 6th, at Oakland. He also expects to be 
with the Conventioners at Festival Hall, June 7th. He will have 
editorial duties and correspondence needing his attention. He will probably 
speak only once at the Oakland Convention, aside from the two 
public Sunday addresses here mentioned and the address at Festival 
Hall, June 7th. 

For information respecting room and board at reasonable rates 
address I.B.S.A. Committee, Box 473, Oakland, Cal. 

THE RETURN JOURNEY 



June 8— Sacramento, Cal. June 17— Butte, Mont. 

10— Portland, Ore. " 19— Greeley, Colo., a.m. 

11— Bellingham, Wash. " 19— Cheyenne, Wyo., p.m. 

12— Vancouver, B.C., a.m. " 20— Denver, Colo. 
12— Everett, Wash., p.m. " 21— Colorado Springs, Colo. 
13-Seattle, Wash. " 22-Pueblo, Colo. 

13— Tacoma, Wash. " 23— Omaha, Neb. 

14-Spokane, Wash. " 24-Chicago, 111. 

15 -Missoula, Mont, a.m. " 25-South Bend, Ind. 
15— Helena, Mont, p.m. " 27— Indianapolis, Ind. 
16-Great Falls, Mont. July 4-N.Y. City Temple. 

DOCTOR JONES' EXCURSION PARTY 

Brother Jones advises that our Convention program seems too long 
for the proposed plan of Special Car. His latest thought is that himself 
and some others may overtake Brother Russell at Los Angeles 
Convention, proceed thence to San Francisco and then return to 
Chicago direct. 



LITTLE CONVENTIONAL GATHERINGS 

In harmony with our suggestion the friends at various places where 
Brother Russell will be addressing the public are arranging for little, 
quiet, local Conventions. Incidentally, we remark, that these are often 
amongst the most profitable. We advise that they be not made public 
—that the public be not invited to them, unless, indeed, it would be the 
particular friends of those who might be in attendance, especially if they 
were consecrated people. Some of the places intending such gatherings 
have sent us the particulars noted below. 

Information respecting board and lodging at economical rates, etc., 
etc., should be obtained from the Class Secretaries. 
PITTSBURGH, PA., May 9 (other dates not yet determined). 

Address R. H. Bricker, Class Sec'y, 1323 Goebel St., N.S. 
ALTOONA, PA., May 9, 10. 

Address Class Sec'y, F. B. McClellan, 322 Cherry St. 
EAST LIVERPOOL, O., May 9, 10, 11. 

Address Class Sec'y, I. Whitehill, 1062 Oak St. 
CINCINNATI, O., May 13, 14, 15, 16. 

Address Class Sec'y, H. Schulz, 201 Lincoln Inn Court. 
ST. LOUIS, Mo., May 14, 15, 16. 

Address Class Sec'y, J. H. Hoeveler, 6126 Waterman Ave. 
KANSAS CITY, MO., May 14, 15, 16. 

Address Class Sec'y, Mrs. R. H. Goza, 4409 E. 27th St. 
SEDALIA, MO., May 15, 16. 

Address Class Sec'y, S. Bowser, 501 E. 4th St. 
COFFEYVILLE, KANS., May 16, 17. 

Address Class Sec'y, Mrs. C. F. Palmeyer, 302 E. 6th St. 
OKLAHOMA CITY, OKLA., May 16, 17, 18. 

Address Class Sec'y, G. F. Wilson, 801-1/2 W. 9th St. 
HOUSTON, TEXAS, May 21, 22, 23. 

Address Class Sec'y, J. Isaac, Jr., 905 Thompson St. 
LOS ANGELES, CAL., May 26, 27, 28, 29. 



Address Class Sec'y, F. P. Sherman, Peoples Temple, 8th and 
Flower Sts. 



THE WATCH TOWER FREE LIST 

Strictly speaking, we have no free list; that is to say, the Postal Laws 
require that all subscriptions be paid for. However, many desire to read 
our journal who are in dependent or very poor circumstances. Some 
kind friends have provided a fund out of which these may be supplied 
according to the law. Now is the time to send in your renewal of the 
requests, if you are on the poor list, in order that your subscription may 
be renewed, as though you sent in the money. A post-card will do. 
The following words will be understood to mean that you are not so 
circumstanced as to be able to pay for the journal, but desire it. Say: 
"Your offer of THE WATCH TOWER for the ensuing year is noted, and 
accepted, with appreciation." (Sign.) 



RURAL ROUTE VOLUNTEERING 

We are asked respecting the law governing the depositing of matter 
in rural route mail-boxes. We reply that the mail-boxes are not Government 
property. The volunteer matter may be put into these without 
infracting any law of the United States. There is, of course, a general 
desire that such boxes should not be stuffed with handbills or other 
matter purely advertisements. Our B.S.M. is strictly a newspaper. 
Whether they be delivered by a Government carrier or by some of our 
volunteers makes no matter. 



I. B. S. A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF MAY 

Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY VII. 

Week of May 2 Q. 38 to 44 Week of May 16 Q. 52 to 53 

Week of May 9 Q. 45 to 51 Week of May 23 Q. 54 to 59 

Week of May 30 Q. 60 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each; 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



R5668 :page 115 

THE SUM OF ALL GRACES 

"And now abideth faith, hope, love, these three; but 
the greatest of these is love."— 1 Corinthians 13:13. 



THE Apostle Paul has just been referring to 

the various miraculous gifts of the Spirit 

then granted to all begotten of the Spirit to 

the new nature. Any one lacking some such 

special gift at that time would thus manifest 

to all believers that he had not become 

a member of the Church of Christ. These 

supernatural gifts also served to assist the 

primitive Church in spiritual growth. They 

did not have the Bible in those days, and if 

they had possessed it, but very few could have read it; 

hence, they needed special assistance which the Church 

afterward did not need, and which later was taken away. 

In this letter to the Church at Corinth, the Apostle, 
after discussing these various gifts, says, "And yet I show 
unto you a more excellent way." Then he proceeds to 
point out the super-excellence of the fruit of Love. Whoever 
has the Holy Spirit must have a measure at least of 
this fruitage, whether it be the little flower that contains 
the fruit-bud or whether it be the partly developed fruit, 
the fully developed fruit or the ripened fruit. God our 
Father, who looks upon the heart, knows how His Holy 
Spirit in the heart is seeking to control the flesh, to guide 
the mind and all the words and actions. We are not able 
to judge one another's hearts. The Apostle said that he 
did not feel able properly to judge even himself, but left 
judgment to the Lord. He knew that his heart was loyal 
and that he was endeavoring to be all that the Lord would 
have him be. Though he was conscious of his inability 
always to "do the things that he would," he knew that the 
Master would accept his loyalty of heart; so he would do 
his best and leave the remainder with God. 

Our faith and our hope in the Lord lead us to earnest 
endeavor to develop the fruitage of love in all its varied 
and beautiful phases. Gentleness is a part of love; meekness 
is a part of love; so also are humility and brotherly-kindness. 
The question at issue with each child of God 
is not, How tall and well-built am I? or, How fine-looking 
or well-educated or well-connected am I according to the 
flesh? or, How many or how fine sermons have I 
preached? or even, How many have I brought to a knowledge 
of the Truth? But the vital question is, How much 
of the quality of love have I developed? How great is 
the likeness of my character to that of Christ? 

LOVE IS THE PRINCIPAL THING 

Why is this quality of love made so prominent in the 
Word of God? We answer, Because it is the first thing, 
the most important thing, the principal thing. It is the 
fulfilling of God's Law; and, indeed, the sacrificial love 
enjoined upon God's saints of this Age goes even beyond 
the requirements of the perfect law. But why is Love put 
first? It is not because God arbitrarily so placed it, not 
because He exercised His power of fiat and declared that 
it should be first. No. It is because no other quality of 



character is so lovely, so beautiful, so productive of happiness 
and joy, so great a blessing to all upon whom it 
operates. It is the very essence of God's character. 
"GOD IS LOVE!" This quality particularly represents 
His personality. While God is all-just and all-powerful, 
we do not say that God is Justice or that God is Power, 
but that God is Love. He uses His great Power only as 
Love dictates and approves. He uses His Justice only in 
fullest harmony with His glorious attribute of Love. 
Love is the mainspring of all His doings. 

Whoever, therefore, would be God-like must be loving, 
must have love as the dominating quality of his character 
and his life. Love and righteousness are inseparable. 
Love is to continue to all eternity; and only those who 
become the active embodiment of this gracious quality of 
character will live eternally. Hence we see the paramount 
importance of its development in every life. 

Next to our Lord's marvelous Sermon on the 
Mount stands this great homily on Love, recorded 
in the 13th chapter of 1st Corinthians. Both 
discourses teach the same lesson, but approach it 
from different standpoints. As pupils in the School of 
Christ, all the instructions of the Divine Word and 
the Divine providences in our lives are designed by 
the Lord to develop our characters and to influence our 
conduct in harmony with the requirements of Love. The 
Master said, "A new commandment I give unto you [the 
Church], that ye love one another." Since "Love is the 
fulfilling of the Law," and is "the bond of perfectness" in 
the child of God, no wonder we are assured from the 
Scriptures that "God is Love," and that "he that loveth 
not, knoweth not God!" Our Lord again declared that 
"this is life eternal— that they might know Thee, the only 
true God"— the God who is Love. 

This noble quality of Christian character cannot be 
acquired instantly. It is a growth; and its development is 
the chief business, the chief concern, of every spirit-begotten 
child of God who would know God, who would 
win the great reward of life on the highest plane of existence 
and who would see our Father and our Savior 

R5668 :page 116 

face to face and dwell in their presence forevermore. 

ALL ATTAINMENTS VALUELESS WITHOUT LOVE 

In this wonderful discourse under consideration, St. 
Paul points out that this crowning grace of Love is the 
necessary quality to make any service acceptable to God. 
If Love is not the motive power controlling us, the greatest 
zeal, the finest rhetoric, or the richest eloquence, on 
behalf of Truth and righteousness would pass for nothing 
in God's estimation, and would bring no reward from 
Him. If love be lacking, great ability in expounding the 
mysteries of God, much study and great knowledge, would 



be as naught in winning the approval of the Lord. Even 
a mountain-moving faith would be valueless, if, looking 
into the recesses of the heart, the Father could see that 
love is wanting. The giving of all one's possessions to 
feed the poor or to spread the Gospel, if done without 
love as the moving impulse, would be powerless to bring 
us God's approbation. Death as a martyr would not be 
acceptable except it was undergone from love to the Lord 
and loyalty to His Truth. 

Why is this? It is because all these things might be 
done through selfish motives— to be seen of men or to 
feed pride or to exercise the spirit of combativeness. Love 
must prompt all our service for God or all will be utterly 
without value— as "sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal." 

THE SPECTRUM OF LOVE-ITS COMPONENT ELEMENTS 

A college professor, commenting upon this word Love, 
said, "As you have seen a man of science take a beam of 
light and pass it through a crystal prism, as you have 
seen it come out on the other side of the prism broken 
up into its component colors— red, and blue, and violet, 
and orange, and all the colors of the rainbow— so St. Paul 
passes this thing, Love, through the magnificent prism of 
his inspired intellect, and it comes out on the other side 
broken up into its elements. And in these few words we 
have what one might call the spectrum of Love, the analysis 
of Love. Will you observe what its elements are? 
Will you notice that they have common names, that they 
are features which we hear about every day, that they are 
things that can be practised by every man in every place 
in life; and how by a multitude of ordinary virtues, the 
supreme thing, the summum bonum, is made up? 
"The spectrum of Love has nine ingredients: 

Patience— Love suffereth long.' 

Kindness— 'and is kind.' 

Generosity— Love envieth not.' 

Humility— Love vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up.' 

Courtesy— 'doth not behave itself unseemly.' 

Unselfishness— 'seeketh not her own.' 

Good temper— 'is not easily provoked.' 

Guilelessness— 'thinketh no evil.' 

Sincerity— 'Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in 
the Truth.'" 
To the above we add three other ingredients: 

Fortitude— Love "beareth all things, ...endureth 
all things." 

Trustfulness— Love "believeth all things." 

Hopefulness— Love "hopeth all things." 
We cannot agree with the professor that these graces 
can be practised by every man, in every place, nor that 
they are ordinary virtues. We must contend that these 
fruits as a whole cannot belong to the "natural man." He 
may indeed put on some of the gentleness, some of the 
humility, some of the courtesy, some of the patience, some 
of the kindness, as men may attach grapes to thorn bushes 



or figs to thistles; but with the natural man these graces 

are wholly put on, and not the outgrowth of the inward 

grace, the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Love. They are not 

an evidence of relationship to God. Where the individual 

has not been begotten again by the Word of Truth and 

by the Holy Spirit, his imitation of certain outward manifestations 

of love will not constitute him a son of God nor 

bring to him the rewards and blessings of sonship, to 

which there is only the one Door— Christ Jesus. 

And with the Christian a mere outward manifestation 
of patience, meekness, etc., is not sufficient, either in God's 
sight or in his own sight. These rich fruits are produced 
only by the indwelling Spirit of love in his own heart. 
In civilized countries many of the fruits of the Spirit are 
recognized by the unregenerate as desirable traits and are 
imitated, as marks of good breeding. In many cases they 
are successfully worn as a cloak or mask, covering hearts 
and sentiments quite antagonistic to the Spirit of Love. 

WORLD'S IMITATION OF LOVE AN OUTWARD VENEER 

While even an outward imitation of the fruit of Love 
mitigates to some extent the evils and distresses and frictions 
incident to man's fallen condition, yet it is only a 
veneer, as times of stress and trial often manifest in a 
painful manner. We remember a report which we once 
read of a conflagration at a certain Charity Bazaar in 
Paris, which showed that the most polished and aristocratic 
young gentle-men of the most polite city and nation 
of earth displayed the ferocity of brute-beasts when face 
to face with death, and that in their mad rush to escape 
the flames they knocked down and injured each other, and 
treated thus even ladies of the first rank in France, to 
whom they had just before been overly polite. We cannot 
expect more of a love-veneered, selfish heart— even the 
strong glue of chivalry will not hold the veneer under 
such circumstances. 

The time is now very near when a far greater and 
more terrible crisis will make manifest to the whole world 
that much of the politeness and gentleness of our day is 
only skin deep, and is not from the heart, not the 
fruitage of the Holy Spirit of Love. In that great crisis, 
every man's hand will be "against his neighbor and 
against his brother," as the Word of the Lord graphically 
portrays. In that great Day of Vengeance, the masks of 
formal politeness and chivalry will be discarded, and the 
world will for a short period get such a revealment of its 
own hideousness and selfishness as will horrify it and will 
help to prepare it for the blessed Kingdom of Love then 
to be established by the great Immanuel, the Messiah of 
God. And this great Day of Vengeance has already begun. 

DRAWN BY LOVE DIVINE 

The Scriptures inform us that in our fallen estate unselfish 
love is foreign to our natures, and must be introduced 



into them by the Power of God. The Apostle says, 
"Not that we loved God, but that He loved us, and sent 
His Son to be the Propitiation for our sins." As we 
learn of this great love of God, and accept the conditions 
which He has made for our return to Him, through His 
Son, the love of God constraineth us to love in return. 
The measure of our appreciation of Divine Love will 
be the measure of our zeal in conforming our characters 
to the Divine pattern. A naturally rough, uncouth, depraved 
disposition may require a much longer time after 
the grace of Divine love enters his heart, before that 
grace is manifest in all the words and thoughts and acts 
of the outward man. Others of more refined nature, of 
gentle birth and cultured training, might even without the 
grace of God within have many of the outward refinements, 
so that as a Christian his outward conduct might 
be much more pleasing. None save He who reads the 
heart is competent to judge as to who has and who has 
not this quality of love well developed in his character. 
We will now take up the various elements of Love. 

ANALYSIS OF LOVE'S COMPONENT ELEMENTS 

Love is patient— it is longsuffering with the weaknesses 

R5668 :page 117 

and imperfections of those who give any evidence 

of good intentions. Moreover, it is patient even with those 

who are out of the way, and who oppose themselves to 

righteousness and Truth, realizing that the whole world 

are more or less under the influence of the great Adversary 

and his demon host, who blind the minds of the 

masses. This manifestation of love was very prominent 

in our Lord Jesus. How patient He was with His opponents! 

Let us heed the Apostle's words in his Epistle 

to the Hebrews, "Consider Him that endured such contradiction 

of sinners against Himself, lest ye be wearied 

[in well-doing and patience] and faint in your minds." 

Love is kind in its methods. It not only seeks to do 
good, but seeks to do it in the kindest possible manner. In 
proportion as love is attained the effort of the heart will 
be to have every word and act, as well as the thought 
which prompts them, full of kindness. Love is tender, 
affectionate. It has a real and deep interest in others, 
especially the brethren in Christ. We do well to remember 
the motto of the old Quaker: "I shall pass through 
this world but once. Any good thing, therefore, that I 
can do, or any kindness that I can show to any human 
being, let me do it now. Let me not defer it or neglect it, 
for I shall not pass this way again." This sentiment is 
especially applicable in the Church of God. 

Love is generous, and has no place for envy, which, 
on the contrary, springs from a perverted nature— from 
selfishness. Love rejoices with them that rejoice; it rejoices 
in the prosperity of every good word and work, 



and in the advancement in Christian grace and service of 
all who are actuated by the Spirit of God. 

Love is humble— it "vaunteth not itself." It does not 
sound a trumpet before it. Its good deeds are not done 
to be seen of men, not done to be praised of the brethren, 
but would be done just the same if no one should see or 
know but the Lord alone. It is boastful neither of its 
knowledge nor of its graces, but in humility acknowledges 
that every good and perfect gift comes from the Father, 
and returns praise to Him for every mercy received. Love 
seeks rather to keep self in the background. Some one 
has truly said, "Love saves a man from making a fool of 
himself by consequential conduct, and by thrusting himself 
into positions which betray his incompetence." 

Love is courteous— "doth not behave itself unseemly." 
How beautiful is this trait in the child of God! How 
much pain is caused by the lack of courtesy, of that 
thoughtful consideration for others which springs from 
real love in the heart— love that is trained! Pride and 
selfishness are at the root of most of the unseemly conduct 
and boorishness so common to those who think themselves 
somebody, either intellectually or financially. Perfect 
love, on the contrary, manifests courtesy along with 
humility. Politeness, courtesy, may be defined as love 
in the little things. 

The secret of real courtesy is love. A gentleman or 
lady is one who does things gently, thoughtfully, kindly, 
lovingly. A true Christian, then, should be a gentleman 
or a lady in the most real and perfect sense. To ignore 
the little courtesies of life as unnecessary is a serious 
mistake in a child of God. A kind greeting, a pleasant 
smile, little acts of thoughtfulness for others— who has not 
realized their potency or felt pain from the lack of these? 

UNSELFISH, SWEET TEMPERED, SINCERE 

Love is unselfish— "seeketh not her own," exclusively 
or pre-eminently. It never seeks to take advantage of 
others or to promote its own selfish interests. It goes out 
to others, and seeks to promote their comfort and happiness. 
It does not desire to grasp the best of everything 
for self, nor to have the chiefest seats or the most attention 
or the highest honors, but rather prefers others in 
honor, and is willing in cheerfulness to take the lower 
place. Put into practise, this phase of love— unselfishness 
—has a great influence for good upon all the affairs of 
life, in the home, in the Church of God, everywhere. 

Love is good-tempered— "not easily provoked." Among 
the evils abounding today is that of ill-temper, fretfulness, 
bad humor, touchiness, quickness to take offense. To 
whatever extent this disposition is fostered or willingly 
harbored, and not fought against, it is an evidence of a 
deficiency and a lack of development in the Spirit of God, 
of deficiency in likeness to Christ, our Pattern. 

Very few of the evidences of a wrong spirit receive as 
much leniency and as many excuses for its continuance 



as does this fault. However much natural weakness or 
nervousness may tend in this direction, every true member 
of the Body of Christ must surely vigorously oppose this 
disposition to be irritable, fault-finding and morose. He 
must fight this tendency of his fallen flesh, must wage a 
good warfare against it in the strength of the Lord. The 
imposition of a penalty upon one's self for every outbreak 
of irritability or of unlovely temper would soon bring 
greater watchfulness over the tongue and over the unloving 
impulses of the old nature. Few traits of character 
more truly glorify the Lord than sweet temper. 

Love is guileless. It "thinketh no evil"— does not 
surmise evil. It seeks to interpret the actions, words and 
manners of others charitably. Being pure and well-intentioned 
itself, it endeavors so far as possible to view the 
words and the conduct of others from the same standpoint. 
It does not treasure up animosities and suspicions, 
nor manufacture a chain of circumstantial proofs of evil 
intentions out of trivial matters. "Faults are thick where 
love is thin," is a wise and true saying. Love makes all 
possible allowance for errors of judgment rather than 
impugns the motives of the heart. 

Love is sincere— "rejoiceth not in iniquity." It is 
grieved by evils wherever encountered, but is sympathetic 
toward all who fall into evil through weakness or who are 
beset by temptations. In this respect love prompts to an 
opposite course of action from that of Balaam, who "loved 
the reward of iniquity." Balaam, it will be remembered, 
feared the Lord, and as His prophet could not think of 
doing otherwise than according to the strict letter of the 
Lord's injunction; but he did not have the spirit of obedience 
and loyalty, the spirit of love; and hence when a 
reward was offered him if he would curse Israel, he was 
willing, in order to secure the reward, to conform to the 
evil proposition, if only the Lord would permit him. 

So there are some Christians who have a respect for 
the letter of the Divine Word through fear, but who lack 
the Holy Spirit (disposition) of love, and who by reason 
of a love for wealth or popularity or ease, etc., are willing 
to engage in various practises which come as near to injuring 
the Lord's Cause as possible without being in open 
opposition to Him. Some of these Balaams are in the 
ministry; and for the sake of salary and prestige and the 
friendship of wealthy Balaks, they are willing to preach 
doctrines which they do not believe, to wink at unholy 
practises, and in various ways to cast stumbling-blocks 
before Spiritual Israel, and encourage others so to do. 
Both our Lord and the Apostles mention these Balaams 
as being false teachers in the nominal Church. See 2 Peter 2:15; 
Jude 11; Revelation 2:14. 

Every one who is seeking to develop in his heart the 
Holy Spirit, perfect love, should guard this point of sincerity 

R5668 :page 118 

of motive as well as uprightness of conduct. The 



least suggestion of rejoicing at the fall of any person or 
thing that in any degree represents righteousness and 
goodness is to be deplored and overcome. Perfect love 
rejoices not in iniquity under any circumstances or conditions, 
and would have no sympathy, but only sorrow, in 
the fall of another, even if it should mean his own gain. 

Love "rejoiceth in the Truth." However profitable 
error might be, love could take no part in it, and could 
not desire the reward of evil and error. But it takes 
pleasure in the Truth— truth on any subject, but especially 
the Truth of Divine Revelation, however unpopular it 
may be, however much persecution its advocacy may involve, 
however much it may cause the loss of the friendship 
of this world and of those blinded by the god 
of this world. The spirit of Love has so strong an 
affinity for the Truth that it rejoices to share loss, persecution, 
distress, or whatever may come against the Truth 
and its servants. In the Lord's estimate it is all the same 
whether we are ashamed of Him or His Word; and of 
such He declares that He will be ashamed before His 
Father and the angels. Love has no sympathy with hypocrisy 
or pretense. It is transparent and honest in character. 

STRONG, TRUSTFUL, HOPEFUL 

Love is strong— it "beareth all things." It is both 
willing and able to endure, for the Cause of God, reproaches, 
reproofs, insults, losses, misrepresentations, 
privations, and even death. "This is the victory that 
overcometh the world, even your faith"— the very center 
and life of which faith is the holy spirit of love to the 
Lord, to them that are His, and of sympathetic love for 
the world. Perfect love can bear up under the most trying 
circumstances and conditions which the Lord shall permit 
to come upon His children, and by God's grace come off 
"more than conqueror through Him that loved us and 
gave Himself for us." 

Love is trustful— it "believeth all things." It is not 
suspicious, but on the contrary is disposed to have confidence 
in others, so far as possible, and to give them credit 
for sincerity. It acts on the principle that it is better if 
necessary to be deceived a hundred times than to go 
through life soured by a distrustful, suspicious mind— far 
better than to accuse or suspect even one person unjustly. 
This is the merciful disposition applied to thoughts; and 
of this disposition the Master said, "Blessed are the 
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy." The unmerciful 
mind and heart, ready on every slight provocation or 
imaginary one to think evil of others, is father to unmerciful 
words and conduct toward others. 

Love is hopeful, buoyant— it "hopeth all things." It is 
not easily discouraged. Hope is the secret of Love's 
perseverance. Having learned of God, and having become 
a partaker of His holiness, it trusts in Him and 
hopes undismayed for the fulfilment of His gracious 
Covenant, however dark the immediate surroundings. 



This hopeful element of love forms one of the striking 
features in the perseverance of the saints, enabling them 
to "endure hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ." 
Its hopeful quality hinders Love from being easily offended 
or easily stopped in the work of the Lord. Where 
others would become discouraged and put to flight, the 
spirit of love gives endurance; for its anchor of hope is 
fastened securely "within the Veil." It holds firmly to 
the Rock of Ages, and hence cannot drift into despair. 

Not only is Love the greatest of all the graces, but 
really, as we have seen, it is the sum of all the fruits of 
the Spirit. It is everlasting— "Love never faileth." It 
is for those who develop this quality to its glorious perfection 
that eternal life has been provided. And those 
who possess the sacrificial love which our dear Master 
possessed, who so love as to gladly lay down their lives 
for the brethren, will gain the fullest and grandest life 
of all— Divine life.— 2 Peter 1:4. 

THE EDITOR'S PROPOSITION 

Let us then, dear brethren, more and more cultivate 
love, remembering that whatever else may be our attainments, 
all will be in vain without this crowning grace. 
The Editor has a proposal to make to every reader of 
this journal, which he believes will prove very helpful to 
each one who shall co-operate. It is this: That during 
the remainder of this year (if we shall be spared so long 
in the flesh) each of us pray every morning that the 
Lord will bless us in the cultivation of love, in thought, 
in word, in deed, throughout the day; and that every 
evening, in reviewing the events of the day at the Throne 
of Heavenly Grace, we remember to report to the Lord 
respecting our measure of success or failure. 

Then note the results of your watching and praying; 
keep on the lookout for all encouraging evidences of 
growth in this fruitage of the Holy Spirit; and when you 
write us, if you please, mention your progress in willing 
to love, and in practising it. We shall be especially glad 
to know of your growth along this line. 



R5668 :page 118 

THE WHITE RAIMENT OF THE KINGDOM 

"He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment; 
and I will not blot his name out of the Book of Life, but I 
will confess his name before My Father, 
and before His angels."— Revelation 3:5. 

IN THIS text, as throughout the Bible, the 
thought is maintained that the elect class, 
who will receive the highest glory, honor 
and blessing from the Lord, must demonstrate 



their loyalty by overcoming. It is not 
sufficient that there shall be an overcoming 
of the will at the beginning of the Christian 
career, but subsequently there must be trials 
and testings endured, and these must be met 
in an overcoming manner. The consecration 
having been made, and the trials and testings having 
begun, the individual yielding under those temptations 
and testings, and continuing to be overcome by them, 
would prove that he is not sufficiently loyal; for the 
Lord has promised that His grace shall be sufficient in 
every time of need.— 2 Corinthians 12:9. 

Although the Lord's grace is sufficient, this would not 
mean that we might not sometimes fall into temptation. 
We might fall into temptation inadvertently, without the 
consent of our wills, and "be overtaken in a fault." But 
the Lord's grace is sufficient to bring us out of the temptations 
as overcomers, enabling us to triumph over them. 

R5669 :page 118 

Falling into temptation does not mean falling in temptation 

—falling when tempted. But when one is temporarily 

overcome, whether it be a yielding to a temptation of the 

flesh or whether it be a wilfulness of spirit, or mind, has 

much to do with the nature and degree of the sin. We 

may not always be able to triumph fully, completely, according 

to the flesh, but the will must be loyal. We must 

triumph in the mind, otherwise we shall not be overcomers. 

This overcoming is a gradual work, progressing 
throughout our Christian course, from the moment of 

R5669 :page 119 

consecration down to the conclusion of life. But the text 
apparently takes hold of the conclusion, rather than the 
beginning or the middle of the work, and implies that the 
individual has at the end of the trial, the end of his race-course, 
this overcoming degree of righteousness, so that 
he may be classed as an overcomer. Such an overcomer 
will be clothed in white raiment. 

WHITE RAIMENT LOANED TO US 

The Scriptures give us to understand that at the very 
beginning of our Christian experience, we figuratively are 
clothed in white raiment. This white raiment represents 
justification— we are justified freely from all things. It 
is a robe without a spot. It is sometimes spoken of as 
Christ's robe of righteousness, because it comes to us 
through Christ. It is to be had only through Him. He 
is able to impute to us, to loan to us, grant to us temporarily, 
this robe. It is spoken of as the wedding garment. 
At an oriental wedding, a wedding garment of 
white linen was used to cover over the clothing worn by 
each guest. It was loaned to the guest at the wedding by 



the host, when he appeared at the wedding-feast. 

White linen signifies purity. So when Christ gives us 
the use of His merit, it is as a white garment to cover out 
imperfections. It is an imputation of His righteousness, 
which is to us justification. We are exhorted to keep our 
garments unspotted from the world. The imputation of 
righteousness given us, we are to preserve, to maintain. 
But we cannot fully maintain it of ourselves. Our tongues 
may sometimes say things that we wish they had not said, 
and our hands may sometimes do things we would not 
desire. Hence, God has provided a way by which our 
blemishes or transgressions may be eradicated— those not 
wilful. This way is our daily application for the cleansing 
of these unwilling transgressions, through the precious 
blood. Thus we keep our garments unspotted from the 
world. Thus our justification, our white robe, is maintained 
—should be maintained. 

WHITE RAIMENT OUR OWN 

But it is not sufficient that we have the imputation of 
our Savior's righteousness. This imputation is only a 
temporary arrangement. We need to come to the place 
where we shall have a righteousness of our own. Our 
flesh is imperfect; as St. Paul says, we cannot do the 
things which we would. In spite of our best endeavors 
things are bound to go more or less wrong. But we are 
to prove ourselves overcomers— "more than conquerors." 
The Lord has arranged that at the conclusion of our trial, 
at the end of the present life, all the overcomers shall 
receive the new body. This new body will be a body of 
actual purity. Thus, as the Apostle says, we shall "be 
clothed upon with our House which is from Heaven." 
So our raiment will be changed from a garment of imputed 
perfection, our justification by faith, to that which 
represents actual perfection. At the resurrection we shall 
receive that body of inherent purity, without blemish, 
without spot, which is here pictured as "white raiment." 

"BROUGHT BEFORE THE KING" 

Furthermore, we read of each of these that the Lord 
"will not blot out his name out of the Book of Life," in 
which are written the names of all those who become truly 
the Lord's people, those who have made with the Lord "a 
covenant by sacrifice," all who renounce their wills, who 
present their bodies a living sacrifice. The name of each 
of these is recorded, entered in the Lamb's Book of 
Life, when he starts to live the new life, and to demonstrate 
his loyalty. Just as these are clothed upon with the 
robe of Christ's righteousness in advance of being actually 
tested, so their names are written in that Book in 
advance of being actually tested. If they do not remain 
faithful, their names will be blotted out of that Book of 
Life. But if they are faithful their names will not be 
blotted out of the Book of Life; and they will attain all 



those glorious things which are promised to those who love 
Him supremely.— Revelation 21:7. 

More than this, the Lord says, "I will confess their 
names before My Father and before His angels." The 
intimation here is that the overcomers will have such 
characters that the Lord will not be ashamed of them, but 
will be pleased to own them in the presence of the Father 
and the holy angels. We are to be "changed from glory 
to glory," into the likeness of our Lord. (2 Corinthians 3:18.) 
In the end, these overcomers will each be so 
grandly developed that the Lord will not be ashamed to 
confess any of them and to say, Here is one of My followers. 
Here is another. They have walked in My footsteps 
and have overcome. But He will be ashamed of 
any who are ashamed of Him. Of such He says, "Whosoever 
shall be ashamed of Me and of My words, of him 
shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when He shall come 
in His own glory and in His Father's, and of the holy 
angels."— Luke 9:26. 

It is not a matter of favoritism, but of character-development. 
If they will not endure to the end, if they 
do not prove overcomers, they will not be fit for the 
Kingdom and association with their Lord. 

This brings up the thought that there is another class 
mentioned in the Bible— the Great Company class, as in 
contrast to the Little Flock— or the antitypical Levite class 
as in contrast to the antitypical Priestly class. The Great 
Company had their names written in the Lamb's Book of 
Life, but they were not overcomers in the truest sense. 
They did not stand faithful. Because of not proving 
faithful, they will not be confessed before the Father and 
the holy angels in the same sense as the Bride class. 

It is stated that the Bride will be presented before the 
Father, and that "the virgins, her companions" (Psalm 45:13-15) 
will be there also— but the latter will not be 
confessed as the Bride class. We will not say that their 
names will be blotted out of the Lamb's Book of Life. 
Their names may remain. But those who go into the 
Second Death will surely have their names blotted out 
of the Book; they will be destroyed with everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord. 

ROBES WASHED IN "THE GREAT TRIBULATION" 

The Great Company will not have the "abundant entrance" 
granted the Little Flock. And the same distinction 
obtains between these two classes in connection with 
the white raiment. While all receive the robe of Christ's 
imputed righteousness, some of them do not keep their 
garments "unspotted from the world." Their white 
raiment becomes spotted and soiled, bedraggled by contact 
with the earth. Their justification, or robe of Christ's 
righteousness, becomes unpresentable. When a spot comes 
upon it, instead of having the spot cleansed away at once, 
they allow it to remain, and the spots accumulate until 
their garment becomes quite soiled. Then at the conclusion 



of their course, when the examination day comes, 
their robe is found to be spotted— yet they wear it still. 
They are not divested of that robe of justification. They 
have not abandoned the Lord and He has not abandoned 
them. But they have failed to use the means which the 
Lord provided for their cleansing. 

In the Revelation this class is spoken of as "a great 
multitude"— the Great Company. We are told that they 
"will come up out of the Great Tribulation, and will wash 

R5669 : page 120 

their robes, and make them white in the blood of the 
Lamb." Instead of doing a cleansing work day by day, 
maintaining their justification with God and being ready 
for the change (by means of their faithfulness) they are, 
on the contrary, found of Him as unworthy of this chief 
place. Their robes will not be taken from them, but they 
will be obliged to suffer great tribulations, with the view 
to making them ready to wash and make their robes white 
in the blood of cleansing, so that they, also, will be clothed 
in white and in their resurrection bodies will be pure. 
But they will attain this only by passing through "the 
Great Tribulation."— See Revelation 7:9-14. 



R5670 : page 120 

"LIGHT AFFLICTIONS" HERE-"GLORY TO FOLLOW" 

"We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, 

but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast 

down, but not destroyed; always bearing about in the body 

the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus 

may be made manifest in our 

body. "-2 Corinthians 4:8-10. 

THE Apostle Paul is here addressing the 

Church at Corinth, and in the larger sense 

addressing the entire Church of the Gospel 

Age. He is apparently describing to some 

extent the experiences of himself and those 

who were with him in his missionary labors. 

He traveled from place to place, but 

not as our pilgrim brethren now do; for 

sometimes he spent an entire year, sometimes 

more than a year, in one city. Nevertheless, 

he was a traveler, going about where other missionaries 

of the Lord had not gone, addressing the Jews 

and whoever else might give evidence of having a hearing 

ear. On these tours he took with him assistants. We 

are therefore to consider that his words here referred 

not only to the Apostles (for he was the only Apostle 

of the company), but also to the others with him; and 

that this Epistle, as are all the inspired writings, was 



designed by the Lord for the instruction and benefit of 
all the saints throughout the Christian Dispensation. 

The Apostle's assistants were general ministers of the 
Lord, as are all God's children in proportion as they do 
a work of ministry. His words would seemingly be addressed, 
then, to all who are engaged in the Lord's service. 
In this Epistle he points out that there are differences 
in the services rendered— "He which soweth 
sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and he which soweth 
bountifully shall reap also bountifully"— and also 
differences in the experiences of the various members 
of the Body of Christ. He says that some of them had 
been the objects of persecution and that others had 
shared in those persecutions by suffering with those so 
persecuted, indicating that the Lord recognizes and appreciates 
this association with those in distress, if there 
be such association. 

This thought is brought out also in St. Paul's Epistle 
to the Hebrews. (Chapter 10:32-34.) If those not so 
actively engaged in the service are faithfully doing all 
that their hands find to do, the Lord is as appreciative 
of it as He is of those who because of greater ability or 
physical strength or opportunities are able to accomplish 
more— each doing to the extent of his opportunity the 
work of the Lord. 

The Apostle said of himself and his companions, and 
of all those laboring faithfully in the service of the Master, 
"We are troubled on every side." There are many 
troubles that are common to the whole human family- 
lack of employment, sickness, death, poverty, etc. There 
are multitudinous troubles which come to the world; and 
of course the Apostle and his companions were subject 
to these difficulties like other men. To many these trials 
of life bring distress. But while St. Paul and those with 
him had their ailments and difficulties, their persecutions 
and trials, they also had the knowledge of the Truth and 
the Lord's sustaining grace; and they were enlisted in 
the army of the King of kings. They were not distressed 
by their troubles, but were trusting in the Lord's precious 
promises that these should all work out for their good. 

"AS HE WAS, SO ARE WE, IN THIS WORLD" 

And so we are not to allow the troubles of life to 
distress us as they distress other people. We have something 
that others do not have— the Lord's assurance that 
everything in our lives shall be a bearer of blessing to 
us if we are faithful. This enables us to rejoice in tribulation, 
if we really believe this promise of our Father's 
Word. There are other troubles that come to the Lord's 
people, but do not come to the world. The world is more 
or less in opposition to those who are engaged in publicly 
preaching the Truth and to those who are associated 

R5671 :page 120 



with them. There is a battle on between right and 
wrong, light and darkness. The world, being attached 
to their darkness, feel an enmity toward the light, a 
hatred of it; and they are often disposed to give special 
trouble to those who are the Lord's representatives in 
a particular capacity. 

Occasionally we find worldly persons who are of good 
heart and kind intention and who are desirous of helping 
on a good work; but these are exceptions. Our 
strongest opposition, however, comes generally, as did 
that of the Master, from those who are our brethren, 
though many of them are only nominally so. Then we 
have the Adversary particularly against us. It is true 
that the whole world have the oppositions of the Adversary, 
but he is especially active against those engaged in 
the public service of the Lord. Satan seems to bring 
before these special temptations, and it is not surprising 
that they should be the particular objects of his rage and 
of his wiles. But those who are thus engaged in God's 
service have special blessings at His hands, and extra 
fortifications. So while we may be sure that those in the 
public ministry have more troubles from the Adversary, 
they are also given more grace to cope with them. 

OUR DEATH THE GATEWAY TO LIFE 

"We are perplexed, but not in despair," says St. Paul. 
The Apostle and his company were not the only ones who 
have been at a loss to know just what to do. The whole 
world have been perplexed, and are particularly so today. 
The general anxious uncertainty of our day results 
in a large measure, it would seem, from the nerve-racking 
experiences of the present time. If people knew the 
right thing to do in respect to their business, their homes 
and their affairs in general, they would not be so full of 
doubt and bewilderment. But no one is wise enough to 
get along without some perplexity; and present conditions 
in the world are causing much distress and 
also anxious foreboding for the near future. Those who 
are engaged in the work of the Lord have some perplexity. 
But the anxiety or uncertainty of the Lord's 
people should never go to the length of despair. Those 
who are of the world, getting out of work and being in 
various difficulties, become very despondent. Frequently 
we hear of suicides. Things look very dark to people 
who take their own life. 

It may yet be true of the Lord's people that things 

R5671 :page 121 

will look very dark; but they are not in despair, and will 
not be in despair whatever may come; for the Lord has 
said that He will never leave us nor forsake us. This 
gracious promise should give us a hope sure and steadfast. 
Our anchor of hope should hold. Our position, 
therefore, is very different from that of the world, who 



have no particular hope. The world have no solid anchor, 

no precious promises to hold them fast. We know that 

if the worst comes to the worst, if we should even die of 

starvation, our hope lies beyond the Veil, beyond death. 

Therefore God's saints of today look upon death as the 

gateway by which to enter into fulness of life, into a 

realization of all our hopes and joys. If, therefore, 

there is despair, it would prove that our anchorage has 

been cut loose. Whoever would find that he is in despair 

would find that he is letting go his faith, and should immediately 

seek counsel from the Word of God and 

from others strong in faith, and should go to the Lord 

in frequent and earnest prayer, assured that if faith is 

restored despair will go. 

"I WILL NEVER LEAVE THEE" 

"We are persecuted, but not forsaken." There are 
persecutions of certain kinds that come to those in the 
world. Sometimes their neighbors have a grudge against 
them, and they thus are more or less persecuted. But 
they have no effective means of dealing with such a matter 
and nothing to comfort them. Sometimes they give 
as good as they get. But in the case of one of the Lord's 
children it is very different. When we feel that justice 
calls for retaliation, then we should remember that it is 
not ours to retaliate, to return evil for evil. The Lord 
has told us that we should leave all matters relating to 
justice in His hands. "Vengeance is Mine, I will repay, 
saith the Lord." He does say that we are to run away 
from persecutions; therefore we are not to condemn 
those who run away as following a wrong course. We 
are told by the Master, "If they persecute you in one 
city, flee to another." So if a child of God is persecuted 
in one neighborhood and he can get away to another 
neighborhood, it would be better to go. 

But though persecuted for righteousness' sake, the 
Lord's people are not forsaken. The world and those 
possessing the world's spirit may harass and buffet them, 
but the Lord does not forsake them. When persecutions 
come to us, however, we are to inquire, "Are these oppositions 
and persecutions coming to me on account of 
my loyalty to the Lord, or is it that there is something 
in my disposition which causes them?" If the latter is 
the case, we should diligently endeavor to rectify our 
fault. If, on the other hand, we find by careful scrutiny 
of ourselves and our conduct that we have been doing 
our best, our very best, and that the persecutions are 
coming to us on this account, then we are to rejoice in 
the persecution. 

We are "cast down, but not destroyed." This expression 
shows that while the Apostle and his companions 
did not suffer despair, did not feel forsaken, they sometimes 
felt a heaviness of spirit. This heaviness of spirit, 
or feeling of loneliness and depression, is natural at 
times to all mankind under the adverse conditions prevailing 



in the world. The weight of this casting down may 
be accentuated to some extent by the condition of the 
physical health. Those who are weak or in pain physically 
are apt to feel any mental pressure or trouble. This is 
all to be fought against in the Christian; for we know 
that our afflictions and disabilities are something outside 
and not of the Lord, except in the sense that He permits 
them for our development, for our future work in the 
Kingdom. We are therefore to be of good courage. If 
the Lord permits us to have trouble, we are to exercise 
fortitude, to patiently endure, and not to allow it to destroy 
our faith or our happiness or our loyalty of spirit 
to Him to whom we have vowed allegiance. 

We are to put up with whatever our Father permits, 
in sweetness of temper, and to say to ourselves, "This 
may be a good lesson to me. Perhaps these cast-down 
feelings, this feeling of desolation, may help me to sympathize 
more with others." The poet has truly said: 

"Into each life some rain must fall, 
Some days must be dark and dreary." 

So let us see to it that we do not allow this feeling of 
depression to conquer us and to destroy our faith and 
energy; but rather, looking to the Lord for assisting 
grace, and claiming His precious promises, we are to 
rise above the difficulty and press bravely onward. 

OUR "COVENANT BY SACRIFICE" 

We are "always bearing about in the body the dying 
of the Lord Jesus." The Apostle thus declares that the 
Lord's people, in proportion as they are faithful in His 
service, have a likeness to the Lord in their service, in 
their death. Our Lord's experience in the narrow way 
was three and a half years of dying. He was daily laying 
down His life— surrendering His life. He was an 
Example to us of how we should surrender our lives. 
He laid down His life, not in the service of the world, 
but of the Lord's professed people. While the merit of 
His sacrificed life was to be used of the Lord for the life 
of the world, yet He laid it down in the direct service 
of His Jewish brethren. 

The Hebrew people were the people of God. Our 
Lord spent His life especially with those who were truly 
desirous of pleasing God and knowing His will, whether 
found amongst the rich and influential or amongst the 
poor and lowly. Jesus welcomed publicans and sinners, 
and gave His life for them. He knew that among this 
humble class He would find the greater proportion of 
true wheat. He was laying down His life during all the 
three and a half years of His earthly ministry, and 
merely completed this work at Calvary. 

And so it is with all of the Lord's true people. They 
have made "a covenant by sacrifice." They have consecrated, 
dedicated their lives to the Lord and His service; 



and as Jesus their Master laid down His life in 
doing good, in proclaiming the Truth then due, so they 
are to lay down their lives in the same manner, whether 
the time of their ministry be three and a half years or 
twenty years or whatever it may be— until the Father's 
good time shall come for their deliverance. They will 
be in full harmony with the Lord and will gladly have 
fellowship in the sufferings of their great Head— and 
properly so; for they are prospective members of His 
Body. Thus all of these members are continually bearing 
about in the body the dying of their Lord. They are 
dying daily as He died, "laying down their lives." 

"THEREFORE GLORIFY GOD IN YOUR BODY" 

This is all the work of the New Creature. The old 
creature is merely compelled to follow in the way of the 
New Creature, and this setting aside of the will of the 
flesh is the basic feature of our dying. When our dying 
has been completed, our lives faithfully laid down, it 
will bring us to that condition where we shall hear the 
Master's "Well done!" 

St. Paul also says that "the life of Jesus" is to be 
"made manifest in our body." We understand him here 
to be referring to the human body. The New Creature 

R5672 : page 122 

owns this body. With the people of the world there are 
not two personalities, but merely the one creature. This 
duality of personality is applicable only to those who 
have been begotten of the Holy Spirit. The old body is 
suffering; but the New Creature rejoices, glad to be in 
the service— gives thanks to God day by day respecting 
its tribulations, knowing that these are working out 
"a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." 

Thus the life of Jesus is manifested through us to the 
world, and to the brethren. The world cannot understand. 
They say, "If I were in your place, in such a 
trial, I would be miserable. But you are rejoicing!" So 
they cannot understand. But we have a newness of life 
that the world cannot appreciate. All who can appreciate 
this should daily grow in grace and knowledge. We 
should show forth more and more of the Lord's life in 
our characters and in our bodies. Thus we shall be 
manifesting more and still more of the Lord's Spirit, doing 
more of the Lord's work, becoming more like Jesus 
—all of which will prepare us for the glory beyond, 
when the New Creature shall be completed, when all the 
perfections and glories of the new nature will be ours. 



R5672 : page 122 

"TOUCH NOT MINE ANOINTED" 



-MAY 16.-1 SAMUEL 26.- 

KING DAVID'S TRYING EXPERIENCES-THE CAVE OF ADULLAM 
-KING DAVID'S NEPHEWS-WATER FROM BETHLEHEM- 
DAVID TWICE SPARED KING SAUL'S 
LIFE-LESSONS OF THE HOUR. 

"Love your enemies, do good to 
them that hate you."— Luke 6:27. 

OUTLAWED and hunted by King Saul, young 
David had a varying career. He was soon 
joined by a class of unfortunates, justly or 
unjustly ostracized from society. Some of 
them doubtless were criminals; some were 
debtors, liable to imprisonment, who fled 
to preserve liberty, etc. At all events young 
David soon found himself at the head of a 
company of about four hundred men, more 
or less armed, more or less desperate. 

It was a great training for him in preparation for his 
kingdom work later on. It gave him an inside view of 
the conditions of the ne'er-do-wells of society. Himself 
and his little army doubtless subsisted upon foragings, 
collecting a toll in the nature of a tax from the farmers. 
In offset to this toll, or tax, David doubtless defended 
them from the marauders who frequently came, not only 
from the Philistines, but also across the Jordan from 
Moab. Evidently up to that time no adequate police protection 
had been provided by King Saul's government. 
Instead of guarding the interests of his subjects properly, 
the king was mad with jealousy against his faithful servant 
David, and from time to time instituted pursuits of 
him, much after the manner of hunting expeditions for 
wild beasts in the forest. 

Amongst those who came to David were three of his 
nephews, sons of his sister. These afterward became very 
prominently identified with King David in all his work. 
One was Joab, who became the captain of the host, or 
general. Abishai and Asahel were the two others, men of 
ability, who afterward became renowned in the kingdom. 

DAVID'S NOBILITY OF CHARACTER 

For a time David and his company had the cave of 
Adullam as a stronghold. It is greatly to his credit that 
he refused to plunge his nation into civil war, as he would 
have been abundantly able to do. Evidently the majority 
of the people would have sided with him from the first, 
and his victory over King Saul might have been easily 
accomplished. And how easily he might have deluded 
himself into thinking that such would be God's will! He 
remembered that the Lord, through the Prophet Samuel, 
had anointed him to be the king; but he remembered also 
that it was not for him to take possession, but to abide 



God's time, when Divine Power would overthrow Saul's 
kingdom and give the control to himself as Saul's 
successor as king. 

How blessed it would be if all of God's people would 
thus remember to wait upon the Lord! "Wait ye upon Me, 
saith the Lord, until that Day when I rise up to the prey." 
The Lord's times and seasons are best for us, and any 
attempt on our part to push ourselves in advance of the 
Lord's will would be sure to react unfavorably. It was 
because David was thus full of faith in God and possessed 
of the spirit of obedience to Him that he was called a man 
after God's own heart— not that he was perfect— not that 
he always did the Lord's will, but that the Lord's will was 
his real heart's desire; and whenever through weakness 
of the flesh he took a different course, he was prompt to 
repent on seeing the mistake, to implore Divine forgiveness 
and to change his course. 

Joseph Parker, commenting, says, "There is no straining 
of the meaning in discovering in all this picture a type 
of the position of Jesus Christ in the world. He was 
despised and rejected of men; He had not where to lay 
His head; and the people who immediately surrounded 
Him were characterized by unaccountable expectations, 
personal inferiority, social degradation, and also by needs 
of every description; surely it was no valiant or brilliant 
host that gathered around the Son of God whilst He 
tenanted this Adullam cave which we call the earth." 

While sojourning with his followers at the cave of 
Adullam, David, in a fit of home-sickness, referred to the 
fine well-water of his Bethlehem home, intimating how 
much he would relish it if he could have it here. Thereupon 
three of his faithful followers, one of them his 
nephew, undertook the perilous journey, unknown to 
David. It was perilous for two reasons: first, they were 
outlaws from King Saul; second, Bethlehem was in the 
hands of the Philistines at the time; but notwithstanding 
these difficulties these brave men manifested their love 
and loyalty to their leader, and brought a water-skin from 
the favored well. 

When they arrived and presented it to David, he 
showed a wonderful loyalty of heart. Not only did he 
appreciate the great devotion that they had shown, the 
risk that they had run and the water that they had 
brought, but he declared it was too precious and gotten at 
too great a cost to be lightly used. He poured it forth 
upon the earth in oblation, a sacrifice of thanksgiving to 
the Lord for the blessings they were enjoying and for the 
comfort and support of such loyal associates. Surely the 
greatness of David and his devotion to the Lord and his 
faith were well manifested again in this transaction! It 
marks him as more than an average man— a noble man. 

TRAINING FOR KINGDOM WORK 

By this time David and some of his followers were at 
a place called Nob, where Ahimelech the priest showed 



him kindness. King Saul, learning of this through a spy, 
slaughtered all the priests of that place and all of their 
lineage, eighty-five persons. This brought to David one 
of the sons of Ahimelech with the priestly ephod. One 
of the prophets had also joined David. All of this helped 

R5672 : page 123 

to make David's position the more secure, and to convince 
Saul all the more that God's favor was departed from 
him. Nevertheless Saul continued to fight against God 
and His Divine Program. 

Under these circumstances David's forces gradually 
increased to the number of six hundred, increasing his 
experience also and preparing him the better for his coming 
work. As Bishop Wilberforce remarks, "A mighty 
training lay in that wild outlaw life for the knowledge 
and government of men. Nothing but the completest personal 
supremacy could hold such unruly elements under 
any species of command; and David, the unwilling head 
of such a following, learned in mastering them the secret 
of governing men and of knitting together their discordant 
hearts into an harmonious unity." 

Every now and then King Saul would become feverish 
for the destruction of David. On one of these occasions, 
David and his company were occupying a cave amongst 
the bleak rocks on the west side of the Dead Sea, when 
King Saul, with probably a good-sized company, pursuing 
David, entered the same cave for rest and refreshment— 
for how long we know not. Kitto tells us that some of 
these caves are quite large enough to shelter fifteen hundred 
men. Another writer remarks, "A traveler indeed 
tells us that in one of them, which lies some twenty miles 
from En-gedi, no fewer than thirty thousand people once 
hid themselves. These caverns are dark as midnight. 
One can see outward clearly, but to see four paces inward 
is impossible." 

David and his associates were further back in the 
cave; and when Saul and his company entered it to rest, 
the desire of David's band was that Saul at least should 
be killed, and that thus the trying experiences of them all 
might be ended and that a just recompense should be 
made for the evils the king had done and was doing. But 
David would not consent. Instead, however, he cut a 
piece from King Saul's robe as a demonstration that the 
king had been fully within his grasp, and that he could 
have killed Saul had he chosen— as a demonstration, too, 
of his loyalty to the king. 

Then, when the king and his company had gone a 
certain distance so that there was no danger, David and 
his associates showed themselves and protested that the 
king was not appreciative of the loyalty of his subjects, 
and that he was seeking their lives when they would not 
take his. Saul's better nature was aroused; and he wept, 
saying, "Thou art more righteous than I." And for the 
time, the hunting of the outlaw David was abandoned 



with the promise that he would never do so again. Nevertheless, 
our lesson tells of another similar experience a 
little later on. 

R5673 : page 123 

On this occasion David, with his nephew alone, went 
into Saul's camp and took away from beside his head his 
spear and his royal water-bottle. Departing with these, 
they from a distance on an opposite hill, a ravine between, 
could safely speak to Saul and his host and be heard. 
David pointed out to the king that he not only was more 
vigilant than Saul's soldiers, but that he was more loyal 
to the king's interests and that if a messenger were sent 
he would return both the spear and the bottle; that he 
wished no harm, but merely brought these away to further 
convince the king of his absolute loyalty; and that to 
pursue him as an enemy was a mistake. 

Such an intrusion into the camp of a king today would 
be impossible because of modern methods of setting 
guards, pickets, etc., but not so in olden times, nor to any 
great extent in eastern countries today. We recall that 
Gideon and his band similarly invaded a camp. We recall 
Abraham's pursuit of the five kings, and his finding 
them enwrapped in slumber without proper picketing. A 
traveler of large experience in the East says, "The Arabs 
sleep heavily, especially when fatigued. Often when 
traveling my muleteers and servants have agreed to 
watch together in places thought to be dangerous; but in 
every instance I soon found them to be fast asleep, and 
generally their slumbers were so profound that I could 
not only walk among them without their waking, but 
might have taken the very covering from them." 

A PROFITABLE LESSON 

David's explanation of his unwillingness to take the 
life of his enemy was that Saul was God's anointed, and 
that to have made an assault upon him would have been 
to attack the Almighty's arrangements. This David could 
not conscientiously do. "Touch not Mine anointed, and 
do My ministers no harm." 

It is well that we of today should have in mind this 
principle. We are not to think of the kings of today as 
being the Lord's anointed, however. They are their own 
anointed. Their kingdoms are kingdoms of this world. 
On the contrary, Israel was God's special kingdom, which 
He had accepted under a special covenant arrangement. 
By Divine authority King Saul had been anointed with 
special anointing oil, which typified the Holy Spirit. 
David's anointing with the same oil was not to give him a 
right to interfere with the Lord's anointing previously 
accomplished in Saul, but to give him the assurance that 
he was to be the successor of Saul, not by his removing 
Saul, but by the Lord's giving the possession in His own 
time and way. 



Although the coins of all the kingdoms of earth represent 
that their rulers reign and govern as representatives 
of Messiah's Kingdom, we know that this is a mistake. 
Messiah's Kingdom has not yet been established. We are 
still praying, "Thy Kingdom come." 

EARTH'S FIVE UNIVERSAL EMPIRES 

When God removed His typical kingdom from the 
earth, the Message to the last king, Zedekiah, was, "This 
shall not be the same. I will overturn, overturn, overturn 
it; and it shall be no more until He comes whose right it 
is and I will give it unto Him." Thus was intimated an 
interregnum, as far as Divine rulership in the world was 
concerned, from Zedekiah's time until Messiah's Millennial 
Kingdom. Meantime, however, God did give the 
Gentiles an opportunity to show what kind of kingdom 
they would be able to establish in the world. From the 
days of Zedekiah, 606 B.C., to the present time, we have 
had four distinct kinds of government, and the fourth one 
modified in a deceptive manner. These kingdoms were 
(1) Babylonia, (2) Medo-Persia, (3) Greece, and (4) 
Rome. The present governments of Europe are the 
Roman Empire under a new gloss, or pretense. Their 
laws, methods and ambitions are the same as those of the 
Romans exactly; but deceiving and being deceived, they 
style themselves Christian kingdoms; and by common consent 
the whole world is accustomed to speaking of these 
as Christendom— that is, Christ's Kingdom. 

The Bible pictures this; and in the symbolic image 
which represented all these governments, the feet were of 
iron the same as the legs, but were smeared with miry clay 
to make them look like stone feet— stone being the symbol 
of God's Kingdom. So these kingdoms of Europe today 
at war and manifesting anything but a Christian spirit- 
manifesting anger, malice, envy, hatred and strife, which 
the Apostle says are "works of the flesh and the Devil"— 
these are the kingdoms which are claiming to be Messiah's 

R5673 : page 124 

Kingdom, and are represented in the feet of the image, 
colored like the Stone Kingdom, which is shortly to fill 
the whole earth.— Daniel 2:31-45. 

Messiah's Kingdom is pictured as "a stone cut out of 
the mountain without hands," without human power; and 
it, in the days of these kings, represented by the toes of 
the image, is to smite the image and grind it to powder; 
and the stone is to become the great Mountain, or Kingdom, 
of the Lord in all the earth. This smiting, we believe, 
is near at hand, the present war of Europe being 
intended of the Lord to weaken the nations and to prepare 
them for the next stage of trouble, the great earthquake, 
which in symbol signifies revolution. 

Following the revolution quickly, is to come the great 
symbolic fire which is to destroy the present order of 



things entirely. This fire represents anarchy, the overthrow 
of all rule and authority. Thus God is allowing 
man to prove to himself that his best attainments are but 
imitations and ultimately lead to disaster. The lesson 
learned, all mankind will be ready for Messiah's Kingdom, 
which will then be ushered in and be "the desire of all 
nations."— Haggai 2:7. 



R5673 : page 124 

KING SAUL'S LAST BATTLE 

-MAY 23.-2 SAMUEL 2-5.- 

DISTRESSED, HE ASKED AID OF THE WITCH OF EN-DOR-DECEIVED 
BY EVIL SPIRITS-THE BATTLE LOST-SAUL AND JONATHAN 
SLAIN-THE SONG OF THE BOW, OR SAUL'S DEAD 
MARCH-DAVID KING OF JUDAH-THEN OF ALL ISRAEL. 

"Jehovah is my strength and my Shield; my heart 
hath trusted in Him, and I am helped."— Psalm 28:7. 

TODAY'S STUDY covers an interesting period 

in the history of Israel and in the 

experiences of David, the beloved of God. 

Persecuted and hunted by King Saul, no 

place was safe for David. The Philistines, 

desiring him for a friend rather than a 

foe, gave to David and his followers the 

city of Ziklag. While residing there, David's 

conquests were over the Amalekites, 

and never against the Israelites. He could 

not willingly battle against the Lord's people, though he 

felt free to fight against those whom the Lord declared 

were to be destroyed because their wickedness was come 

to the full, to the limit of Divine permission. 

Meantime, the end of Saul's reign was nearing. A 
fresh invasion of the Philistines required all the army 
he could muster, and then he felt very dubious respecting 
the results. Although as king, in harmony with the 
Divine regulation, he had ordered all witches, wizards, 
and all who claimed to communicate with the dead to 
leave the land of Israel, nevertheless there were some 
here and there remaining. In his extremity, seeing the 
Lord would not answer him, King Saul visited the 
Witch of En-dor— said by some to have been the mother 
of the king's chief general, Abner. 

The witch, after being assured that it would not 
work ill for her, got into communication with the fallen 
angels, who she supposed, as spiritualists still suppose, 
were the spirits of the dead. Doubtless she was honest, 
and thought it was Samuel that was called. But the 
Bible assures us that "the dead know not anything." 
Samuel was sleeping with his fathers, waiting for the 



resurrection morning, and could give no counsel, could 
know nothing about matters going on. 

The evil spirits, however, in that time as well as 
now through mediums, personated the dead and, using 
their superior knowledge, answered as instead of the 
dead. The questions having been propounded in this 
case, the answer was that the king would lose the battle 
the next day, and that himself and his sons would be slain. 

We do not know how the fallen angels know so much 
about the matters of our race, but we do know that it 
is unwise for any to have any dealings with them; for 
the Lord has forbidden it. Their sole object is to deceive 
the people; and, according to St. Paul, through 
dreams and revelations they have brought into the 
Church various doctrines of devils (1 Timothy 4:1), 
which, becoming incorporated in our creeds, like the fly 
in the ointment, have made them to stink.— Eccl. 10:1. 

Happy would it be for people if they realized what 
the Bible so clearly teaches; namely, that the dead are 
dead and can give no information of any kind, that they 
have neither joy nor suffering, but are simply in a state 
of suspended animation, awaiting the Dawn of the better 
Day in which Immanuel, Messiah, will bring the 
knowledge of the glory of God to all as the result of 
His Ransom-Sacrifice at Calvary. The teaching that the 
dead are more alive than they were when they were 
alive is not only senseless, but contradictory to the 
Lord's Word, and has become the foundation of all the 
various grievous errors which have distressed the reasoning 
faculties of Christian people. None would pray 
for the dead, or say masses for them for their release 
from Purgatory, if they knew that their dead friends 
were merely sleeping until the resurrection morning. 

R5674 : page 124 

But, worst of all, this theory that the dead are alive 
has become the foundation of serious blasphemies 
against God, in which all denominations are more or less 
joined as represented by their creeds. These blasphemies 
consist in declarations respecting God's character 
and Plan which would be a disgrace to any devil, and 
are far from the character and attributes of the God of 
all grace, the Father of all mercies, from whom cometh 
down every good and every perfect gift.— James 1:17. 

"THE SONG OF THE BOW" 

When David heard of the results of the battle, his 
sympathy for Saul and for Jonathan was expressed in 
a beautiful poem, which is remarkable for the fact that 
it contains not a single suggestion of how Saul had persecuted 
him or sought his life. It compliments Saul for 
what good he had accomplished. It tells of the tender 
love of Jonathan, surpassing that of women. This ode 
is recorded in 2 Samuel 1:17-27. The Dead March from 



Saul is an attempt on the part of the musician to put 
the sentiment of David's Song of the Bow for Jonathan 
and Saul into the music of our day; and thus it has become 
identified with the funeral services of the great today. 

In the battle Saul's sons were killed, including Jonathan. 
Saul himself was wounded. Fearing that if he 
should fall into the hands of the Philistines alive they 
would torture him to death, he desired his armorbearer 
to slay him, and finally suicided with his own sword. 

A young Amalekite, thinking to curry favor with 
David, and knowing something of how he had been persecuted 
by Saul, brought him the news of the death of 
Saul and gave him Saul's crown and the bracelet that 
was on Saul's arm, telling that he had dispatched King 
Saul at the latter's request— probably, however, manufacturing 
this part of the story to bring honor to himself. 
At all events, David received the matter in a totally 

R5674 : page 125 

different way from what was expected, saying to him, 
"How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand 
to destroy the Lord's anointed?" David then commanded 
him to be put to death. But for Saul and Jonathan he 
mourned until evening. 

David waited upon the Lord those many years, fully 
confident that in the end he should be the king of Israel, 
but not hastening the event in any way, simply standing 
ready for the responsibilities and the power of the office 
where the Lord should put him. What a wonderful example 
we have in David's course! How much Christians 
can learn of patient waiting for the Lord's time in 
all their affairs— not only waiting for the Kingdom 
while they pray, "Thy Kingdom come," but also waiting 
for the Lord's leading and providence in all their affairs, 
overruling them all for good! It is one of the too frequent 
mistakes made by Christians, that they overlook 
the Lord's providence and promised supervision of their 
interests, and attempt to do for themselves, often to 
their own disadvantage. 

David realized that the time had probably come for 
himself and his companions to move from the Philistines' 
country, and he inquired of the Lord by the priest 
and the ephod. The answer was that he should go into 
Judea. Next he made inquiry, Into which city? and the 
answer was, Hebron. Thither David and his companions 
removed with their families; and the tribe of Judah, his 
own tribe, promptly recognized him as their king. It 
was over seven years after this, however, before he became 
the king of all Israel. Meantime, one of the sons 
of King Saul, Ishbosheth, had survived; and Abner, 
Saul's chief general, had him anointed king of Israel. 
King David of Judah made no attempt to coerce the other 
tribes, but continued his waiting for the Lord's due time. 

Meantime, however, Abner gathered an army against 
David's servants, and a fierce battle ensued, in which David's 



forces were the victors; the others lost the fight. 
Finally Abner, angered with King Ishbosheth, proposed 
to David that he would become David's vassal, and 
would assist in turning the hearts of all the Israelites 
toward him. King David appreciated the proposition, 
doubtless considering it to be the Lord's will and in harmony 
with the Lord's promise. However, the matter did 
not so carry out; for Joab, David's nephew, the chief 
man of war, slew Abner deceitfully. Again we see David's 
conduct in contrast with the average sentiment of 
his time. Instead of rejoicing in the death of Abner, 
the king mourned for him, and denounced his nephew 
for the wrong course he had pursued. He was courageous 
enough in the presence of his own ablest soldier to 
extol the virtues of Abner as a great soldier, saying, "A 
mighty man has fallen in Israel." 

KING OF ALL ISRAEL 

But a little while after this, others, misunderstanding 
King David, slew King Ishbosheth and brought his 
head to David as an evidence of his death, expecting 
doubtless that they would be rewarded. On the contrary, 
they also were condemned. They had slain the king. 
They were esteemed worthy of the same punishment, 
and were themselves slain. Thus did the people see exemplified 
in David's course principles of righteousness 
quite uncommon in his day, and we might say, uncommon 
still. All these things served to endear to the people 
the king, who, they perceived, was not merely self-seeking, 
narrow, but was broad-minded and even generous 
toward his opponents, his enemies. He seems to 
have had a great appreciation of justice and also a 
breadth of sympathy for his enemies. 

King David was thirty-seven years old when finally 
the eleven tribes sent a delegation to confer with him, 
indicating that they would appreciate having him as the 
king over all Israel. This was seven years and a half 
after the death of King Saul, and probably about seventeen 
years after David had been anointed first by Samuel. 
Faith and patience mark every step of those years 
and show us King David's character as we could not 
otherwise have known it. Its grandeur was chiefly shown 
in that it manifested a devotion to God and a submission 
to the Divine will. 

The king's acceptance as king of all the tribes of 
Israel marked the third time that the holy anointing oil 
was put upon his head. 

Meantime King David had grown stronger and 
stronger in conquering his enemies— the enemies of the 
Lord— those whom God declared should be destroyed. 
We remind our readers afresh that the Lord declared 
that the iniquity of the Amorites had come to the full, 
and thus indicated it to be His will that they should be 
destroyed from the earth. Whether destroyed in battle 
or by pestilence or famine, mattered nothing to them, as 



the Divine sentence of death must be carried out. 

However, all the while that God has been permitting 
sickness, war, famine, pestilence, death, to reign in the 
world. He has been preparing for human redemption, 
human salvation through the great Redeemer. Messiah's 
Kingdom is soon to take control of the earth, to 
cause a cessation of the reign of Sin and Death, to 
cause the binding of Satan and to cause the sunlight of 
Divine Truth to flood the earth. Then all the blind eyes 
will be opened and all the deaf ears will be unstopped, 
to know, to understand the true God, His true Message. 

Meantime, those who died by Israel's sword will 
know nothing of the lapse of time. They will awake in 
the Millennial Kingdom, when all that sleep in the dust 
of the earth will awake. They will then be under the 
most favorable conditions we could ask for them— freed 
from the shackles of ignorance and superstition, with 
Messiah's Kingdom ready to help them out of their 
weaknesses and degradation back to human perfection, 
lost in Eden, redeemed at Calvary. 



R5669 : page 125 

RETURNING TO BUSINESS 

SOME of our dear readers very commendably 
arranged their affairs some time ago so as 
to give their entire time to the Harvest 
work, not anticipating the prolongation of 
the Harvest— the gleaning work, the burning 
of the tares, the threshing of the wheat, 
etc. Moreover, many of them used in the 
Harvest work nearly all of their surplus of 
this world's goods— striving to lay up treasure 
in Heaven. Some of these dear 
Brethren and Sisters have nearly or quite gone to the 
limit of their possibilities, as far as present arrangements 
are concerned. They are, properly, looking about them to 
see the leadings of the Lord's providence in respect to 
their future operations. Will they plunge into business 
so deeply as to have little time for spiritual things? Will 
they become identified with some kind of speculation, and, 
perhaps, get others involved in what ultimately would be 
a loss? Or will they look for something to do in a quiet 
way that will enable them to meet expenses, possibly 
being able to continue to some degree in the gleaning work 
of the Harvest? The latter is our expectation and, we 
believe, in accord with the Spirit of the Lord— the spirit 
of a sound mind.— 2 Timothy 1:7. 

R5670 : page 126 

Let us call to mind the great disappointment of the 
Apostles in connection with the Redeemer's death. Up to 



within one day of His crucifixion they had thought that 
His remarks respecting death, crucifixion, etc., were figurative 
language, and that in reality He was about to be 
exalted to power and great glory. The experiences of 
that time must have been a severe test upon them in every 
way. Our Lord's resurrection the third day revived their 
hopes, although His appearances in miraculous manner 
indicated some wonderful change which they could not 
understand; but afterwards they learned that it was because 
He was no longer a man, but a perfected New 
Creature of the Divine nature. 

Then came the long interval between appearances— for 
weeks at a time they saw nothing of Him, heard nothing 
from Him. Anxious, disappointing days!— their faith and 
patience weakened. Finally, utterly discouraged, St. Peter 
took the lead in announcing his determination to give up 
all thoughts of further preaching and to return to the fishing 
business. He announced, "I go a fishing." Promptly 
his former partners responded, "We also go with thee." 
(John 21:3.) Here were seven principal disciples, abandoning 
the great work to which they had been invited of 
the Lord— but doing so in their perplexity, with hearts 
as loyal as ever. 

Evidently this was the occasion Jesus had waited for. 
We know of no other reason why He should remain forty 
days before ascending to the Father. He allowed the 
disciples to go back to their former business and to meet 
with discouragement. The very first night "they toiled 
all night and caught nothing!" Poor men! They must 
have felt as though everything was going against them. 
However, Jesus was watching over them all the while 
and purposely permitting them to come to this crisis, so 
that He might teach them a great lesson— and us through 
them. The lesson was that He was able to overrule all 
of their affairs, and that they should firmly trust Him, 
come what might, so long as they were loyal and following 
His directions. 

Discouraged as to confidence in their own abilities 
as business men, they were ready in the morning to 
see Jesus on the shore and to accept His invitation to 
breakfast with Him from fish already cooked on the fire 
—from whence came the fish and the fire they knew not. 
These things were provided by miraculous power, as was 
the body of Jesus in which He appeared to them and the 
clothing He wore on it. Jesus said little to them, except 
to St. Peter— "Feed My sheep, feed My lambs, if thou 
lovest Me." The Apostles took the lesson and returned 
again to the preaching of the Gospel as the main business 
of life. The Lord's blessing was with them. He 
provided for them according to their needs, although it 
was sometimes in prison; sometimes in fasting and 
hunger, nakedness and peril. He gave them of His best 
for their development as New Creatures. 

We do not wish to draw a parallel here and suggest 
that all the Brethren should abandon earthly affairs, as 
did the Apostles. We are not Apostles. There were only 



The Twelve. We are not to expect that we would have 
as important a work to do, nor that the Lord's providences 
would be so markedly exercised on our behalf. We are, 
however, to remember the Master's statement, "One is 
your Master, even Christ; all ye are Brethren!" While 
the Apostles were more important Brethren than we, still 
we are Brethren; and One is our Lord, or Head, and we 
have all one Father. The Divine promises assure us that 
all things shall work together for good to us, because we 
love God and have been called according to His purpose 
and are seeking to make our calling and election sure. 

The lesson we do suggest is that the Divine Plan has 
not changed. The Harvest surely is not ended. The 
great Time of Trouble has already begun. Although it is 
necessary for us to provide things decent and honest in 
the sight of all men, we are not to forget that our chief 
business is that of ambassadors for God— representatives 
of the Lord Jesus Christ— proclaimers of the Good 
Tidings of great joy which eventually shall be to all 
people. We are never to forget that we are to seek first, 
chiefly, the Kingdom of God and the righteousness which 
it stands for and inculcates. 

This is to be our chief work, the chief aim of life for 
us. Everything else is to be secondary. We are to expect 
that the Lord will give us necessary wisdom and 
grace if we seek it, whereby we may serve Him with 
acceptance and still provide the things necessary for our 
bodily comfort, without entirely leaving the work. This 
would mean that we should watch and pray— asking the 
Lord's direction and then waiting to see which way His 
providences seem to direct our course. We should watch, 
also, against the wiles of the Adversary, who would seek 
to ensnare us in business or pleasure or whatever. 

Our advice is that all of the Lord's people put the 
Kingdom and its interests first, in word, in thought, in 
deed— giving merely what time is absolutely necessary 
for the procurement of the things needful for our earthly 
comforts and the comfort of those dependent on us. 
Assuredly thus we would be following the example of 
the Master, pleasing to the Father and helpful to each 
other. Thus we would be examples to our neighbors, as 
well as be preparing ourselves for the Kingdom. 



R5674 : page 126 

INTERESTING ITEMS 

THE TYPEWRITER AND PROGRESS 

Amongst the great inventions of our day is the typewriter. 
It came upon the market just forty years ago, in 
1874, as a merchantable and usable convenience, after having 
been seven years in process of development. The Bible, we 
believe, marks that same year, 1874, as the beginning of the 



Harvest of this Age. What a wonderful forty years it has 
been! What wonderful blessings these years have brought to 
mankind! What evidence they give of the dawning of the 
New Dispensation, which the Bible teaches began there! 
Notice some of the great inventions— the telephone, electric 
light, trolley-car, perfecting printing press, cheap pulp paper, 
linotype and monotype machines, gas engine, automobile, 
aeroplane, talking machine, moving pictures, and a hundred 
other conveniences, improvements, etc., not forgetting the 
wireless telegraphy. 

Great as are the blessings enumerated, none of them 
surely can compare with the great blessings that God has 
given to His consecrated people, who have in these same 
years been seeking the light of the New Dispensation in the 
Word of God. The blessing, joy and enlightenment which 
they have received is beyond all comparison and all valuation! 



WAR HASTENING MILLENNIUM 

If any one had suggested a year ago the possibility of 
total abstinence being established by law in Russia, Germany 
and Great Britain, he would have been considered idiotic. 
Truly 

"God moves in a mysterious way 
His wonders to perform." 

Men, in the interest of war, are preparing to abolish intoxicating 
liquors. Russia already has done this. The report 
is that her millions of people are blessed greatly for the 
better— improved mentally and materially. Germany is already 
discussing the matter. The Prime Minister of Great 
Britain and the King favor total abstinence as a war necessity 
because the workmen are hindered by the use of liquor 
from accomplishing the work necessary to be done for the 

R5675 : page 127 

prosecution of the war. How wonderful this appears! Is the 
light of the Millennial Morning breaking upon the world? 

Look again! Great Britain and Germany have been fearing 
Socialism and every way seeking to combat it as destructive 
of present institutions. As we have already pointed out 
many of the Socialists will be identified with the Millennial 
Kingdom. How strange to find that the great war now 
raging is tending toward Socialism— that while Socialists 
have joined the army the Governments at war are adopting 
socialistic measures! 

For instance in Great Britain: Speedily after the 
declaration of war the British Government took over the 
control of all the railroads of the Kingdom, to facilitate the 
moving of troops and war materials. Now the British 
Parliament has given the Government full authority to take 
over the entire manufacturing business of Great Britain and 



place it under a central management, with a view to increasing 
the output of war materials. This bill, which passed on 
March 9th, the Hon. Andrew Bonar Law declared as a 
measure, "probably the most drastic ever laid before Parliament." 
It passed unanimously. 

In Germany the Government's action has been no less 
drastic— the Government has absorbed all power. The extreme 
in this direction was the seizing of all food supplies 
and the doling of the same out to the people according to 
their needs, dictating the proportions of ingredients, the 
quantity to be eaten and the price to be paid. Could any 
Socialist imagine the principle for which he contends more 
fully put into execution— by those, too, who have opposed 
Socialism in the past? 

How will it be when this war shall end? Will individualism 
and private ownership return to the control of affairs in 
Great Britain and Germany? If the attempt is made to 
restore them, will it not bring a clash? Will it not bring the 
great social earthquake which the Bible declares will immediately 
follow the war? And will not that social earthquake 
lead straight on to the fire of anarchy, as the Bible 
indicates? We so believe: We must with patience wait, 
nor attempt to hasten the Lord's arrangements. However, let 
us remember that the Lord declares that He will hasten 
these things at the present time and that a short work will 
He make of matters. 

Speedily the glorious Kingdom will be established, even 
though it be through blood and earthquake and fire. How, 
then, will those feel who are deriding the thought that Messiah's 
Kingdom is in process of establishment— that this 
war is identified with its establishment and that it will be 
fully inaugurated in the midst of the fire of anarchy, which 
it will quench by bringing in the New Order of things— the 
new heavens and the new earth— the new ecclesiastical 
and the new social order— the doing of God's will on 
earth. 



R5675 : page 127 

MEMORIAL SUPPER REPORTS 

We have excellent reports of Memorial celebrations this 
year. It would appear that everywhere it has been the same 
as here in New York— larger attendance and a deeper appreciation 
than on any preceding occasion. The New York 
City Congregation had a most impressive service at THE 
TEMPLE. It was good to be there! A spirit of sweet 
solemnity, confidence, rest, seemed to pervade the large 
gathering in The Temple's fine auditorium. 

In harmony with our well-known suggestions, the different 
little Classes in the suburbs of New York held 
their own separate meetings for the celebration of the 
Memorial, even though they reckon themselves part and 
parcel of the New York and Brooklyn Congregations, and 



meet as one Church. The reports as to numbers participating 
show considerable progress during the past year. Quite a 
number partook of the emblems for the first time. Many of 
the new ones were more or less attracted to the Truth 
through the opposition which the enemy has been stirring up. 
The evil attacks led to examination; and the Truth was all 
the more beautiful and forceful in its contrast with the 
error. If the ministers of the various churches become more 
violent and slanderous they will, no doubt, awaken all of 
God's true saints and draw their attention more or less to the 
Truth. For a saint of God to come into contact with the 
Truth is almost like bringing a piece of steel into close 
relationship with a magnet. 

Nor is the increase of numbers, of interest and of deep 
piety in the New York Congregation alone. Everywhere, so 
far as our reports go, the same principle seems to be applicable 
and the same results inevitable. 

We subjoin reports from some of the Congregations already 
heard from. Compared with the reports of last year 
the showing is very fine. 

Other reports from Memorial celebrations are coming 
in gradually. Although we have noted only those showing 
twenty-five or more in attendance, this does not signify 
that we are not deeply interested in having the reports 
from every celebration. Please send them in, therefore, 
as they become the basis of our judgment in other matters 
connected with the interests of the Classes. 

New York City 1119 St. Joseph, Mo 82 

London Tabernacle 769 Allentown, Pa 80 

Forest Gate 368 Swampscott, Mass 75 

Chicago, 111 720 Grand Rapids, Mich 75 

Los Angeles, Cal 445 Atlanta, Ga 71 

Pittsburgh, Pa 415 So. Chicago, 111 70 

Boston, Mass 415 Camberwell, Jamaica 70 

Detroit, Mich 356 Hamilton, Ont 70 

Philadelphia, Pa 300 Youngstown, 69 

Minneapolis and St. Paul, Rockford, 111 67 

Minn 266 Hartford, Conn 66 

Toronto, Ont 259 Pasadena, Cal 65 

Seattle, Wash 256 Birmingham, Ala 64 

Cleveland, 240 Edmonton, Alta 64 

Vancouver, B.C 237 Newark, N.J 64 

Portland, Ore 219 Tampa, Fla 62 

St. Louis, Mo 203 Altoona, Pa 61 

Washington, D.C 196 Memphis, Tenn 61 

San Antonio, Tex 185 Panama City, Panama 60 

Cincinnati, 185 Oklahoma City, Okla 59 

Indianapolis, Ind 183 New Albany, Ind 59 

Buffalo, N.Y 173 San Diego, Cal 58 

Columbus, 167 Norfolk, Va 57 

Dayton, 165 Omaha, Neb 56 

Providence, R.I 159 New Haven, Conn 55 

Kansas City, Mo 154 Schenectady, N.Y 53 

Milwaukee, Wis 153 Jackson, Mich 52 

Oakland, Cal 146 Bridgeton, Barbadoes 52 



Toledo, 145 Dallas, Tex 51 

Victoria,B.C 119 Aurora, 111 51 

Baltimore, Md 118 Scranton, Pa 50 

Louisville, Ky 113 Troy, N.Y 50 

Roseland, 111 112 York, Pa 50 

Oldham, England 106 Cumberland, Md 48 

Edinburgh, Scotland 102 Cromwell, Conn 48 

Lancaster, Pa 101 Easton, Pa 48 

Bellingham, Wash 100 Sharon, Pa 47 

Spokane, Wash 98 Wilmington, Del 46 

Houston, Tex 96 Jacksonville, Fla 45 

Tacoma, Wash 92 Akron, 45 

Springfield, Mass 90 Reading, Pa 45 

Richmond, Va 87 Topeka, Kans 45 

Binghamton, N.Y 82 Moline, 111 44 

Worcester, Mass 82 Wichita, Kans 43 

Des Moines, la 43 Harrisburg, Pa 30 

Port Huron, Mich 43 Pittsfield, Mass 30 

Lawrence, Mass 43 Muncie, Ind 30 

Johnstown, N.Y 42 Waterbury, Conn 30 

London, Ont 42 Flint, Mich 30 

Montreal, Que 42 Ottawa, Ont 30 

Terre Haute, Ind 40 Ft. Smith, Ark 30 

Bloomfield, N.J 40 Paragould, Ark 30 

Watertown, N.Y 40 Tonawanda, N.Y 30 

Newcastle, Pa 40 Newark, 30 

Camden, N.J 39 Colorado Springs, Colo 30 

Joplin, Mo 39 Syracuse, N.Y 29 

Bay City, Mich 39 Kewanee, 111 29 

Passaic, N.J 38 St. Petersburg, Fla 29 

Knoxville, Tenn 37 Iola, Kans 29 

Mattoon, 111 37 Chatham, Ont 29 

Auburn, Ind 37 Brandon, Man 29 

Chattanooga, Tenn 36 Johnstown, Pa 29 

Sidney, N.S 36 New Philadelphia, 28 

Santa Ana, Cal 36 Anna, 111 28 

Piqua, 35 Kalamazoo, Mich 28 

Crooksville, 35 Tamaqua, Pa 28 

Paterson, N.J 35 Owen Sound, Ont 28 

Springfield, 111 35 Elwood, Ind 28 

Saginaw, Mich 34 Haverhill, Mass 28 

Boise, Idaho 34 Zion City, 111 28 

Brockton, Mass 34 Magnet, Ind 27 

Warren, 34 Butler, Pa 27 

Springfield, 34 Boaz, Ala 27 

Canton, 34 Hobart, Okla 27 

Sacramento, Cal 34 Beaumont, Tex 27 

Lima, Ohio 34 Norristown, Pa 26 

Tiffin, 33 Toronto, 26 

Van Buren, Ark 33 Brazil, Ind 26 

The Dalles, Ore 32 Port Clinton, 26 

Glens Falls, N.Y 32 Tulsa, Okla 26 

Hollister, O. (Hung.) 32 Calmar, Alta 26 

Wheeling, W.Va 32 Fairmont, W.Va 26 

Berne, Switz 32 Lowell, Mass 25 



E. Liverpool, 31 Cortland, N.Y 25 

Chester and Moore, Pa 31 New Orleans, La 25 

Jamestown, N.Y 31 Rosenberg, Tex 25 

Duluth, Minn 31 Madison, Wis 25 

Kirkaldy, Scotland 31 



page 128 

International Bible Students Association Classes 



page 129 

VOL. XXXVI MAY 1 No. 9 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

"The Ends of the Ages"— Conditions 
Similar 131 

Shining of Truth Exposes Error 131 

"Great, Swelling Words" 132 

Our Fiery Chariot 132 

"These Things" That We Must Do 133 

Doctrinal Confusion of Many Christians 133 

Why Thousands are Falling 134 

Did Jesus Revile His Enemies? 135 

City of David-City of God 136 

A Great Lesson in Reverence 136 

"Thou Art the Man!" 138 

Co-Laboring with God 139 

Seventy Sent Forth 140 

Our General Letter 140 

"He Went to His Own Place" 141 

Rejection of Knowledge a Serious Matter 142 

Requests for Pilgrim Visits 142 

"Consider Him"— Then Follow 142 

The Rutherford-Troy Debate 143 

page 130 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5685 : page 130 

ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF DEBATES 

Although the Lord's providence did seem to open up the way for 
the "Eaton-Russell Debate" and later, for the "White-Russell Debate," 
and through these Debates led the way on to the publication of the 
Sermons in hundreds of newspapers throughout the world, nevertheless 
the Editor is not, and never was, much of a believer in the advantages 
of debating. The Debates mentioned were valuable chiefly as entering-wedges 
for the newspaper work. On the surface, it might at first 
appear as though a debate would be an excellent method of presenting 
the Truth to the public. Let it not, however, be forgotten that it is 
also an excellent method of presenting the error to the public. While 
it is true that Truth is mighty and will prevail, nevertheless "the god 
of this world" has blinded the eyes of men for eighteen centuries so 
thoroughly that remarkably few even yet see the beauty and force of 
the great Divine Plan of Salvation as presented by Jesus and the 
Apostles. On the contrary, the great mass of mankind have had thoroughly 
drilled into them heathen philosophy— carefully concocted theories 
and superstitions— and these are well riveted and fastened from 
childhood's hour. 

An audience hearing a debate have the same difficulty that a jury has 
when hearing the opposing attorneys discussing the merits of a case. 
Each speaker has certain talent and ability, and each makes a certain 
amount of impression. It is the same with the general readers when 
these debates go before them. Those who have the Truth will enjoy 
the presentation of it, while those who have been schooled and prejudiced 
in favor of the error from childhood will rejoice in its presentation. 

Added to this is the fact that the debates in general are in the 
nature of a war of words, the disputants each seeking to undo the 
other's arguments and to prove his own. In such a war of words the 
Truth is at a disadvantage. Why, do you ask? We answer, Because 
those who are of the Truth are bound by the Golden Rule, not only 
in its letter, but also in its spirit; and their presentations of the Truth 
must be along absolutely fair lines that take in the context and the 
spirit thereof. On the other hand, our opponents seem to have no 
restrictions nor restraints. Any kind of argument, regardless of the 
context, regardless of the Golden Rule, regardless of everything, is 
considered permissible. Indeed they do not even stop to consider such 
a trifling (?) matter as the Golden Rule or to exact allegiance to the 
letter and spirit of the inspired Word. Thus our opponents always 



have the advantage, not because they are intellectually brighter, but 
because they can and do use means to bamboozle the minds of the 
hearers and readers. This the advocates of the Truth dare not do- 
have not the desire to do, so surely as they have the Spirit of Christ. 

So far as the Editor is concerned, he has no desire for further 
debates. He does not favor debating, believing that it rarely accomplishes 
good and often arouses anger, malice, bitterness, etc., in both speakers 
and hearers. Rather he sets before those who desire to hear it, orally 
and in print, the Message of the Lord's Word and leaves to opponents 
such presentations of the error as they see fit to make and find opportunity 
to exploit.— Hebrews 4:12. 

This should not be understood to mean that the Editor would never 
again engage in a public debate, but merely that in order to induce him 
to debate, his opponent would need to be a person of so great prominence 
as to bring the matter to the attention of everybody. Only such 
a consideration would be a proper offset to the wide presentation of 
error thus accomplished. Otherwise we prefer merely to present the 
Truth as the Lord opens the way and to leave the presentation of 
error and its circulation entirely in the hands of others. 



JUDGE RUTHERFORD'S SPICY DEFENSE 

Brother Rutherford, grieved by the various untruthful, slanderous attacks 
upon the Editor, has prepared a pamphlet in my defense. A copy 
of it has just been handed me. I have not yet read it, though, of 
course, I knew of its preparation and in a general way of its contents. 
I preferred not to have anything to do with its publication. It explains 
Brother Rutherford's views as a lawyer, as a brother, and as a 
man who most fully understands the entire situation. It contains some 
interesting illustrations and is priced at ten cents per copy, or eight 
dollars per hundred copies, postpaid. It is not unreasonable to expect 
that nearly all of our readers will be very glad to have this pamphlet, 
as it will furnish them with evidence on every point thus far brought 
forward by my maligners. 

Orders for the pamphlets should be addressed to Judge Rutherford, 
New York City, P.O. Box 51. However, we will have a supply at 
THE WATCH TOWER Office, and, if one is ordering other things, this 
pamphlet can be supplied also. It is entitled, "A GREAT BATTLE IN 
THE ECCLESIASTICAL HEAVENS." 



page 130 

THE CALIFORNIA CONVENTION 
-MAY 30-JUNE 7- 

Doctor Jones, finding it impracticable to take a Convention Party over 
the long route of over two months represented in Brother Russell's 
Western Itinerary, has decided to make a Special Excursion to the Oakland-San 
Francisco Convention and return. 

On that Tour the usual Excursion Rate for the Exposition is available. 
Excursion Rates, of course, are available to anybody from anywhere. 



Additionally we note that any desiring to attend the Convention, but living 

at a point where Excursion Tickets are not on sale, can do one of 

two things. He can either go to some large city near where the Excursion 

rates prevail and count his journey beginning there; or he can 

buy his tickets at his home town on the certificate plan, paying full fare 

one way and one-third fare returning. All information respecting reservations 

for the Convention should be addressed to Mr. E. D. Sexton, 

Box 473, Oakland, Calif. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JUNE 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
June follow: (1) 264; (2) 87; (3) 7; (4) 180; (5) 258; (6) 47; 
(7) 18; (8) 107; (9) 277; (10) 252; (11) 170; (12) 164; (13) 
260; (14) 313; (15) 319; (16) 12; (17) 3; (18) 14; (19) 299; 
(20) 88; (21) 240; (22) 21; (23) 244; (24) 281; (25) 174; (26) 
330; (27) 129; (28) 50; (29) 230; (30) 318. 



R5676 :page 131 

"THE ENDS OF THE AGES "--CONDITIONS SIMILAR 

"If the world hate you, ye know that it 
hated Me before it hated you."— John 15:18. 

BY THE word "world" the Lord did not mean 

Gentiles; else He would have said Gentiles. 

Had He said Gentiles it would have signified 

all the peoples not in covenant relationship 

with God. But when He used the 

word "world" He seemed to signify the 

present order of things, and therefore the 

people of the present order; for there 

would be no present order except through 

the people. He would mean those who had 

religious influence— the representatives of the people. 

But the special order of that day was made up of 
the scribes, Sadducees, Pharisees, chief priests and the 
Doctors of the Law— those interpreting the Law. Those 
who represented the Law, and thus represented the people, 
would have to do with that order of things particularly. 
We know that these hated the Lord. As He said 
elsewhere, they hated the light. They hated Him, not 
because He really did them any harm, but because His 
teachings, and the light that shone from His life and 
teachings, were contradictory to themselves, and to their 
plans, schemes and arrangements. If His words were 
true, all the plans they had made in all those years would 
be shown as coming to naught. In proportion as they 
had confidence in their own plans, Christ and His followers 



would seem to be fools, trying to do some impracticable 
thing. 

Our Lord's principal opposition, then, came from the 
religious rulers, the teachers and the Jewish politicians. 
There were the Sadducee party and the Pharisee party. 
The Sadducees believed in nothing beyond what they 
could see. They were agnostics. The Pharisees were a 
very strict religious sect, pre-eminently the holiness people 
of the Jews. They were very scrupulous regarding 
outward forms and ceremonies, but as a class were very 
haughty, self-righteous and unjust. Whoever fell in line 
with Jesus' teachings would not have any particular interest 
in either of these sects or in their teachings- 
would not especially respect them and consider them the 
great ones of their nation. While at variance amongst 
themselves, these religious rulers were one in their opposition 
to Jesus. 

It was these sects, together with the scribes and Doctors 
of the Law, who incited the people to crucify Jesus. 
We are not to suppose that these learned men— men of 
considerable education and intelligence— got out into the 
streets with the people and hurrahed for Barabbas and 
shouted against Jesus; but rather that they incited the 
rabble, and themselves assumed a more dignified line of 
conduct. At all events, their course led to the Lord's 
death. Not only did they hate the Master, but they hated 
Him with such a bitterness and such resentment as to 
destroy Him. They plotted His death several times, but 
they could not take Him until His hour had come. The 
Pharisees acknowledged that a great miracle had been 
performed in the raising of Lazarus, but they determined 
that Jesus should be destroyed on account of this 
great miracle, because it would influence the people, and 
the people would in that same proportion become alienated 
from themselves. 

The high priest, Caiaphas, said, "It is expedient for 
us, that one man should die for the people, and that the 
whole nation perish not." (John 1 1:47-53.) The leaders 
of the nation feared that all the people would be so 
influenced by Jesus' teaching that they would themselves 
avail nothing, and that "the Romans would come and 
take away their place and their nation." They said, 
"We are the guardians of this nation. The government 
at Rome would pay no attention to this rabble here. If 
we fail, God's Cause in the earth will be blotted out. It 
is therefore expedient that we should destroy this man." 
The difficulty was that they had a wrong view of God's 
Cause and of their nation. They were leaving God out 
of the account. They were thinking that they must do 
the whole thing. They were forgetting that God is the 
One All-Powerful and is at the helm. 

SHINING OF TRUTH EXPOSES ERROR 

As respects the true people of God the Master said, 
as recorded in our text, "Marvel not if the world hate 



you; ye know that it hated Me before it hated you." We 

see that it is in proportion to their faithfulness as followers 

of the Lord Jesus that the Lord's people are 

hated and persecuted. There was a long period of persecution 

in the early days of the Church— first by Nero, 

then by Diocletian and others of the Roman Emperors. 

Then came the general rise of the Antichrist, culminating 

in the establishment of the great misrepresentation, 

the counterfeit, of God's Kingdom, in the year 539 A.D. 

These also hated the true Church and held them in contempt. 

The latter were chimerical, was the thought— they 

were poor thinkers, they took the words of Jesus too 

literally, they thought too much about a future Kingdom 

instead of about the present kingdom. Then followed 

the long night of bloody persecutions, during the entire 

R5676 : page 132 

papal Millennium. [799 A.D. to 1799 A.D.] The true 
followers were not numerous, and were chiefly the poor 
of this world— not many great, not many learned— but 
rich in faith. "Not many wise men after the flesh, not 
many mighty, not many noble, are called." "Hath not 
God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs 
of the Kingdom which He hath promised to them that 
love Him?"— 1 Corinthians 1:26; James 2:5. 

Coming down to our day, in proportion as the people 
of the Lord are following in the footsteps of Jesus they 
will wish to let their light shine out upon others. In 
proportion as they thus let their light shine, it will show 
the misconceptions and errors of the present order of 
things in the world. Here in our day as in Jesus' day, 
Truth shows forth and rebukes the error, and those who 
promulgate the Truth are more or less hated because of 
this. Today, as in the days of our Lord's First Advent, 
there is a religious System which is more or less mixed 
up with politics. Its adherents plan all kinds of reforms. 
They say, "If we can destroy the white slave traffic and 
the liquor traffic, we shall have nearly brought in the 
Millennium. Electing wise rulers will help in bringing 
in the new order of things." But much as we sympathize 
with these good efforts we perceive that as a whole such 
plans are not God's Plan in respect to the future Kingdom. 
Present institutions are not to be repaired, but replaced 
by the "new heavens and new earth" conditions. 

We must not find special fault with reformers, however, 
and their efforts to put patches upon the old garments. 
We are to have sympathy for anything that is 
making for good, for righteousness. We are to leave 
the world to do the best they can, and we are to give 
our attention to God's Plan and the great Reform He is 
to bring in. The instruction to us is that we should get 
ready for a place in the Kingdom, and should help other 
children of God that they, too, may make their calling 
and election sure, and be ready for the Kingdom. That 
Kingdom, which is now just at hand, will be God's 



Agency for destroying sin and exalting righteousness. 

PUTTING DARKNESS FOR LIGHT 

All this seems like a foolish tale to the world; for it 
would mean defeat to their projects. It would upset all 
the plans of Churchianity. If the people thought as we 
do it would mean great disaster to all the denominations. 
The people would not be nearly so much interested 
in building up these systems or in raising money 
as they would be in seeking to do the work of the Lord 
in the world. If our view should prove true, and should 
gain the confidence of the people, to that extent all man-made 
systems would become unpopular. They would all 
be put to shame in comparison with the Truth. Hence 
their promoters think that to hide their darkness and call 
it light is necessary for their prosperity. They think that 
it is necessary for them to burn our books and to keep 
our sermons out of the newspapers, etc. All this seems 
to them to be the wise course. They perceive that they 
and their systems would utterly fall if our teachings were 
generally received by the people. 

"GREAT, SWELLING WORDS" 

These church systems claim that they have witnessed 
for Christ's Kingdom for eighteen hundred years. Roman 
Catholics say, "We have made a great institution! 
See the millions of money that we have invested! See 
how much we are in favor with the various governments; 
and we are hoping soon to get control of all the governments. 
Then we will conquer the world!" So say the 
Methodists, the Baptists, and all the rest of them. "We 
must conquer the world! This is the way the Kingdom 
must be set up!" 

Thus they go about to establish their own plans. 
When they do study the Word of God, they study it 
with sectarian spectacles on their eyes; and they think 
that "the Church" is now in the condition soon to cause 
every knee to bow and every tongue to confess. They 
say, "If these Millennial Dawn people go about and tell 
that there is only a 'little flock' in the true Church, people 
will remember that we have been boasting of our 
big flock. What do you say, Roman Catholic flock? What 
do you say, Lutheran flock? Methodist flock? Baptist 
flock? Presbyterian flock? Do we not claim that there 
are four hundred million Christians in the world? Shall 
we let an insignificant people come around and say 
that there are only a handful in the Church, and that all 
the rest of us are frauds? It is an implication that our 

R5677 : page 132 

great institutions are wrong. If these people are going 

to turn the world upside down, and bring us into disrepute, 

we must put them down before it is too late. 



Something must certainly be done!" 
OUR FIERY CHARIOT 

So we see there is hatred there. The Lord's true 
people are striving for a perfect ideal; they are striving 
for the likeness to the Lord as representatives of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. But this is not what the religious 
people hate so much. It is the disturbing of their institutions 
—the shaking and rocking of their boat. They 
are afraid that they will be capsized in the sea. It is the 
spirit of the world in them that hates the Lord's faithful 
ambassadors. Some of the noble-minded of the world 
now see somewhat of the Truth. This is the more exasperating 
to these church people who are not fully in 
harmony with the Lord. 

What this may eventually lead to we do not know. 
But there are Scriptures which seem to indicate that the 
closing of the career of the true Church will be one of 
persecution. We understand that Elijah was a type of 
the Church. His last experience was his being carried 
away in a chariot of fire. It was the agency by which 
he was taken from the world. So in the close of this 
world (Age) the Lord may take away His people in a 
fiery trouble— but it will be the chariot to carry them 
Home, to glory, honor and immortality, to participation 
with Jesus in the Divine Nature. "Fear not, Little 
Flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you 
the Kingdom." "If we suffer with Him, we shall also 
reign with Him."— Romans 2:7; 8:17; Luke 12:32; 
2 Timothy 2:12. 



page 132 

"In pastures green? Not always; sometimes He 
Who knoweth best, in kindness leadeth me 
In weary ways, where heavy shadows be. 
Out of the sunshine, warm and soft and bright, 
Out of the sunshine into darkest night; 
I oft would faint with terror and with fright, 
Only for this— I know He holds my hand. 
So, whether in the green or desert land, 
I trust, although I may not understand. 

"So, whether on the hill-tops, high and fair, 
I dwell, or in the sunless valleys, where 
The shadows lie— what matter? He is there. 
And more than this, where-er the pathway lead, 
He gives to me no helpless, broken reed, 
But His own hand, sufficient for my need. 
So, where He leads me I can safely go; 
And in the blest hereafter I shall know, 
Why, in His wisdom, He hath led me so." 



R5677 : page 133 

"THESE THINGS" THAT WE MUST DO 

"If ye do these things, ye shall never fall."— 2 Peter 1:10. 

THE CONTEXT preceding the words of the 

above text shows us that the Apostle has 

been urging the development of the fruits 

of the Holy Spirit in the heart, and so far 

as possible in the life— in the words, the 

deeds, the thoughts. He sums up his argument 

by saying that those who, following 

his advice in this matter, add one after another 

of these qualities and so build up 

their Christian character, will "never fall." 

The implication is that there would be some tendency to 

fall, some testings; and that this development of character 

would be necessary in order that the individual 

might be able to stand these tests. So the Apostle's 

assurance is that those who do not fall, who stand all the 

tests, will be granted an abundant entrance "into the 

everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus 

Christ"— the very thing that all of the Lord's people are 

invited to share. 

We whose eyes of understanding have been enlightened 
can realize the strength and reasonableness of the 
Apostle's argument; yet these things have not been much 
taught in a logical way. Errors of the Dark Ages have 
hindered and made void the teachings of the Apostles. 
The thought given out by the creeds of the past is that 
only a mere handful would be saved, and that the rest 
of the world would be banished to an eternity of torture 
and woe unspeakable. Many of the world have taken 
this in a light way, have been incredulous— declaring that 
they would stand their chance, etc. Others, who were 
of the Lord's people, have been frantic in their efforts to 
save as many as possible from the threatened eternal torture. 
Some had it that unless they belonged to a certain 
class, or cult, or had a certain kind of baptism, or turned 
away from sin and joined some church, they were sure of 
never-ending and unspeakable suffering beyond this life. 

With these ideas in their minds, it is not strange that 
they were too busy to study the Word of God with sufficient 
care to see what it really teaches, and that therefore 
they adopted plans of their own for saving the 
world. These deluded ones seem to be quite active in 
what they term soul-saving work. We cannot but admire 
their courage and zeal, even though it be not according 
to knowledge. If their premise were correct, then every 
Christian should be rushing around as though demented, 
in his endeavors to save the world. 

Suppose that a great fire broke out but a few doors 
from us, that there were no fire department accessible 



and that hundreds were in imminent danger of being 
burned to death, though we were ourselves safe from the 
fire. Suppose that then some one would say to us, 
"Come, let us have a Bible Study." We would be sure to 
answer quickly, "No indeed! There are many people in 
that building who will be burned to death unless they are 
quickly rescued!" We would be in such haste and such 
eagerness to save the lives of the endangered ones that 
we would stop for nothing else. 

DOCTRINAL CONFUSION OF MANY CHRISTIANS 

So the great Adversary has filled the minds of many 
Christian people with the vagary that the world is in 
imminent danger, not of being burned to death, but of 
being precipitated into a lake of burning brimstone or 
into an abyss of unimaginable horror and woe, there to 
be preserved in torture throughout unending ages! He 
has thus engaged Christians in an imaginary assault upon 
the Devil, to rescue souls from this eternity of torment. 
Not until our eyes are opened and we see that there is 
no such provision for the heathen, or for anybody, can 
we begin to exercise the spirit of a sound mind. When 
we come to understand God's arrangement, everything 
changes before our mind's eye. We then see that God 
has made full provision for the heathen and for all men, 
and we realize that 

"Faith can firmly trust Him, 
Come what may." 

We see that our work as Christians is to co-operate with 
God in the salvation of the Church class— not a salvation 
from eternal torture, but from death, and to a glorious 
inheritance with Christ in His coming Kingdom. We 
see that this great work has been progressing during 
the Gospel Age, and in an orderly manner. 

This blessed union with Christ which God has arranged 
for the Church is to be soon consummated by a 
marriage feast; and then, in the Kingdom to be established 
under the whole heavens, she as His Bride will 
with Him have the blessed opportunity of uplifting and 
delivering fallen humanity, the entire race of Adam, of 
restoring men, "whosoever will," to the glorious estate 
which was lost by Adam and redeemed by Christ Jesus 
the Lord through the blood of His cross. How wonderful 
it is to realize how all-embracing is God's marvelous 
Plan of salvation— that it includes in its gracious provision 
not only those now living, but also all who have 
gone down into the tomb ! With the eyes of our understanding 
thus enlightened, the delusions are taken away 
from our minds, and we begin to use our reason and to 
see the beautiful, wonderful things which God planned 
from before the foundation of the world. 

DOCTRINE OF SANCTIFICATION LOST TO MAJORITY 



As we reason, we see that the primary consideration 
with us is our sanctification. "This is the will of God 
[concerning you], even your sanctification." When we 
thought that the salvation of the world was dependent 
upon our feeble efforts here in the flesh, we had little 
time to study the Bible or to think particularly about our 
sanctification. Indeed, the thought of sanctification 
faded away from the minds of the majority of professing 
Christians; and for a Christian to press the importance 
of this doctrine was to brand himself as a religious 
fanatic. The general thought has seemed to be that 
those who were really thus set apart were surely so small 
a number that sanctification could not be God's Plan for 
the Church. So the many drifted apart from the Scriptures, 
and thought that only those guilty of most heinous 
crimes would be punished with eternal torment, and that 
all others would be some means get into Heaven. People 
have thought, and this thought seems to prevail today to 
an increasing extent, that unless one dies a murderer or 
a lawless, disreputable character, he will somehow be saved. 

"If a person can squeeze into Heaven without any 
sanctification, so much the better," is the thought. "Do 
not try to get up too high. Do not try to get one of the 
chief seats in Heaven. Take a lowly place"— crawl in 
under the gates, perhaps! And thus many have tried to 
believe that they and their friends would go to Heaven. 
Our Catholic friends have been taught that they must go 
to Purgatory for awhile. But nearly all others have 
hoped that they would get to Heaven at once. This idea 
of sanctification, of being holy as our Lord was holy, of 
walking in the footsteps of Jesus, is not the Bible view 
at all, according to their thought. They did not consider 
it the Bible view because they did not know the Bible 
teachings, and because they did not wish to conform 
themselves to so narrow a way— the broader, easier way 

R5677 : page 134 

was much more pleasant to the flesh. They could not believe 
that God would be intent upon roasting nearly everybody 
—surely He would be content to roast the most degraded 
heathen and the worst characters of Christendom. 

OUR "REASONABLE SERVICE" 

So these have accepted what seemed to them to be a 
reasonable moral standard, instead of endeavoring to find 
out what the Bible calls our "reasonable service." The 
great Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Church at Rome 
(Romans 12:1), says, "I beseech you therefore, brethren, 
by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living 
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your 

R5678 : page 134 



reasonable service." When we get rid of these erroneous 
thoughts and ideas and get the spirit of a sound mind, 
we begin to see more of God's wonderful Plan— of His 
Justice, Wisdom, Love, Power, of His purpose for His 
children now, and His arrangement for the world by and by. 

When light begins to break in upon the mind, and a 
glimpse is seen of God's gracious Plan of salvation, there 
is a danger that those whose hearts are selfish and lacking 
in gratitude will lapse into even greater worldliness, 
that they will pay very little attention to Bible study 
for the development of the fruits of the Spirit, feeling 
that it will be well with them in the future in any event, 
and they will delve into business, money-making, pleasure, 
etc. Others, on the contrary, feel an earnest desire 
to render thanks to the Lord for His great mercy and 
love as manifested in His glorious Plan of the Ages; 
they seek to know what is the Lord's will for them that 
they may do it, and say, "The fact that God is not such 
a demon as to torture eternally any of His creatures, but 
has so marvelous and loving a Plan for all, makes me 
want to serve Him all the more." As the Apostle Paul 
said, the Truth is "to the one the savor of death unto 
death; and to the other the savor of life unto life," and 
reveals the real sentiment of the heart.— 2 Cor. 2: 16. 

THE CHRISTIAN'S NEED IN THIS "EVIL DAY" 

Thus those who receive the Truth in the love of it 
become students of the Bible. As they study, they learn 
more and more how each one of the true Church is to be 
sanctified by the Truth, that each may be "made meet for 
the inheritance of the saints in light." They realize that 
the Church is now being called out to be saints of 
God, to be separated from the world, and to have a share 
with the Lord Jesus in blessing and uplifting the whole 
world in the Age to follow this, the Millennial Age— now 
so near at hand. To such the exhortation of the Apostle 
is, "Add to your faith virtue [fortitude]; and to virtue 
knowledge; and to knowledge temperance [self-control, 
self-restraint]; and to temperance patience; and to patience 
godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and 
to brotherly kindness love [a broad, generous love, taking 
in the whole world, even our enemies].— 2 Peter 1:5-7. 

The Apostle then adds, "If these things be in you and 
abound, they make you that ye shall be neither barren 
[inactive, idle] nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our 
Lord Jesus Christ." At this juncture the Apostle shows 
the contrary effect of the spirit of the world upon those 
who profess to be children of God— the result of a neglect 
to study and to assimilate the Word. He says, "But he 
that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar 
off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old 
sins." Then he counsels all, "Wherefore, the rather, 
brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election 
sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall: for so 
an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into 



the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ."-Vs. 8-11. 

NEED OF "THE WHOLE ARMOR OF GOD" 

By seeking to know God's will in order to do it, the 
Lord's people are preparing themselves for the glorious 
inheritance of the faithful. Fortified by development of 
character, these will not fall, no matter what the trial 
that the Lord may permit to come upon them. The 
Apostle Paul, in his Epistle to the Church at Ephesus, 
speaks of some who will be able to stand in the "evil 
day," and implies that a great many at that time will not 
be able to stand. He declares that those who hope to 
stand will need to put on "the whole armor of God." The 
various pieces of the Christian's armor will then be indispensable, 
and he intimates that only those fully armored 
would be ready for the onslaughts of that Day. 

The Lord did not reveal to the Apostles when the 
"evil day" would come. They knew that it was then 
future, but how far into the future they did not know. 
They did not expect it before their death; for some of 
them said that they expected to put off the present body, 
to die, and to awake in the First Resurrection, and that 
they believed the Second Coming of Christ to be some 
little time distant. Evidently it was a part of God's Plan 
to keep His people uninformed concerning the exact time 
of the Day of the Lord, until due; but He provided for 
them that they would be able to stand when the "evil day" 
arrived, if they would diligently put on the armor. 

And now we have come to this "evil day"; and the 
urgent message to us is: "Put on the whole armor of 
God!"— prepare yourselves for the great testing that will 
come, that you may be able to stand! Get ready! Each 
piece of the armor, each fruit of the Spirit, is a part of 
the necessary preparation for this "evil day," this "hour 
of temptation," now present. So these should all be 
added with great care. Read Ephesians 6:13-18; 2 Peter 1:4-11; 
Galatians 5:19-26. 

WHY THOUSANDS ARE FALLING 

This is the time long foretold, when "a thousand shall 
fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand." 
Why will all these fall? Because they have neglected 
this necessary development of character; because they 
have failed to put on the whole armor of God; because 
under the delusions of the Adversary and the spirit of 
the world and of Babylon they have become twisted in 
their minds. They have tried to raise money for the 
heathen or for building fine church edifices; they have 
gotten up church fairs and entertainments, etc.; not appreciating 
the fact that it is necessary to build up their 
own characters, that character, built up after the instruction 
of the Word of God, is absolutely necessary to 
an entrance into the Kingdom of Christ. And so these 



are falling all around us. 

If the whole armor of God was important in the 
Apostle's day, it is still more important today. We need 
all that is represented in the breastplate of righteousness, 
in the shield of faith, in the helmet of salvation, the 
covering of protection for the intellect, in the sandals of 
Gospel preparation, in the sword of the Spirit, the Word 
of God. We need that our loins be girt up with Truth. 
Thus shall we be enabled to preserve our vital relationship 
with the Lord and His House and to daily grow in 
grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

"In the last days," said the Apostle, "all that will live 
godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." Therefore 
we need to be fully established in the faith, and able 
to fully trust the Lord. Let us keep the Sword of the 
Spirit sharpened and well in hand, that we may be ready 
for service in the protection of others and in the defense 
of ourselves. We need to be continually on the alert respecting 

R5678 : page 135 

our own fleshly weaknesses and besetments, that 
we may war a successful warfare, and prove faithful to 
the end of our course, and thus share with our Lord His 
Kingdom and crown. 

"As I near the Time of Trouble, 

Bid my faith in Thee increase; 
While the thousands round are falling, 

Keep me, keep in perfect peace. 
Refuge! Fortress! Thou hast set Thy love on me!" 



R5678 : page 135 

DID JESUS REVILE HIS ENEMIES? 

"Who when He was reviled, 
reviled not again."— 1 Peter 2:23. 

NATURALLY the question arises, How shall 
we harmonize St. Peter's statement in this 
text with the fact that our Lord denounced 
the Scribes and Pharisees and Doctors of 
the Law as hypocrites, as a generation of 
vipers, etc.? 

We recall the evidence presented in the 
Gospels. St. Peter was one of the twelve 
Apostles and hence was with our Lord continually 
during His earthly ministry, and 

evidently, therefore, a very good witness of the fact that 
the Master did not return reviling for reviling. The 
import of the Apostle's words was that Jesus did not 
retaliate. When evil things were spoken of Him, He 
did not speak evil of those who did Him injury. He 



did not call down curses upon their heads, but committed 
Himself to God and left His cause in the hands 
of Divine Justice. 

The Evangelists record some of these revilings 
against our Lord. On one occasion His enemies said 
of Him, "He hath a devil and is mad." Again, Jesus 
Himself implied that He was also called "Beelzebub"— 
prince of devils. The Scribes and the Pharisees acknowledged 
His works, but denounced Him, and attributed 
His good works to Satan. They implied that His 
birth was illegitimate. They attempted to prove that He 
was guilty of blasphemy in saying that if the temple 
were torn down He would erect it again in three days. 
They did not get the spirit of His teaching, and tried 
to make out that His statement was sacrilegious. They 
endeavored to entrap Him in His words. They held 
that if He were really a great man, He would fellowship 
with them and not with publicans and sinners. Finally 
they reviled Him to the extent of crucifying Him between 
two thieves. 

But how was it that Jesus said some very sharp 
things to the Scribes, Pharisees and chief priests of that 
day? For instance, He called them a "generation of 
vipers," "whited walls," "sepulchres full of dead men's 
bones and all uncleanness." On one occasion He said, 
"Ye hypocrites! Ye can discern the face of the sky; 
but how is it that ye cannot discern the signs of the 
times?" Again, "Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers! 
How can ye escape the condemnation of Gehenna!" He 
declared, "Ye are of your father the Devil, for his works 
ye do." At another time He called them, "Ye fools and 

R5679 : page 135 

blind," "Ye blind guides," and denounced them saying, 
"Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for 
ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men; for ye 
neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them who are 
entering to go in. ..Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, 
hypocrites! for ye compass sea and land to make 
one proselyte; and when he is made, ye make him two-fold 
more the child of Gehenna than yourselves... 
Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for 
ye pay tithes of mint, anise and cummin, and have left 
undone the weightier matters of the law, judgment, 
mercy and faith; these ought ye to have done, and not 
to leave the other undone. Ye blind guides, which strain 
at a gnat and swallow a camel! Woe unto you, Scribes 
and Pharisees, hypocrites ! for ye make clean the outside 
of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of 
extortion and excess. Thou blind Pharisee! cleanse first 
the inside of the cup and of the platter, that the outside 
may be clean also." Were these revilings? Was not St. 
Peter mistaken when he wrote the words under consideration? 
Where does the line of difference come in? 



JESUS DID NOT STRIKE BACK 

We answer, The line of difference is in that our 
Lord was not striking back at them; His charges against 
them were made in advance, and were not, therefore, 
retaliation against something which they had said to 
Him. He did not refer to any one of them as having 
a devil. He spoke of their system in general as being 
a pernicious system. If the Lord had not declared that 
these rulers of Israel were hypocrites, how could we 
have known that they were hypocrites, when they appeared 
outwardly very anxious to keep the Law? The 
people said, "See how these holy men go about and pray 
on the street corners! Look at their broad phylacteries! 
We do not see Jesus pray half as much as they pray. 
And they are always watching, watching, to keep the 
Law." It was therefore right that our Lord should 
point out that their watchings, their tithings and their 
long prayers were hypocritical. They were so very careful 
about tithing the mint and the anise seed, but had no 
hesitation about devouring widows' houses— by some 
technicality getting hold of the property of the needy 
widow and then swallowing it up themselves. 

Jesus declared that on the outside these professedly 
holy men were indeed ever so white and clean and 
beautiful, but that on the inside they were vile and unclean. 
They were of their father the Devil; for they 
had his disposition. They did not do good and serve 
God from purity of heart; theirs was merely an outward 
service. Their whole system was honey-combed with 
hypocrisy— in the language of today we would term it 
"rotten." It was necessary that these men be exposed, 
and all who were pure of heart be saved from the blight 
of their influence. Jesus called out no one of them by 
name, but merely denounced them as a class. He was 
not seeking to do them injury, but good, if possible, and 
to warn them and all of the evil of such a course. Our 
Lord wished to deliver the people; therefore He spoke 
these things about a class; He said some very evil things 
about that class. It would be for each one of the class 
to clear his own skirts and to show that he was not 
leading a double life. Our Lord's words, then, would 
not come under the head of evil-speaking. He was 
speaking about a system. He was not telling something 
secret about John Smith, or saying that Mrs. Brown was 
so-and-so, doing thus-and-so in private life, etc. 

So we believe that we have a perfect right to call 
attention to the flagrant errors of today. It would not 
be right to reprove in the way our Lord did; for people 
would resent it more now than did the Jews of His day. 
If our Lord had not rebuked some of these things that 
their leaders did, the people would not have known but 
that those Pharisees had the Lord's endorsement. There 

R5679 : page 136 



they were going about with sanctimonious faces and 
saying so many prayers, etc. Were they really holy 
people? Jesus was there as a Representative of God 
and Exponent of His views. So Jesus let the people 
know that these Pharisees were not doing the things 
pleasing to God. He merely did His duty. 



R5679 : page 136 

CITY OF DAVID-CITY OF GOD 

-MAY 30.-2 SAMUEL 6:1-19; PSALM 24.- 

JERUSALEM THE NEW CAPITAL-KING DAVID'S PALACE-GOD'S 
PRESENCE DESIRED-THE ARK TO BE BROUGHT -UZZAH 
SLAIN-OBED-EDOM BLESSED-THE LESSON LEARNED- 
THE ARK PROPERLY BROUGHT-SOLEMNITY WITH REJOICING 
-THE TABERNACLE OF GOD-LESSONS FOR GOD'S PEOPLE. 

"I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go 
into the House of Jehovah."— Psalm 122:1. 

GUIDED by Divine providence, King David 

sought a new capital after he had been 

anointed king over all Israel. The city of 

Jerusalem had for centuries been an impregnable 

fortress, held by the Jebusites. 

They claimed that even the blind and the 

cripples could defend it against any foe, so 

advantageously was it situated. But when 

the time came, it was delivered into the 

hands of King David and became the capital 

of Israel. One of the first acts of the new king was to provide 

himself a palace fitting to the dignity of the nation 

and the court. To this end he obtained from King Hiram 

of Tyre not only material, but also skilled craftsmen. 

Soon King David's spiritual nature, so marked and 
represented in his Psalms, began to assert itself in respect 
to the government of Israel. It was not sufficient 
that idolatry should not be tolerated amongst God's 
Covenant people. The symbols of God's presence should 
be honored once more. The Tabernacle at Nob had 
fallen into disuse when King Saul destroyed the priests 
because they gave comfort to David; and King Saul had 
had the Tabernacle removed to Gibeon; but the Ark was 
not in the Tabernacle, and had not been for a long time. 

We recall that the wicked sons of Eli had taken the 
Ark with them into the battle with the Philistines; that 
in the defeat it was captured by the Philistines; that in 
its presence, Dagon, the Philistine idol, fell down broken; 
and that in whatever city the Ark rested, there were 
chastisements from the Lord until the Philistines returned 
it to Kirjath-Jearim. There it had remained for 
seventy years, until the events now noticed. King David 



made the transfer of the Ark to its new Tent, or Tabernacle, 
a very important affair, sending word to various 
parts of the nation, assembling some thirty thousand 
warriors and multitudes of people of deep religious inclination 
who desired to be witnesses to this great new 
religious movement, which all hoped would mean the 
bringing of God's blessing back to the nation, as of old. 

A GREAT LESSON IN REVERENCE 

King David, intent upon honoring God, had nevertheless 
neglected to look particularly into the Divine Law 
regulating the Ark and its movement— who should touch 
it, etc. Divine providence now gave him a great lesson 
in respect to reverence for the Almighty and carefulness 
in respect to the Laws. He had esteemed the Ark, but 
not highly enough. Really, it was the most important of 
all the various furniture of the Tabernacle. 

The Brazen Altar and the Laver were in the Court; 
the Table of Shew-bread, which was overlaid with gold, 
the Golden Candlestick, and the Golden Altar of Incense 
were in the Holy. But in the Most Holy the only article 
of furniture was the Ark. In shape it was like a box- 
about four feet long, two feet high, and two feet wide. 
It had a pole at each side, by which the Levites were to 
bear it on their shoulders. It was overlaid with gold; 
and inside the box were the Tables of the Law, a Golden 
Pot of Manna, preserved from the Wilderness times, and 
Aaron's rod, by which miracles had been wrought. The 
top of the Ark was its most particular feature. It was 
a solid plate of gold, wrought out above in the shape of 
two cherubim, whose faces looked inward and whose 
wings stretched forward. 

The Divine direction was that the priests should 
cover the Ark in a particular manner, symbolical of certain 
things; and that then only the Levites should have 
the care of it, to bear it upon their shoulders. Neglecting 
these matters, the king had a new cart made and 
oxen to draw the cart, as though this would be a more 
dignified way to bring it than any other thought of. But 
it was not God's way; and a lesson of reverence for 
God and for the Ark, which symbolized His character 
and His Mercy-Seat, must be given. 

The appropriate time came when the oxen, drawing 
the cart over a smooth, sloping, stone surface, allowed it 
to tilt a little. Then it was that Uzzah stretched forth 
his hand to steady the Ark, and was immediately smitten 
dead with a bolt of lightning. This evidence of Divine 
displeasure with the procedure brought all the festivities 
to a sudden termination; and King David feared to bring 
it too near to him, lest it should do other injury. The 
procession stopped; turning aside, the Ark was delivered 
to the home of Obed-edom the Levite, possibly a priest. 

The whole people thus learned the lesson of reverence 

R5680 : page 136 



—a lesson, by the way, which seems to be as much 
needed today as at any time. Irreverence is frequently 
manifested by the world; but this does not astound us as 
much as when we find irreverence manifested by those 
who profess to be the Lord's consecrated people, His 
Royal Priesthood. It is sometimes irreverence of manner, 
sometimes irreverence of language, sometimes the 
making of jokes on religious things or on passages of 
Scripture. Everything of the kind is surely injurious 
to the individual, as well as to his influence with others. 

We are not to forget that Uzzah was not sent to 
eternal torment; but that he merely fell asleep in death, 
and that his mistake, which taught a good lesson in his 
time, will not inure to his disadvantage in the future. 
Meantime, another lesson was taught; for the Ark at 
the home of Obed-edom began to bring blessings, of just 
what character we are not informed, but blessings of 
such a nature that they attracted the attention of many. 
Among them King David noticed. Again his heart 
turned to the original thought that Jerusalem should be 
not only the City of David, but the City of God, God's 
dwelling-place, as represented by the presence of the 
Ark and the Shekinah Glory-light which shone between 
the two cherubim, as indicating the presence of God 
with His people, Israel. 

GOD'S OWN HOLY NATION 

We are not situated in the same way as were David 
and the Israelites. There is no nation in the world today 
that is God's Kingdom. When He took away the crown 
from Zedekiah, 606 B.C., He declared through the 

R5680 : page 137 

Prophet, "I will overturn, overturn, overturn it; and it 
shall be no more until He comes whose right it is; and I 
will give it unto Him." (Ezekiel 21:25-27.) We believe 
that the time for the giving of the Kingdom to Messiah 
and the fulfilment of our prayers, "Thy Kingdom come," 
is near at hand. But, in the meantime, no earthly kingdom 
is God's Kingdom except in the sense that St. Peter 
declares the Church to be the holy nation, a peculiar 
people of God. (1 Peter 2:9.) But even then, it is not 
a sectarian system that is referred to— not the Baptist 
Church, nor the Methodist, nor the Presbyterian, nor the 
Lutheran, the Anglican or the Roman. The true Church 
of Christ is the unlimited Church, to which properly belongs 
the name Catholic in the sense that it is general; for 
that word means general, or universal. 

The Church of Christ is the one Church throughout 
the whole world; and its members are those who are 
united to Christ by consecration and by Divine acceptance 
through the begetting of the Holy Spirit. Some of its 
members may be found in the Roman Church, some in 



the Anglican, some in the Presbyterian, some in the Baptist, 
some in the Lutheran, some in the Methodist and 
others, and some outside of all these. But this is the 
only holy nation that God recognizes; and it will not be 
organized as a new nation fully until the resurrection 
change shall glorify the Lord's people with Himself 
beyond the Veil; as it is written, we shall be like Him, 
shall see Him as He is and shall share His glory. 

We can no more expect the world to appreciate the 
Truth of God and the presence of God than the Israelites 
could have expected that the Philistines, on the one hand, 
and the Moabites, on the other hand, would accept the 
Lord. Only God's Covenant people can appreciate Him 
and His arrangements. He is in their midst only. 

Nor can we even claim that it is a family matter; 
rather, as the Scriptures show, it is an individual matter. 
Here one, there another, the Church of Christ is scattered 
throughout the world. Only the consecrated belong 
to it or have its privileges and the fellowship with 
the Father and with the Son which the Ark of the 
Covenant would imply. One exception to this rule might 
be noted; namely, the one mentioned by St. Paul— the 
children of believing parents, who are counted in with 
their parents as participators in God's favors, blessings 
and care until such time as they reach a development of 
mind that would enable them to decide for themselves, 
either to make a full consecration to the Lord and be 
individually accepted by Him through the begetting of 
the Holy Spirit, or to turn aside and be part of the world. 

When King David was ready for the bringing up of 
the Ark the second time, some three months after the 
first attempt, which failed, he had studied the matter 
more carefully; and this time there was no new cart, but 
the Divinely directed method— the Levites, bearing the 
Ark upon their shoulders. It is not for us to be ingenious 
and inventive in respect to Divine methods and services, 
but rather to be students of the Divine will, searching the 
Scriptures that we may know the will of God and do 
it. The lesson which King David learned is one which 
all of God's people may well take to heart. 

DANCING BEFORE THE LORD 

The Record tells that, besides the thousands of warriors 
who acted as a guard and gave dignity to the procession, 
and the multitudes of people who met the Ark at 
various villages on the way, there were trumpeters, 
rattlers, and players on stringed instruments, who made 
joyful manifestations of appreciation of the great event 
of God's return to the nation as represented in the Ark's 
return. Another arrangement was that of having the 
Levites chant, one to the other, the different portions of 
a certain Psalm which King David had composed for this 
very occasion. It is made a part of this lesson.— Psalm 24. 

King David joined with the others in his manifestation 
of delight, and danced before the Lord. It would 



appear that this custom of a dignified rhythmic moving 
of the feet in harmony with music is a common form 
even today in far Eastern countries. Mr. Clark tells us 
how there was such a dance at a gathering of the Christian 
Endeavorers at one of their meetings in India, and 
how dignified and beautiful it appeared. 

As the grand procession neared the city of Jerusalem, 
it was met by the women of the city with rejoicing. At 
the head of these should have been Michal, King David's 
wife, the daughter of King Saul. But not so. She was 
in a cynical, proud mood. Was she not the daughter of 
King Saul? Had not her husband David been a poor 
shepherd boy, and then an outlaw for a time? On his 
coming home she criticized him for his manifestations of 
joy in connection with the bringing in of the Ark. She 
said that it was undignified and reproved him. King 
David reminded her that the Lord had taken the kingdom 
from her father and given it to him, and that he thus had 
the Lord's favor and thus relied on Him. And the proud 
woman was apparently thereafter left to herself, the bare 
mention being made that she was thenceforth childless. 

THE PSALM WAS PROPHETIC 

As the Ark represented Christ, in whom are hidden 
all the Wisdom and Power of God and in whom center 
all of God's blessings for men, so the bringing of the Ark 
into the city corresponded in a measure to our receiving 
of Christ. All such realize that "the earth is the Lord's, 
and the fulness thereof"— that every good and perfect 
gift cometh down from the Father and through the Son. 
The world and all that dwell therein are subjects of 
these blessings. 

God is founding His New Order of things in the 
midst of the seas of discontent— amongst those who are 
not established and in harmony with God— the restless 
masses. He invites us to ascend into His Holy Hill, His 
Holy Kingdom, and to be established in His Holy Place, 
in the spiritual Divine nature. He stipulates that none 
can be of this class except upon certain conditions; 
namely, a pure heart, an honest heart, and clean hands, 
righteous living to the best of his ability. These are all 
expected to swear allegiance to God. This is styled their 
Covenant with Him. 

Jesus was the first of these Covenanters; and all of 
the Church must walk in His steps, if they would be with 
Him in His Holy Kingdom. These must not lift up their 
soul to falsehood nor swear deceitfully. God will require 
of them all that they have covenanted with Him. 
Only such will receive the blessing of the Lord, and only 
to such will His righteousness be imputed through Christ. 

Never more than today has this Lesson seemed to 
need to be impressed. How many today confess that 
although they have made a covenant of sacrifice and 
vowed to the Lord, they are not considering this nor 
keeping their vows! How many indeed confess that they 



are speaking falsely in respect to their creeds, denying 
privately what they publicly have declared to be their 
faith! Surely such a course must be reprehensible in 
God's sight and such cannot hope to be of the Kingdom. 

Then follows in the Psalm a declaration that the 
Children of Israel are those who seek the Lord, and who 
request that the King of Glory come in, even the Lord, 
mighty, powerful, able to deliver from sin and from the 

R5680 : page 138 

power of sin— death. We are still waiting for the entrance 
of this King of Glory in the full sense of the word. 
He declares that He will be revealed in flaming fire, so 
far as the world is concerned— a great "Time of Trouble 
such as never was since there was a nation." (Daniel 12:1.) 
Many Bible students see this trouble already beginning 
in the awful war now spreading, and are expecting 
the fiery anarchy of it to result in the near future. 
Then quickly will come the still small Voice, the Divine 
influence, the mighty power of the Savior, which will 
deliver from sin, from death, and from Satan, who shall 
be bound for a thousand years. 



R5681 :page 138 

"THOU ART THE MAN!" 

-JUNE 6.-2 SAMUEL 11:1 TO 12:7.- 

THE HONESTY OF THE BIBLE-KING DAVID'S STATION DID NOT 
COVER HIS GUILT-THE TEMPTATIONS OF PROSPERITY- 
KING DAVID'S TERRIBLE SINS-THE PROPHET NATHAN'S 
PARABLE-THE KING'S SENSE OF JUSTICE-CONDEMNED 
BY HIS OWN WORD-HIS PENITENCE-FORGIVEN 
YET PUNISHED-THE LESSON TO ALL. 

"Create in me a clean heart, O God."— Psalm 51:10. 

THE BIBLE is unlike any other book in the 

world. It is the most honest, the most 

candid, of all books. The one most approved 

as a man after God's own heart is, 

when he sins, most severely condemned and 

heavily punished. There is a lesson, however, 

in the Scriptural statement, "There is forgiveness 

with Thee, that Thou mightest 

be feared." (Psalm 130:4.) The fact that 

God is not merciless, that He does not disregard 

the weak and imperfect condition— the fact that 

He gives us credit for our heart intentions, even when 

the weaknesses of the flesh are reproved and punished— 

these indications of consideration prompt to the greater 

reverence for God than if we merely thought of Him 



as merciless. 

No wonder we are surprised that one who manifested 
so many noble traits should also have manifested such 
weaknesses as those condemned in this lesson— adultery 
and murder! We think of David the youth, his reverence 
for God, his faith, his loyalty, his trials, his difficulties; 
and we wonder how he could become so changed 
in so short a time. The secret is not far to seek. It 
is easier to live a wholly consecrated life in poverty 
than when surrounded by wealth and the pleasures, customs 
and liberties of the court. The king temporarily 
forgot that the Ark, representative of God's favor and 
presence, was now in his city. He realized indeed that 
the eyes of the Lord were in every place beholding the 
evil and the good; yet the seeing of the Tabernacle 
should have brought freshly to his mind the thought, 
"Thou God seestme." 

We may be sure, however, that King David did not 
get into so sinful a condition of mind and heart suddenly. 
The narrative shows that the matter must have gone 
on for months, gradually reaching a culmination. Nor 
would it be fair to the king to assume that his heart 
was as wrong as his conduct. Rather we must assume, 
from subsequent manifestations, that his heart was still 
loyal to God and to the principles of righteousness, but 
somehow his heart had gone to sleep and his flesh had 
become very much alive. He was awake to sin, asleep 
to righteousness. He had before him the unfavorable 
examples of other kings and the liberties which they 
exercised. His relationship with God had made him keen 
of intellect; and now, in yielding to temptation, this keenness 
of mind was all the more effective in the evil course. 

A COURAGEOUS SERVANT OF GOD 

David first coveted his neighbor's wife. He did not 
rebuke this sinful condition of mind, but allowed it to 
proceed until he stole his neighbor's wife. Her husband 
was in the war, a faithful soldier. The emergency 
seemed to call for his death in order to protect the king 
from shame. David's conscience was surely asleep when he 
ordered his general to put the faithful soldier in an exposed 
place in the attack being made on a certain city, 
then to command a retreat and thus leave the most exposed 
ones to be killed. 

The plan carried out. It cost the life of not only the 
defrauded husband, but several others. We can scarcely 
imagine how one of King David's loyalty to principle 
could have arranged such a plan or how he could have 
had any peace under these circumstances. Surely none 
of his beautiful Psalms were written during those nine 
months or more. But Uriah was dead; and his stolen 
wife had been made the wife of David, and shortly their 
child was born. 

Then appeared the Prophet Nathan before the king. 
Wisely bringing his reproof in the form of a parable, he 



told of a poor man who had but one ewe lamb and of 
how a wealthy neighbor had defrauded him of it. King 
David's sense of justice was outraged, and he declared 
that the man who did that deed must restore four-fold 
and must also be put to death. Then the Lord's Prophet 
Nathan pointing to the king, declared, "Thou art the 
man!" and promptly drove home the lesson. It required 
courage; but whoever has a message from the Lord must 
needs have the courage to deliver it— as wisely as possible, 
of course, but faithfully. 

Instantly King David's heart was aroused; immediately 
his conscience was quickened. He saw his own conduct, 
not from the standpoint of other kings and what 
they did, but from the standpoint of the Divine Law of 
righteousness, truth, kindness, mercy. He beheld himself 
a sinner. Indeed, under the Law, both the adultery 
and the murder were punishable by death. The king 
instantly acknowledged his sin, and prayed, fasted and 
mourned. Meantime the Prophet, by Divine direction, 
informed the king that for all this the Lord would not 
cause his death nor take from him all his loving-kindnesses, 
because he had confessed and repented; but that, 
nevertheless, the child of his sin should not live and the 
king himself would in after time suffer severe punishments 
for his transgressions. 

Here we perceive a principle of the Divine Government 
in respect to those who are the people of God and 
are in covenant relationship with Him. Justice would 
have been required in respect to the sins; but to the repentant 
soul the Lord's favor would, nevertheless, still 
be granted. Many Christians have had experience along 
this line. God does not continue to treat them as sinners; 
but, accepting their heart contrition, He forgives them 
in that sense of the word; yet true to His arrangement, 
"Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." In 
this Divine arrangement there is nothing to encourage 
sin, but, on the contrary, everything to encourage righteousness; 

R5681 :page 139 

and if sin be fallen into, everything to encourage 
the sinner to accept Divine forgiveness and to 
reform his life, even though he shall be obliged to bear 
some severe penalty— perhaps to his tomb. 

THE PSALM OF REPENTANCE 

Very many Christians have been encouraged to repentance 
by the Fifty-first Psalm. Surely none have been 
encouraged by it to sin. It is said that Voltaire, the 
infidel, once attempted a burlesque of this Psalm, but 
became so awed by its solemn tone that he threw down 
the pen and fell back dazed on his couch, full of remorse. 
Bishop Hall, commenting, says, "How can we presume 
of not sinning, or despair for sinning, when we find so 
great a saint thus fallen, thus risen?" We should remember, 



however, that noble as King David was, he was 
not a saint in the New Testament sense of that word. 
He may have been equally saintly in heart intentions, but 
he had not been accepted of the Lord and begotten of 
the Holy Spirit; for "the Holy Spirit was not yet given," 
as we read in John 7:39. 

The giving of the Holy Spirit and its begetting to a 
new nature began at Pentecost, and has continued since. 
If we are astonished that King David should be overtaken 
in such faults, how much more would we be astonished 
if any saint of God, begotten of the Holy Spirit, should 
fall into such a trap of the Adversary. The spirit-begotten 
ones have much advantage every way— not only 
through the greater enlightenment which comes to them 
through the better knowledge of the Divine character, 
the Divine Plan and the Divine promises, but also by 
reason of having the Lord Jesus as their Helper under the 
assurance that "All things shall work together for good 
to them" (Romans 8:28); and that the Lord will not 
suffer them to be tempted above that they are able; but 
will with every temptation also provide a way of escape. 
-1 Corinthians 10:13. 

"Have mercy upon me, O God, according to Thy loving 
kindness; according unto the multitude of Thy tender 
mercies blot out my transgressions. Wash me thoroughly 
from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For 
I acknowledge my transgressions; and my sin is ever 
before me." These words of honesty assure us that the 
king was overtaken in some kind of fog which for months 
obscured his mental vision. Earth-born clouds and fleshly 
weaknesses arose like a veil between his soul and the 
Lord, shutting out the light of the Lord's countenance. 

The lesson applies to all who have ever been in covenant 
relationship with God. The poet has expressed 
what ought to be the sentiment of every Christian, discerning 
the slightest shadow between the Lord and himself: 

"Sun of my soul, my Father dear, 

I know no night when Thou art near. 
Oh, may no earth-born cloud arise 

To hide Thee from Thy servant's eyes!" 

The important lesson here is that we shall keep close 
accounts with God. No child of God should go forth in 
the morning without an earnest petition to Him for Divine 
supervision of his affairs and for help to walk in 
the right path. No child of God should retire at night 
without a retrospective glance on all the day's pathway, 
to discern to what extent it has been a profitable one 
and has brought him a day's march nearer the Heavenly 
Home. Or, if perchance something has occurred of 
which he should feel ashamed, it is none too soon to go 
at once to the Throne of Heavenly Grace to obtain mercy 
and find fresh help for future times of need. 

The child of God thus keeping daily accounts with 
the Father and with the Redeemer, will abide in Their 



love and not be in danger of falling into any such great 
sins as these noted in this lesson. Even King David, we 
may be sure, would have fallen into no such sins had he 
not allowed gradually to arise earth-born clouds of fleshly 
hues between the Lord and himself. 

R5682 : page 139 

"Hide Thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine 
iniquities. Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew 
a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from 
Thy presence; and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me. 
Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation; and uphold 
me with Thy free Spirit. Then will I teach transgressors 
Thy ways; and sinners shall be converted unto Thee." 

Although the Holy Spirit was not given to the Ancient 
Worthies in the same sense that it is given to the Church, 
it was nevertheless the manifestation of God's favor 
toward them in their affairs, as the king here intimates. 
We are to remember that from Moses down to John the 
Baptist, according to the Scriptures, there was a House 
of Servants under Moses; but that during this Gospel 
Age there is a House of Sons, begotten of the Holy 
Spirit, under the chief Son, the Lord Jesus Christ- 
Hebrews 3:5,6. 



R5682 : page 139 

CO-LABORING WITH OUR GOD 

TOO often do God's people forget that the Lord 

Himself is at the head of His work. Too 

often the thought is, We will do a work and 

get God to co-labor with us in our work. 

Let us get the right focus on the matter, and 

perceive that God has purposed and is carrying 

out a great work; and that it will succeed, 

entirely regardless of us and our effort; 

and that it is a great privilege granted 

to the people of God to co-labor with their 

Maker in the carrying out of His plans, His designs, His 

arrangements, in His way. Viewing matters from this 

standpoint, our prayer and our watching should be with 

a view to knowing and doing the will of the Lord, content 

whatever lot we see, since 'tis our God who leads us. 

This is the program which the WATCH TOWER BIBLE 
AND TRACT SOCIETY has sought to follow. Its officers are 
seeking to do the will of the Father as guided by the 
teachings of the Head of the Church, Christ Jesus and 
His appointed representatives, the twelve Apostles, whose 
words we have for our instruction today in better form 
than ever before. Following this program, our Society 
has not sought to lay up earthly riches, but has been, 
rather, a spending institution. Whatever God's providence 



sent in to us without solicitation we have sought to 
spend as wisely as possible in harmony with the Word 
and Spirit of the Lord. Long ago we announced that 
when the funds would cease, the activities of the Society 
would cease proportionately; and that as the funds increased, 
the Society's activities would be enlarged. 

This program has been greatly blessed of the Lord 
and, we believe, is in full accord with His will. We have 
no thought of changing it in any degree. Last year was 
the most wonderful one in our experience. The Gospel 
Message by printed page and orally and by the DRAMA 
witnessed the Gospel of the Kingdom nigh at hand to 
millions of people all over the earth. We thank God for 
the blessed privileges enjoyed and the activities permitted 
in His service on behalf of thousands of His consecrated 
people in every land, co-laboring with the Society and 

R5682 : page 140 

laboring either directly or indirectly under its auspices. 

When making our last Annual Report, we expressed 
the thought that many of the Lord's people have already 
invested what money they possessed, and that we would 
thus expect donations to be smaller than heretofore and 
that we would be obliged to discontinue some of the 
DRAMAS. Later we announced bright prospects of a full 
resumption. We did not tell the basis of this expectation, 
but will now explain: 

Some Brethren informed us that they believed they 
were possessed of a rich gold-bearing property, that all 
of its proceeds were consecrated to the Lord's service, 
that ere long we might expect money from them in good 
supply, but that their names were to be kept secret. Their 
expectations, which were highly appreciated, were not 
realized. The expectation had a beneficial effect, however, 
in that it encouraged us to keep the work up to a 
high notch of speed and efficiency in every direction until 
the present time. Now we have gone our limit. We 
must conclude that it is the Lord's will that our activities 
be greatly curtailed, in order to bring down the expenses 
to a parity with the income. 

SEVENTY SENT FORTH 

In line with this decision, seventy of the dear helpers 
at the Society's Headquarters have been obliged to go 
forth to seek other avenues of usefulness in the work. 
Some will become Colporteurs; others will accept situations 
as teachers in schools and colleges; some will enter 
business life. All will, we believe, however, still continue 
to put God first and to consider the spread of the Gospel 
of the Kingdom their main business of life, giving evenings, 
Sundays, etc., to the service, as may be possible. 

The necessary retrenchments include the putting of 
the DRAMAS on a self-supporting basis— or else discontinuing 
them. Our Society can continue to supply films 



and slides for these DRAMAS, and the Office direction, but 
must look to the Superintendents and operators of each 
DRAMA to meet their own expenses. This is being done 
by offering the DRAMA to Theatre Managers as part of 
their regular program, to be charged for, but not at an 
extra charge. The new plan is being put into operation 
and is proving successful generally. Indeed, some people 
declare that they would much prefer to pay an admission 
fee than to attend the DRAMA free, because they feared 
that at a free entertainment they would be brought in 
contact with the rude and uncleanly. It is a remarkable 
fact, however, that our free entertainments have been 
generally attended by a splendid class of people from the 
middle walks of life. Furthermore, to adapt the DRAMA 
to the use of the Theatre Managers we have arranged 
that the FOUR PARTS can be given in full as now, two 
hours each; or, if the Theatre Managers prefer, we will 
supply the four entertainments of about one hour each by 
omitting some of the slides and lectures, leaving the audience 
to get the remainder of the DRAMA by the reading 
of the Scenario. It may be that in this way the Lord will 
use the DRAMA in reaching a still different class from 
that already reached by its free exhibition. 

The free volunteer matter, which last year ran up to 
the enormous amount of forty-seven millions of copies, 
must also be cut down. Some of our readers have orders 
placed; and this will be the explanation if your orders 
are not filled entirely. In a word, the retrenchment will 
extend all along the line, including a reduction in the expense 
allowances of the Bethel Family and curtailment 
of expense for food supplies. Our readers will be glad 
to know that the entire Family is rejoicing in the privilege 
of further self-denials for the Cause we love to serve, 
and that the seventy who have gone forth, some of them 
with tears, also manifest fullest resignation to the Divine 
will, rejoicing in the various steps of Divine providence 
and continuing steadfast in prayer, faith and love toward 
the Lord and the Brethren. All are seeking to receive 
the experiences of life as the polishing preparatory for 
the Kingdom. So receiving them, the blessing of the 
Lord is more and more manifest amongst us. 

We have made this statement with greater detail than 
might seem necessary, lest there should be wrong impressions 
and misunderstandings of any kind. 

OUR GENERAL LETTER 

To Seventy Brothers and Sisters of the Bethel Family: 

Greetings! 

Sorrow mingles with our joy to do the Father's will and 
to follow the guidance of His providence, because it signifies 
a temporary parting from so considerable a number of those 
whom we dearly love and whose association with the work 
we highly prize. At the opening of the year we thought that 
we saw a bright ray of financial hope, notwithstanding the fact 
that the dear friends throughout the world who had been contributing 



to the Tract Fund to support the work had well 

drained themselves of means and could not be expected to 

continue their donations as formerly. Month by month we 

have waited and maintained the work, expecting some realization 

of our hopes; but after five months the drain is so heavy 

that prompt action is necessary. We must not involve ourselves 

in debt nor jeopardize the work in general; hence the 

decision for the reduction of the expenses along every line, 

including the Home expenses, Office expenses, etc. 

Financially we know that some of you will be benefited by 
the change. We can surmise also that some will experience 
benefit to their health by a change of employment. We assume 
that some of you thus leaving the Bethel and the Tabernacle 
will be entering the Colporteur work. The weather is 
delightful now, and in places where money is not too scarce 
good success is obtainable. 

In any event, dear Brethren and Sisters, we commend you 
to the Lord and to His watch-care, blessing and guidance, 
assured that all things are working together for good to those 
that love Him. He may have some new experiences for us— 
trials and blessings. He may have some new opportunities 
for us and may guide us in the reaching of others in this 
gleaning time. We assure you that we are loth to part with 
you and that, should the financial stringency be relieved, it 
will be our pleasure to again expand the work, according to 
the leading of the Lord's providence. 

So far as possible, we would like this retrenchment to take 
place at once— before the middle of this month, or at least 
before the First of June. We ask your hearty and cordial 

R5683 : page 140 

co-operation, and request that you remember in prayer those 
who are charged with the responsibilities of the Society's 
work, that wisdom and grace may be theirs in abundance. 

While we have suggested that the work may a little later 
on be expanded, we should also add that it may quite as probably 
be still further contracted to effect a further reduction in 
the general expenses. Whatever is the Lord's will surely is 
our will. Let us show Him our faith, our confidence, our 
loyalty and our obedience. 

The selection of names of those who might be spared from 
the work was no easy task to the Heads of the Departments 
charged with this responsibility. Like all human work it 
may be imperfect; but we are sure that it is done with an eye 
single to the Lord's pleasement, and we trust that He will 
overrule it to His praise and for the good of all concerned. 
With much Christian love, 

Your brother and servant in the Lord, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 

LOVING RESPONSE 

To Our Beloved Pastor, from the Departing Seventy 
Members of "The Bethel Family": 
As we go forth from the hallowed precincts of the "Bethel 



Home"— hallowed by the remembrance of the many seasons 
of sweet communion with those whom the Heavenly Father 
has specially honored in placing in the fore-front of His 
mighty work in these closing days of this present world's history 
—it is with a feeling of joy and thankfulness for the many 
blessings and privileges which have been ours as members of 
the "Bethel Family." 

R5683 : page 141 

As we reflect upon the Lord's abounding grace so freely 
and richly bestowed upon us as members of this household, 
and as we face the future with its prospects of Heavenly 
honors and glories, awaiting us— those who shall be accounted 
"conquerors, and more than conquerors"— there is, nevertheless, 
a tinge of sadness in parting with so many loved ones, 
and in leaving all we have called "Home". 

Ah, well! we shall remember the kind and loving ministrations 
of yourself, dear Brother Russell, in the days to come, 
when separated from one another, we shall fight on in the 
good fight of faith. 

It is the prayer of our hearts that the splendid example 
of Christian fortitude and self-sacrificing devotion in the service 
of the Lord, the Truth, and the brethren that you have 
shown, may ever be a cherished and shining image upon 
Memory's Scroll. 

If ever a true and devoted servant of the Lord should be 
loved and honored for his work's sake, we believe it is yourself. 
When we think of the days and nights of years of 
toil, and pain, and weariness; and of the grandeur and 
world-wide scope of your services; how can we help but love 
and honor you! 

We give thanks to our Heavenly Father for having raised 
up one who has been so wise and faithful in ministering to 
the Household of Faith and to us in particular who have 
been of the "Bethel" household. 

And now, our dear Pastor, with these expressions of love 
and appreciation, we go forth with the prayer for Divine 
guidance upon you, and upon our way, that in the Lord's appointed 
time our journey's end shall be the Father's house of 
many mansions— the Heavenly Bethel— prepared for the 
Bride, the Lamb's Wife. 

God bless you and the dear remaining members of the 
"Bethel Family"! 

Signed, C. J. Woodworth, 

F. F. Cook, 
R. G. Jolly and the others. 



R5683 : page 141 

INTERESTING QUESTION 
"HE WENT TO HIS OWN PLACE" 



Question. --I notice an article in THE WATCH TOWER 
which says that Judas died the Second Death. Can a man 
die the Second Death until he has passed from death unto 
life, until he has been spirit-begotten, until he has once 
been in Christ Jesus and free from condemnation? 

Answer.— Judas and all the other Apostles occupied a 
peculiar place or position, different from other Jews of 
their time, because they were in contact with our Lord 
Jesus, the Great Light. They saw that Light, and were 
responsible in proportion as they saw it. For any of 
them to sin as Judas did against that Light, would be a 
very reprehensible thing. True, Judas had not been begotten 
again of the Holy Spirit; for spirit-begetting was 
not possible until Pentecost. But this does not prove that 
he could not die the Second Death. On the contrary, we 
know that during the Millennial Age there will be some 
who will not receive the begetting of the Holy Spirit, but 
who will die the Second Death— the death that will be 
destruction. Their responsibility will lie in the fact that 
they will be brought to a knowledge of the Truth, with 
the opportunities which it will give them of coming into 
full harmony with the Lord. If they respond to those opportunities, 
they may attain everlasting life; if they do not 
respond, they will die the Second Death. 

Such an opportunity was given to Judas. For a long 
time he responded favorably; but afterwards he rejected 
the blessings that were his portion, and ignominiously 
proved himself a traitor to the One who was his Benefactor. 
Jesus was to be the Judge in the matter; and we 
have His words, calling Judas the "son of perdition." (John 17:12.) 
He said that it would have been better for that 
man if he had never been born. (Matthew 26:24.) This 
would not be true if Judas were to have an opportunity 
during the Millennial Age. The Scriptures say that he 
went to his own place. (Acts 1:25.) His own place was 
not Heaven; for it was not open to anybody yet; his own 
place was not Restitution; for that has not yet come. His 
own place was the only place then open— the Second Death. 

PRESENT STANDING OF THE CHURCH 

The Ransom-price, the Ransom-sacrifice of Jesus, has 
not yet even been paid over, or applied, for the whole 
world of mankind. If it were, the whole world, redeemed 
by that payment, would be in His hands. The world has 
not yet been in our Lord's hands. The time, however, we believe 
is near when through the strength of that Sacrifice, 
He will ask the Father, and the Father will give Him "the 
heathen for an inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the 
earth for His possession." (Psalm 2:8.) That will be 
the time when He shall have paid over the Ransom-price. 
He laid down the Ransom-price when He died, but did not 
apply it. The world is still under condemnation. Only 
the Church has escaped that condemnation thus far. 

The Church escapes from that condition of condemnation 
by the imputation of the benefits of that Ransom 



which is not yet paid over. If the Church could have 

the merit of Christ imputed to her down through the 

Gospel Age since Pentecost, the same merit, we believe, 

could be imputed before Pentecost; for our Lord had 

made the consecration of Himself, and, so far as the type 

goes, He had already slain the bullock. That is, the consecration 

of our Lord at Jordan represented the killing of 

the bullock in the Atonement Day type; it was the giving 

up of His earthly life. This was done when He was 

thirty years of age, before He had called these disciples. 

It was then that the Father recognized and accepted His 

Sacrifice; for He gave our Lord the begetting of the Holy 

Spirit. If that Sacrifice had not been accepted then the 

Father would not have begotten Him of the Spirit. 

THE APOSTLES' STANDING DURING OUR LORD'S MINISTRY 

The Holy Spirit was given as an evidence that what 
Jesus had given to the Father was accepted. What He 
did at Calvary was merely the finishing of that work 
which He began at Jordan. Our Lord treats the matter 
from this standpoint, and in discoursing with His disciples 
tells them that they might pray to God as their 
Father. No Jew had ever done this before. The Jews 
thought that Jesus' claim to be the Son of God was 
blasphemy, and took up stones to stone Him because of 
this. (John 10:31-33.) Whoever said, "Our Father," 
was making himself to be a son of God. No Jew, so far as 
we have any record throughout the Scriptures, ever made 
use of such expressions; they were a House of Servants. 

Then again, Jesus addressed His followers, His disciples, 
as though they had been accepted of the Father. 
He was the Father's Agent, and He received them in 
harmony with the Father's arrangement. He declared 
that "No man cometh unto Me except the Father draw 
him"; and, "No man is able to pluck them out of My 
Father's hand." He made these statements before they 
had received the Holy Spirit at Pentecost. This was 
treating them as though they had the full initiation into 
the Divine Family. Our Lord declared that "he that 
believeth in Me hath everlasting life." (John 6:47.) All 
these disciples had believed on the Son. As long as they 
would hold Him in the Scriptural manner— hold to Him 
by faith, according to the terms of this Gospel Age, faith 
and consecration— they might count that they had the life 
promised to His faithful followers. If any would abandon 

R5684 : page 142 

Him, as Judas did, of course he would pass back again 
from the imputed life to the death condition. 

REJECTION OF KNOWLEDGE A SERIOUS MATTER 

Judas was a New Creature in the reckoned, or imputed, 
sense of the word in which all the disciples were 



said to have passed from death unto life. It was to the 
new life that they had passed, not to Restitution life; for 
the Lord said to these same disciples that they who had 
followed Him would sit upon twelve thrones (Matthew 19:28), 
thereby implying that they had passed to that life 
which would be the condition of the enthroned. Speaking 
of them, then, from the standpoint of the New Creation, 
this was possible because in our Lord's contract unto 
death, which He entered into by baptism, He really gave 
up all of His earthly rights. It was possible in the tentative 
form, the Father purposing that not many days after 
Jesus' ascension they would be endued with power from 
on High. --Luke 24:49. 

Hebrews 6:4-8 does indeed refer to the Church, but 
it does not enumerate the only conditions on which any 
will die the Second Death. All of the Church are liable 
to this condemnation. If they would sin wilfully, if they 
would fall away so as to deny the very Foundation of 
God's favor— the Ransom-sacrifice of Jesus— they would 
die the Second Death. This Scripture does not say that 
there are no other conditions on which the Second Death 
will be inflicted. We see that the Second Death will be inflicted 
on some in the Millennial Age. 



page 142 

REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS 

AS THE WATCH TOWER list includes thousands 
of new readers we make the following explanations 
afresh:— 

THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT 
SOCIETY out of donated funds sends forth 
instructors, lecturers, styled "PILGRIMS." It 
pays their expenses of every kind. Thus 
they become in a special sense its representatives, 
meeting with Bible Students 
everywhere. Some of these are specially 
qualified for public service as well as for semi-public 
studies with the friends; others are less qualified for 
public service, but excellent in Class meetings. The 
SOCIETY uses great care in the selection of these to the 
intent that their presentations of the Truth, expositions 
of the Scriptures, etc., may be along helpful lines— profitable 
every way and especially for the upbuilding of the 
Lord's people in the most holy faith. 

It is expected that the Classes inviting such Pilgrim 
service will provide for the Pilgrim's necessities at one 
of their homes, or otherwise, during his brief stay of 
from one to two days. Luxurious or extraordinary 
preparation for these Brethren is not expected, but merely 
their comfortable provision. By this we mean a clean, 
comfortable bed and wholesome food. Any one not being 
able to furnish these reasonable requirements should not 



propose to entertain the Pilgrim. The Class inviting 
Pilgrim service should consider itself responsible and 
should see that these reasonable comforts are provided. 
The Pilgrims are expected to address meetings every 
night, also afternoon meetings wherever these are possible 
—or otherwise to visit the Brethren who may be sick 
either spiritually or physically. The morning is often 
necessary for traveling. The Pilgrim should not be kept 
up too late at night. "Moderation" should govern, 
in this as in all things, as the Scriptures direct. 

We invite Classes desiring Pilgrim visits to send in 
their requests at once, addressing the SOCIETY, care PILGRIM 
DEPARTMENT. 

We desire that post-cards be used in making applications 
for these visits, and specially desire replies to all 
of the following questions. The questions need not be 
repeated, but merely indicated thus: (a), (b), etc.: 

(a) How many Bible Students in your vicinity use the 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES? 

(b) Are weekly meetings held? 

(c) How many are usually in attendance? 

(d) Where do you now meet on Sunday? (Give full street 
address and name of auditorium.) 

(e) At what hours are the Sunday meetings held? 

(f) Was a vote taken on the Pilgrim invitation? 

(g) How many voted for the invitation to be sent? 

(h) Do you desire Sunday appointments for Special Public 

Lectures? 
(i) How frequently do you desire such Special appointments? 
(j) Give seating capacity of Auditorium you could secure, 
(k) What attendance do you think could be secured for well-advertised 

public sessions in good Auditorium? 
(1) Would a suitable place be found for meetings not specially 

advertised? 
(m) Have the members of your class chosen leaders in accordance 

with suggestions of SCRIPTURE STUDIES, 

Volume VI., chapters 5 and 6? 

If so, give name and full address of each, 
(n) Give full names and full addresses of the two (2) to 

whom notices of Pilgrim visits should be sent. (Please 

notify Pilgrim Dept. as to any change or removal.) 
(o) If your town is not on a railroad give the name of 

proper railroad station at which to stop, 
(p) How many miles from station is meeting place, and 

which direction from station? 
(q) Would Pilgrim be met at station? 
(r) If not, how should Pilgrim get from said station? 
(s) Give writer's full name and address, 
(t) Any additional remarks. 



R5684 : page 142 

"CONSIDER HIM "-THEN FOLLOW 



"Consider Him who endured such contradiction of sinners 
against Himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in 
your minds."— Hebrews 12:3. 

THE Apostle had just been pointing out the 

faithfulness of our Lord Jesus. He had reminded 

the Church of the shame and 

ignominy which the Master had endured 

for the great joy set before Him by the 

Heavenly Father. He declares Jesus to be 

the Author and Finisher of our faith. He 

then urges that in our trials and difficulties 

as children of God we remember what extreme 

experiences in suffering the Master 

endured— such contradiction, such opposition, of sinners 

against Himself— opposition to His doctrines, to everything 

that He did. This opposition to Jesus continued 

until finally it resulted in His murder. 

The Apostle says to the Church, "Ye have not yet resisted 
unto blood, striving against sin," as Jesus did. As 
a matter of fact, we really suffer very little and give up 
very little. At most we have but little life, as members of 
the fallen race, and it stretches out for only a brief span. 
We have very little to consecrate to God. And when that 
little is going we should consider how insignificant it is, 
and what great things the Master had— not merely the 
perfections that He had in His earthly life, but also what 
He had previously, and how, in obedience to the Divine 

R5684 : page 143 

will, He humbled Himself and left His glory to become a 
man— and then humbled Himself still further, unto death, 
"even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath 
highly exalted [raised to the highest position— Strong] 
Him, and given Him a name which is above every name." 

We should be glad to walk in His footsteps, to endure 
the same experiences, to drink whatever the Father shall 
pour out for us in our cup— His cup. As we consider thus 
our dear Master's experiences and faithfulness, it makes 
our experiences seem only light afflictions, but for a 
moment, and working out "for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the 
things which are seen, but at the things which are not 
seen; for the things which are seen are temporal; but the 
things which are not seen are eternal." (2 Corinthians 4:17,18.) 
For let us remember that we are "called... 
to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Therefore, brethren, stand fast."— 2 Thessalonians 2:14,15. 



R5684 : page 143 

THE RUTHERFORD-TROY DEBATE 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The debates are past history now— ending last evening. 
Every night the auditorium was packed, with probably more 
turned away than got in. The total attendance was approximately 
12,000 persons. Except for the great amount of enthusiasm 
manifested by the audience everything was very 
orderly, and a good spirit prevailed throughout. Certainly 
the Lord's favor was with us, and the prayers of the many 
friends were answered. Many messages of encouragement 
came from different parts of the country, among them two 
cablegrams from Europe. The friends are all happy. This 
morning (Sunday) I spoke to the friends for 30 minutes at 
The Temple, and this was followed by a testimony meeting 
for one hour. It would have done your dear heart good to 
see the joy manifested by the friends, and to hear the many 
expressions of love for all. If the debates have accomplished 
no other good, I feel sure they have greatly strengthened the 
saints here, many testifying that the striking contrast between 
Truth and error has given them new zeal for service. 

I must tell you how the Adversary did not succeed for 
once. My opponent was well prepared to assault you personally. 
I judged so from the interviews he had given the 
press two days before the debate. I said nothing then, 
but waited my time. About three minutes before we went 
on the platform for the first night's discussion I called 
Brother Troy, my opponent, and two of his friends and two 
of our friends into a side room. You will recall that we 
had entered into a thousand-dollar obligation, with securities, 
that we would refrain from personalities. I then said: 
"Brother Troy, I desire to be absolutely frank with you and 
therefore I say this to you before we go on the platform. 
From your interviews with the press I judge that you intend 
to assault Pastor Russell from the platform. Of course, you 
can pursue that course if you wish, but the first time you 
attempt it I am going to have your bond forfeited." 

His reply was, "May I not mention his name?" "No," 
I said, "not one time. I signed this agreement with you 
to discuss the Bible, and by that contract I am going to 
abide, and I shall expect you to do the same." He said, "All 
right; I am ready." We went on the platform. Not once 
did he mention your name throughout the four nights, but it 
was an awfully bitter pill for him to refrain therefrom. 
Having prepared along that line and being taken down so 
suddenly he was much disturbed and labored under much 
stress, as I could observe, during his first argument. I am 
confident the Lord directed this matter, and thus saved the 
debate from being an occasion for personal assault upon you. 

When the debate closed last night many persons came to 
me, quite a number saying, "I have been a Baptist for years, 
but I have had my eyes opened here. You have brought me 
the light"; and similar expressions. 

Quite a large number of cards were turned in on each 
night. I have not the total here just now. I received a real 
blessing in the whole matter and am indeed grateful to the 
Lord that He has been pleased to give me this opportunity 
to bear witness to His great Plan. 



This (Sunday) afternoon at the Shrine Auditorium we had 
a very good public meeting. The friends say there were 
about 3500 in attendance, 992 of whom turned in their addresses. 
This afternoon my subject was, "Babylon Before 
the Great Court"; and I took occasion to tell the people about 
the assaults the ministers were making against you personally. 
Several preachers were in the audience, and I stated 
that I would be glad to furnish a printed reply to each one 
of such charges. Sorry we did not have the booklet ready, 
but we will get it to many here when it does arrive. 
I hope that by the time you come the people will be more 
anxious to hear you than ever before. I think there are 
still some of the Lord's people in this place. 

I must take this occasion to say that the success of the 
publicity for the debates and meetings following here is due 
to the untiring and faithful work of our dear Brother Page 
Noll. He made himself very agreeable to the reporters 
"covering" the debates, and they were favorable to us in 
every way they could be. A full report of each day's debate 
was published by the Express and the Tribune, and I am advised 
that about 75,000 extra copies were mailed out each 
day by the newspaper company to various parts of the world. 
The paper printed cards and distributed them all over the 
city, calling the attention of the people to the fact that 
verbatim copies of the debate would be in certain issues of 
the paper; and doubtless this sold many papers. Brother 
Noll had gone after the matter in a systematic manner, and 
the Lord surely blessed his efforts and his faithfulness. If a 
copy of the debates comes to your notice you will see that 
more space is given to my argument than to my opponent's. 
That is due to the fact that I spoke with much more rapidity 
than did my opponent. Profiting by your experience at Cincinnati, 
I crowded in all that I could. 

I enclose a clipping from one of the morning papers, 
wherein you will see that at yesterday's meeting I spoke of 
the booklet I am getting out answering the slanderous charges 
against you. Quite a number are anxious to have these 
pamphlets, and I hope they may be ready soon. 

Never before have I realized so fully the blessed privilege 
the Lord's dear children have of praying for each other. I 
am sure that the prayers of the dear friends throughout the 

R5685 : page 143 

world had much to do with the success of these debates. I 
wish I might express to every one of our brethren my great 
appreciation of their fervent prayers on my behalf. Hourly 
I felt that these were a strength to me. I shall never be able 
to thank you as I would like for the letter which was signed 
by yourself and all the Bethel family, assuring me of your 
united and continued prayers in my behalf. The Lord reward 
all of you. This is but a reminder of the unity of the 
body and the sweet relationship we are privileged to enjoy 
here. How much sweeter it will be in the Kingdom! Brother 
Woodworth suggested that there must be great interest in 
Heaven in this debate. The Lord be praised for it all. I am 



thankful indeed that He was pleased to use me to glorify 
His dear name in any manner. Brothers Woodworth and 
MacMillan sat with me on the platform as counsel, and 
my son was by my side to take anything quickly that I 
desired and to prepare the copy for me without delay. All 
rendered valuable service. The Lord arranged it all. There 
was never a moment after the debate began that we did not 
have the sympathy of a majority of the great audience; and 
when the debate concluded, there could be no doubt about the 
fact that a large majority of the audience was with us. 

My room in this hotel looks out facing the main entrance 
to Trinity Auditorium, and each evening I could see the 
crowds gather. For more than two hours before the debate 
began the people were standing at the door waiting to get in. 
Each evening the gates were closed and locked by 7 o'clock, 
and after that hundreds were turned away. It is estimated 
that from 10,000 to 15,000 persons were turned away during 
the four nights, unable to gain entrance. Over the entrance 
to the Trinity Auditorium appear these words cut in the 
stone: "The Gates Shall Never Be Closed"; but they had to 
close for the four sessions of the debate. 

Please express my love to all the dear Bethel family, reserving 
a large portion for yourself. Please continue to remember 
me at the Throne of Heavenly Grace. 

Yours in the service of the dear Redeemer, 
J. F. RUTHERFORD. 



[We rejoice greatly that the blessing of the Lord was so 
richly with our dear Brother Rutherford on the occasion of 
the debates referred to above. Apparently the Lord guided 
these debates and blessed the outcome. However, we still 
feel a prejudice against public debates of religious questions, 
and have elsewhere expressed our reasons.] 



page 144 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CLASSES 



page 145 

VOL. XXXVI MAY 15 No. 10 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

The New Creature's Conquest of His Flesh 147 

Conflict Between Mind and Body 148 

Two Classes in the World 149 



The Special Battles of the Church 149 

"The Crown of Life"-Who Will Receive It? 150 

Development as New Creatures in Christ 151 

Systematic Study Necessary 151 

Necessary Food Always in "Due Season" 151 

First Lessons in School 152 

Forgiveness Is Blessed 152 

Conditions for Forgiveness 153 

"Let Them Pray Over Him" 154 

Prayers That Are Heard 154 

Who May Pray 155 

What We Should Pray For 155 

"Prophesy Against the Shepherds" 156 

The Second Flock and Its Fold 157 

Interesting Letters 158 

Re Charges of the Preachers' Union 158 

Baptist Preacher Gets Light 159 

page 146 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



LITTLE CONVENTIONAL GATHERINGS 

(Continued from April 15 issue.) 

In harmony with our suggestion the friends at various places where 
Brother Russell will be addressing the public are arranging for little, 
quiet, local Conventions. Incidentally, we remark, that these are often 
amongst the most profitable. We advise that they be not made public— 
that the public be not invited to them, unless, indeed, it would be the particular 
friends of those who might be in attendance, especially if they 
were consecrated people. Additional places intending such gatherings 
have sent us the particulars noted below. 

Information respecting board and lodging at economical rates, etc., 
etc., should be obtained from the Class Secretaries: 
RIVERSIDE, CAL., May 26-One day. 

C. H. Meadors, Sec'y, 156 E. Prospect Ave. 
PORTLAND, ORE., June 10 (3 days) other days unknown. 

C. W. Field, Sec'y, 778 Sherrett Ave. 
TACOMA, WASH., June 13 

A. H. Heath, Sec'y, 3716 N. Proctor St. 
BUTTE, MONT., June 17-One day. 

J. A. Blomquist, Sec'y, 1011-1/2 Nevada Ave. 
CHEYENNE, WYO., June 19, 20. 

Mrs. W. E. Haller, Sec'y, 312 E. 16th St. 
DENVER, COLO., June 20 (3 days), other days unknown. 

Albert L. Fanders, Sec'y, 3956 Kalamath St. 
OMAHA, NEB., June 22, 23, 24. 

A. W. Riemer, Sec'y, 1503 Prospect St., Florence, Neb. 
SOUTH BEND, IND., June 25, 26, 27. 

Bertha L. Vincent, Sec'y, 419 Cushing St. 
INDIANAPOLIS, IND., June 25, 26, 27. 

C. A. Wise, Sec'y, 1 120 W. 30th St. 



CONSPIRACY ARTICLE IN SWEDISH 

Swedish friends will please note that we now have in stock Swedish 
B.S.M. No. 68 for use wherever Swedish ministers slander the Truth. 
Mention quantity you can use without waste— free. 

R5691 :page 146 

BETTER HEALTH-LONGER LIFE 

While it is true that the Lord's consecrated people should look forward 
with joy to their "change" at death, nevertheless it is quite proper 
that as long as they do live, they should keep their bodies in reasonably 
good condition, so that their service for the Lord, for the Brethren, for 
their families and all men may be as efficient as possible. These are 
sufficient reasons for our publishing the advice below. Additionally, 
however, the Lord's people are interested in the welfare of the world 
and in everything that will assist mankind. Especially are we expecting 
simple, helpful knowledge of how to live, because we believe that we are 



already forty years into the great Millennial period, and that light on 
every subject is being granted accordingly. 



It has long been noted by physicians that many of the ailments of 
life are due to diseased condition of the bowels. To offset this many 
are using enemas, sometimes styled internal bath. These help some, but 
are inconvenient, only palliative, and evidently are not in line with the 
laws of nature. Proper food should keep the system in proper order. 

Only recently has it been learned that there are healthful and also 
injurious bacteria. For instance, the fine butter flavor of first-class 
butter is found to result from the presence of a certain kind of bacteria, 
which now is cultivated and obtainable commercially. On the other hand, 
that which makes other butter rancid is an undesirable species of bacteria, 
not only unpleasant to the taste, but injurious to the system. Similarly, 
in the secretions of the mouth, the throat and the alimentary canal, 
bacteria live— some good, healthful, others injurious. 

It has been found that there is a species of bacteria associated with 
putridity which is highly injurious. Hence the impropriety of eating 
putrid food, which is apt to foster disease, especially in persons of low 
vitality. It has been discovered that such bacteria infest the bowels, 
producing gas or flatulence and hindering the food eaten from giving 
back the proper nourishment and strength. This bacteria producing 
putridity is associated sometimes with constipation and sometimes with 
diarrhoea. In any event, it is undesirable. A relief from this difficulty 
has been found— good bacteria which, driving out and taking the place 
of the bacteria of putridity, tends to make the bowels clean and healthy, 
and to favor digestion and general health. 

This new bacteria came to the attention of the world in recent years 
through noting that the people of Bulgaria are extremely healthy and 
long-lived. The cause for their good health was sought and found. Not 
only do they eat plain food, but the Bulgarians use a great deal of sour 
milk, which contains the healthful bacteria. Not everybody is aware of 
the fact that, while ordinary ferments are injurious, the proper ferment 
of milk is very healthful. 

Sour milk is being prepared under various names; for instance, 
Bulgarzoon, Lactobacilline, Fermilac and other preparations. These 
cultures are sold in tablet and liquid forms. Put into sweet milk according 
to directions, they germinate and produce what much resembles 
buttermilk, but is much better than the average buttermilk. The only 
difficulty about these tablets is the expense. Below we give directions 
whereby each reader may start his own culture of this helpful bacteria, 
Bacillus Lactine, by using only one of the tablets purchased. 

The drinking of this milk needs to be continued with some regularity, 
at least once each day or, preferably, three times, until the bowels are 
thoroughly cleansed and the culture, Bacillus Lactine, gets well established 
in the system. It is a peculiarity of this Bacillus Lactine that it 
passes through the stomach into the bowels without being digested. In 
very chronic cases it is recommended that the sour milk be used as an 
enema or internal bath, following a regular water enema, or injection. 

(Continued on 2d column, page 159) 

R5689 : page 159 



(Continued from page 146) 
Directions for Starting Bacillus Lactine Culture 

Crush one tablet of whatever preparation is used and stir into one 
quart of good, sweet milk which has been brought to blood heat. Cover, 
and put in a warm place until it becomes a firm clabber. This will require 
about twenty-four hours in winter, less time in summer unless 
kept in a cool place. Then shake, beat or churn for a few minutes, and 
put the jar in a cool place. It is ready for use as soon as it is shaken, 
but improves by standing awhile. Shake or churn as often as served, 
that it may be perfectly smooth. 

After you are satisfied that the buttermilk is as good as can be made 
with the tablets, discontinue their use, and substitute a good half 
teaspoonful of the buttermilk for each quart of milk, and treat in the same 
manner. Should your buttermilk— from overheating the milk, or from 
any other cause— be injured or become unpalatable, it will be necessary 
to go through the same process as at first, with a fresh tablet. If regularly, 
properly made, there will never be reason for renewal of tablet. 

"Directions for Use" usually— perhaps always— state that pasteurized 
milk cannot be used to prepare the buttermilk. Six months' daily experience 
has demonstrated that this is a mistaken idea. 

LA GRIPPE AND TYPHOID FEVER REMEDIES 

One of the simplest remedies we know of for La Grippe and Typhoid 
Fever, especially in their earlier stages, is to put the bulk of a pea of 
cayenne pepper into a little milk, stir it thoroughly and swallow it. Do 
this twice a day for about three days. 

R5691 :page 159 

A NEW CURE FOR PNEUMONIA 

Doctor Park, in the Medical Record Journal, tells that he has discovered 
a new treatment for pneumonia, which seems to effect a cure 
every time. His published statement, intended for physicians, is briefly 
stated as follows: 

"In 2 ounces of chemically pure distilled water I dissolved 15 grains 
each of sodium salicylate and the soluble phosphate of iron. This solution 
is sterilized by heat, and on cooling there is added 15 minims of 
saturated calcium-creosote mixture, the whole then being passed through 
a small laboratory porcelain filter. The injections are made through the 
skin, with an all-glass syringe, using a 27-gauge needle, into one of 
the large veins of the forearm. Great care, of course, is taken with the 
asepsis and also to be sure that the needle is within the vein. If it is 
properly inserted there will be absolutely no pain. If pain is felt, it 
means that the needle has gone into the muscle instead, and the injection 
must instantly be stopped and a new trial made. There may be a 
momentary flushing of the face and occasionally a temporary nausea. 
The dose varies from 2 to 5 c.c, according to circumstances. The injection 
must be made very slowly." 



R5685 : page 147 



THE NEW CREATURE'S CONQUEST OF HIS FLESH 

"Ye have put off the old man with his deeds, and have put on the 
new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of 
Him that created him."— Colossians 3:9,10. 

DEVELOPMENT is necessary to the life of 

the New Creation. In our text the term 

"old man" stands for the human will, which 

once dominated the being. All who become 

Christians in the Bible sense of the term 

not only accept Christ and trust in Him as 

their Savior, but devote their old will, their 

old nature, to death. Thenceforth that old 

nature is repudiated, and is no longer to 

control the life of the individual. But the 

body of the "old man"— the fleshly tabernacle— is still retained 

after the old will has been discharged and the new 

will has come in. The New Creature, with new impulses, 

a new purpose, uses the mortal body as its servant. The 

new will is now master. 

This new will is the will of God, or in other words, it 
is a will to do God's will. Our consecration is a consecration 

R5686 : page 147 

to do the will of God, to be dead to any other 
will, whether our own natural will or the will of another. 
This includes the dedication of everything we have or 
had hoped to have as human beings. It means the laying 
on the altar our every power, our every ability, our 
strength, our time, our pocketbook, our influence. Those 
who make a Covenant of Sacrifice are accepted up to the 
full number of the Elect. They will, if faithful unto 
death, receive new bodies in the resurrection. 

KNOWLEDGE THE BASIS OF DEVELOPMENT 

In our context the Apostle explains how this putting 
off and putting on is done. This "new man"— this spirit-begotten 
New Creature— is to develop by acting upon the 
knowledge that it gains. We had some knowledge before 
consecration, or we would not have thought of taking such 
a step. First, the Lord permitted a measure of knowledge 
to come to us. Then when we had accepted the terms and 
presented ourselves for sacrifice, the Savior's merit was 
imputed to us, and we were received of God and begotten 
as New Creatures by His Spirit, His power; and the good 
work has been going on in all those who have met the 
necessary conditions of development. 

We must grow in love. The Apostle tells us that we 
might have all knowledge and yet be as nothing. Knowledge 
alone will not suffice. However, knowledge is the 
basis of faith and obedience. Without knowledge we 
could accomplish nothing. Knowledge shows us the will 



of God on the one hand and the selfishness that appertains 
to the fallen human nature on the other. It shows us the 
love and generosity that belong to the new nature. It 
shows us the Lord's character— the character that we are 
to imitate. We are to be "renewed in knowledge after 
the image of Him that created us"— created us as New 
Creatures. 

As St. Paul expresses it elsewhere, we are to be transformed 
—formed over. We have a new will from the 
beginning, but it requires some time to transform our 
minds. Our minds being accustomed to reasoning along 
the lines of the flesh, the old nature, it takes some length 
of time before they are so entirely renewed as to view 
things from the Divine standpoint. But only as we thus 
progress can we form a Christlike character. 

RENEWING OF CHURCH AND WORLD DIFFERENT 

Not only are we to have our minds renewed, but our 
bodies are to be brought into subjection to the new mind, 
our new will. Because our bodies are earthly and imperfect 
through the fall, we can never hope to bring them 
into complete subserviency to the new mind. There will 
always be more or less of conflict. But we are to deaden, 
to treat as though they were nothing, these desires and 
impulses of the depraved flesh. Thus we make progress, 
being transformed day by day into the image and likeness 
of our God and of His dear Son. Those who attain this 
character-likeness to the Master will in due time be 
granted the Divine nature. 

This change of mind comes only to those who are 
spirit-begotten; it does not come to the world. The Lord 
will deal with the world during the incoming Age. Mankind 
also will need to be renewed; but theirs will not be a 
renewal such as is granted to the Church. The world will 
need a new mind, and must learn to overcome all their 
fallen tendencies, but they will be required to give up only 
that which is sinful. Their renewal will be along the lines 
of Restitution, a restoration, to the former condition of 
the perfect man. They will not have a new mind that is 
in conflict with human nature, as has the Church. The 
world will not renounce their human nature; they are to 
renounce only sin and to bring their human nature, by 
Divine assistance then granted, up to perfection. 

ALL MUST ATTAIN THE LIKENESS OF GOD 

In the end, we see, every being who will have everlasting 
life on any plane will be in the likeness of God— the 
image of God. Father Adam in his perfection had this 

R5686 : page 148 

image; the holy angels have this image; Jesus had this 
image of the Father; and the Church must have this 
image. The world, also, by and by, must have this image 



of God. All must love and serve righteousness. Wrong 
must always be repulsive. All who attain life everlasting 
will see Divine Wisdom, Justice, Love and Power, and 
will thoroughly conform themselves to that standard in all 
their thoughts, words and deeds. All who do not attain 
this image of God by the close of the next Age— the 
thousand years of Christ's reign— will be cut off from 
life, without remedy. 

The Lord Jesus said, "This is life eternal, that they 
might know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, 
whom Thou hast sent." (John 17:3.) To know God 
means to have intimate acquaintance with Him, to be like 
Him in character, to be able to view matters as He views 
them. Only those who have the mind of God will be 
granted eternal life— whether of the Church now or of 
the world in the next Age. 

THE CONFLICT BETWEEN MIND AND BODY 

St. Paul brings to the attention of the Church the fact 
that all true Christians are New Creatures in Christ (2 Corinthians 5:17), 
and therefore may be spoken of as 
separate and distinct from their mortal bodies. (See 
verses 1 to 4 of same chapter.) This will never be true 
of the world in general; it is true only of those who are 
begotten of the Holy Spirit. The Lord does not judge 
these New Creatures according to the imperfections of 
their flesh, because these are covered. They will prove 
the measure of their love and loyalty by the way in 
which they fight against sin and the desires of the flesh, 
and especially against a rebellious spirit in their own flesh. 

Each child of God has an enemy in his own body, and 
the more so because our bodies through the fall have become 
more or less surcharged with sin. The New 
Creature wills to do the Lord's will. Hence from the time 
that the New Creature has an existence there is a conflict 
between this New Creature and the old body. The 
Apostle Paul declared that he browbeat his body, kept his 
body under the control of the new mind; and he intimates 
that this is the only way to be a follower of the Lord 
Jesus.— 1 Corinthians 9:27. 

THE FLESH TO BE THOROUGHLY SUBJUGATED 

This matter of keeping the body under had a beginning. 
All our former lives we had been asking our body, 
What is your will? What is your desire? What will 
please you? Therefore it is a somewhat difficult matter 
now to bring the body under the control of the new will 
and to be able to say, "Thy will, O Lord, not mine, be 
done." Just as a colt needs to be broken, to be brought 
into subjection, so it is with our flesh. If it is 
thoroughly broken, it will remain in subjection. From 
time to time it will, of course, attempt to assert itself, 
but it must be conquered; for if it is not thoroughly 
broken and subjugated, if it is allowed to have more or 



less of its own way, there will always be danger of a 
runaway or of some other difficulty, and of final 
catastrophe. 

We are not to take the Apostle too literally when he 
says that he browbeats his body. His thought is, not that 
we are literally to handle our body in a rough way, to 
maltreat it, as some have thought, but that we are to 
subjugate it, to teach it a thorough lesson. The object of 
this is that the body may learn to be a good servant of 
the New Creature. The Spirit of the Lord cannot quicken 
our mortal body until we have first brought it into subjection. 
Even if the triumph of the New Creature means 
the quick death of the body, it must be made submissive; 
for after we have decided that as human beings our own 
will is not to be any longer in control, but the Lord's will 
is to govern, the only thing to do is to set to work to use 
our body in His service. This will be done more or less 
thoroughly as we grow as New Creatures. As this battle 
goes on, if it is faithfully waged, our flesh becomes 
weaker, and the new mind is renewed day by day. We 
learn more fully to put our bodies under and bring them 
into the service of the new will. It should be manifest to 
all that we are seeking to do the will of the Lord; and 
that the will of the flesh is dead, and not to be entertained 
for a moment. 

THE TESTING OF THE BELIEVER 

The Apostle tells one reason why he kept his body 
under— lest, having instructed others how they should 
do, he himself should make a failure and become a castaway. 
Likewise with every true Christian this is a matter 
of supreme importance, and should be particularly noted 
by every one who is a teacher in the Church. 

In choosing a Bride for His Son, the Father is making 
a selection from those who accept the Gospel Message and 
desire to draw near to Him. The first test is as to 
whether or not they will make a full consecration to God. 
The second test is as to whether, after they have made 
their consecration, they will conquer the flesh and bring 
it into subjection. The third test is as to whether they 
will strive always to keep the flesh in subjection, even 
unto the end of the way. 

The Lord is watching our course continually. His eye 
is ever upon us to see to what extent we are zealous in 
crucifying our flesh. Those who are in dead earnest in 
this matter are the ones whom He is seeking. He seeks a 
godly seed— those who have the disposition of the Master; 
and the Master's disposition has ever been in direct 
antagonism to everything sinful. "Thou hast loved righteousness 
and hated iniquity; therefore God, even Thy God, 
hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above Thy 
fellows," was spoken by the Father of our Lord Jesus. 
Moreover, the Master gladly laid down His life in sacrifice 
to do the Father's will and to save the world. 



R5687 : page 148 

And so the Father has, during the Gospel Age, been 
seeking for the Bride of His Son those who preeminently 
love righteousness, who hate iniquity, and are glad to be 
living sacrifices, to be used up in God's service. In proportion 
as we manifest the spirit which actuated our Lord 
—a love for that which is right, a promptness to fight 
against all sin in ourselves, and a spirit of loving sacrifice 
—we shall be copies of God's dear Son. If we fail to have 
a proper zeal and energy in this respect, we shall be unfit 
to be granted the reward promised— "the prize of the 
High Calling"— and shall be rejected, be cast away. 

One who had committed the sin unto death would be a 
castaway in the most absolute sense. Even the Great 
Company class must prove loyal of heart and mind and 
must hate sin, though cast away as regards the "prize." 
The degree of love and zeal we manifest in fighting 
against the weaknesses of the flesh has much to do with 
the attainment of the prize, in determining whether or not 
we shall be inheritors of the highest nature with our Master 
—the Divine nature. 

We find that in our flesh there is a tendency to revive 
from its condition of reckoned deadness, and to struggle 
for supremacy. Hence, as we have said, the new nature 
must be continually on the alert to maintain its ascendency, 
to fight the good fight of faith, that we may gain the 
"crown of life," may be overcomers in the highest sense— 

R5687 : page 149 

"more than conquerors." We are in a position of great 
responsibility. 

TWO CLASSES IN THE WORLD 

There are at the present time two classes in the world 
—the fleshly and the spiritual. The fleshly live according 
to their natural tendencies; the spiritual live by faith, 
contrary to the flesh. Those who become footstep followers 
of Jesus are begotten of the Holy Spirit; hence 
they have been lifted to a higher plane than others of 
mankind. To them the old things of their past lives have 
passed away, have been renounced, and all things have 
become new. 

The Apostle declares that if these live after the flesh- 
according to their natural inclinations and the desires and 
ambitions of the world— it means that they have descended 
again to the plane of the world; and they will die. It is 
only if we faithfully endure, if we suffer with Christ, 
that we shall reign with Him. Our sufferings with Christ 
are not in the upholding of some foolishness— of wearing 
a certain cut of hair, or a certain style of dress, etc.— but 
in active opposition to error, in living apart from the 
spirit of the world, and in energy and faithfulness, according 
to opportunity, in the spread of the Truth. The 



Lord's side is to be our side in everything. This brings 
us into conflict with the world and with the tendencies 
and proclivities of our own flesh; for we naturally love 
the things that the world loves. 

OUR RESPONSIBILITY AND OUR DANGER 

We are not to blame the world for living according to 
the flesh; for this course is the natural bent of the fallen 
nature. But it is different with us, by reason of the fact 
that we have sacrificed the earthly in order to obtain the 
spiritual. It would be a disastrous matter with us if we 
should live after the flesh, should sow to the flesh, instead 
of to the Spirit. It is not possible for us to live fully up 
to the Spirit, but it is possible for us to make a strenuous 
endeavor to do so. We can live after the Spirit, though 
we cannot measure up to the perfect standard. We can 
do our best; we can make our plans and arrangements in 
harmony with what God's Holy Spirit would dictate and 
approve, as God gives us wisdom to discern. This is the 
only course by which we can reach the eternal life and 
glory which the Lord has promised to the faithful Church. 

We recognize, indeed, that there are two classes which 
will attain spiritual life; but only one will be granted an 
abundant entrance into the Kingdom. Those who sow liberally 
to the Spirit will reap the larger reward. Those 
who sow sparingly will reap the smaller reward. Those 
who are striving to live in full harmony with God, and 
contrary to everything that is in opposition to God, seeking 
by prayer and the study of the Word to ascertain His 
will, shall win the promised prize.— Philippians 3:14. 

But those who have been spirit-begotten, and who then 
live according to the flesh, are not to expect any reward 
—not even Restitution. There can be nothing for them 
but the Second Death. They have had their chance for 
life and have abused it. Christ came to give one full, individual 
opportunity to each and all— and only one. God 
gave Adam an opportunity for everlasting life, but he was 
then inexperienced with sin and its consequences; hence, 
he is to be granted in his awakening an opportunity equal 
to that given the remainder of the world. Christ died to 
redeem all, and thus to give to all mankind, in due time, a 
full, fair opportunity for life eternal, after experience with 
the nature and the results of sin. 

The Church are having their trial now. This class, 
which is now receiving its opportunity, is limited. None 
can come to the full degree of responsibility, except those 
who have the clear enlightenment and special opportunities 
now granted to only a comparatively few. These, 
after having once been begotten of the Holy Spirit, must 
gain spiritual life, or else fail altogether and go into the 
Second Death. 

In the next Age the world will be brought forth from 
the tomb— the death state— in an imperfect, blemished 
condition. The great Mediator will be in charge of the 
world's interests, having then made satisfaction to Justice 



on their behalf. It will be His mission to help mankind up 
to perfection— all who will. But any who continue to 
live, or to attempt to live, after the sinful cravings of their 
fallen flesh will eventually be destroyed; for those who 
prefer sin, after coming to a clear knowledge of the difference 
between good and evil, and having access to all 
needed assistance to rise out of their fallen estate, will be 
cut off as cumberers of the ground and corrupters of the 
earth. Those who during the incoming Age would attain 
eternal life on the human plane must seek to live in harmony 
with God's Law, with righteousness; and thus they 
will reach full perfection and restitution, under the 
guidance and assistance of The Messiah. 

THE SPECIAL BATTLES OF THE CHURCH 

But much more glorious than even this is the prospect 
before those who are now faithfully running the race for 
the prize of the High Calling, held out to the Church! 
There are, however, enemies yet to be vanquished, and 
victories to be gained, if we would receive the crown. Until 
the final battle is fought, we must not relax our vigilance 
for a moment nor lay aside one piece of our armor. 

Considering particularly what are some of the battles 
of the New Creature, we realize that many of them pertain 
to the weaknesses of the flesh through heredity— sin 
working in our mortal bodies, seeking to bring us into 
captivity. After we have become New Creatures, the 
gross sins of the flesh gradually become distasteful even 
to those once in bondage to them. When these are conquered, 
a great victory has been won. But there are 
subtle sins that lurk in the flesh of all those who have 
become the Lord's; and these dispositions hide themselves 
in such a manner that they frequently deceive the new 
will, which needs to be educated up to a clear appreciation 
of the principles of righteousness. 

It is an advance lesson in the School of Christ that 
hatred of a brother is murder, that we are not only to 
hate the act of murder, but also the murder spirit, and are 
so fully to cast out this spirit as to have nothing but love 
and kindly wishes in the heart toward others, even our 
enemies. Only the more advanced and better drilled pupils 
in the School of Christ see clearly and distinctly the meaning 
of the Apostle's words when he denominates anger 
(fleshly wrath), malice, hatred, strife, envyings, and evil 
speakings, as the works of the Devil. These must be 
fought to the finish. 

"WE BESEECH YOU, THEREFORE," BELOVED 

All the children of God must come to see that "love 
worketh no ill to his neighbor," nor does it wish ill. We 
must see that such evil dispositions originate in the mind, 
in the heart; and as soon as the true soldier of the cross 
perceives any of these sins manifesting themselves outwardly 
or lurking in his heart, he will begin a vigorous 



campaign against them, and will go to the Throne of 
Grace for the promised grace to help in time of need. 
Only thus can the child of God keep his record clear and 
retain the Lord's favor and blessing. 

Let each of us then, dearly beloved, apply earnestly to 
ourselves these lessons. Let us diligently follow the example 

R5687 : page 150 

of the beloved Apostle Paul, and "keep under" our 
bodies, lest we become castaways. Let us keep ever before 
our minds the thought that we have "put off the old man 
with his deeds"; and that we have "put on the new man," 
and are now on trial for life or death eternal; that we 
are being tested, are being given the opportunity to prove 
the sincerity and depth of our consecration to the Lord. 
Surely this will spur us on and energize us to faithfulness. 
Let us remember that the keeping under of our body 
appertains to food and drink, to the clothing we wear, to 
the way we spend our consecrated time, to our every 
thought, word and deed. 

These battlings of the new mind against the flesh are 
a "good fight"— good in the sense that they are fightings 
against the intrenched weaknesses and besetments of the 
fallen nature, against temptations from within and without, 
that appeal to us as human beings. They are a "fight 
of faith" because the entire course of the New Creature 
is one of faith; for "we walk by faith, not by sight." We 
could never succeed in this fight unaided. Hence we must 
keep very close to the Lord. We must "watch and pray," 
putting on and keeping securely fastened to us the whole 
armor of God. The time is short in which to complete 
this work in ourselves. Then let us be diligent! 



R5688 : page 150 

THE "CROWN OF LIFE"-WHO WILL RECEIVE IT? 

"Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when he is tried, 
he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath 
promised to them that love Him."— James 1:12. 

THE above words of the Apostle James are a 

part of an earnest exhortation to all the 

Church of God scattered abroad. "Blessed 

is the man who endureth [with fortitude] 

temptation." Those who do not love the 

Lord with all their hearts, in whom self or 

some other idol has first place, will be seduced 

by the world, the flesh or the Devil 

into some form of rebellion against the 

Divine Word or Divine providences. They 

will have schemes, theories or desires which they will 

prefer to the Lord's Plan and way; and their own 



theories, plans and ways will be found, when analyzed, to 
be based upon selfishness and ambition or an evil spirit 
of envy, hatred, jealousy, pride, etc. It is only such as 
endure such temptations and besetments with fortitude, 
by the grace of God conquering and subduing the fleshly 
mind, that will receive the promised crown. 

The Apostle here speaks of the final reward as being 
"the crown of life." It might be possible to view this 
matter of the crown of life from different standpoints; 
for instance, to think of life as being a crowning blessing, 
on whatever plane of being. Those who will be 
brought into the Lord's favor during the Millennial Age 
will, after the close of that Age, if proven worthy, gain 
everlasting life. In other words, they will be crowned 
with a life which will be endless. The Ancient Worthies 
will have this life everlasting. They will be crowned 
with life. Life, perfect, unending, is the greatest blessing 
God could bestow. Then the Little Flock will be 
especially crowned with life; for they will have life on 
the superior plane, the life of the Divine nature— the 
nature of Jehovah; life in the very highest form will be 
their crown. So we think of all these things as being 
crowns of life when all have been tested and proven to 
the end of their course. 

THE CROWN ABOVE ALL OTHERS 

But we have reason to suppose that St. James is here 
referring to the Church, the Bride of Christ, the most 
blessed of all humanity. The Church is now especially 
on trial. This trial of our love, endurance, faith, patience, 
is for the purpose of demonstrating which of us 
will be found worthy of the chiefest of all blessings— the 
Divine nature, which God has promised to those who love 
Him— love Him more than they love houses or lands or 
bonds, more than they love wife or husband or parents 
or children or self, or any other thing. God will have a 
reward for others, also; but it will not be this highest 
crown, which He offers to the Bride of His Son alone. 

What constitutes the temptation spoken of in our text? 
The answer of the Scriptures is that the Lord has said 
there will come trials and temptations— disciplinings— to 
those who are His, to develop their character, to prove 
their steadfastness and loyalty. Without trials and 
temptations our allegiance to God would never be shown. 
Self-love might be reigning in our hearts, and we would 
not recognize it unless it were demonstrated. It is very 
easy to think how much we love the Lord and how much 
we would like to do for Him. Then comes the temptation 
to sloth, and to do something for ourselves instead 
of for the Lord. It is easy for us to think we love His 
will, and to sing: 

"I love Thy will, O God." 

Then we are severely tried on that line, and we sometimes 



find out that our love for His will needs yet farther 
development and greater fixity. 

Our covenant with the Lord is to love Him with all 
our heart, mind, soul and strength and to love our neighbor 
as ourselves. We are to live up to this standard in 
the spirit of our minds so far as we are able by Divine 
assistance, trusting to the merit of the precious blood to 
cover our unavoidable deficiencies. Yea, we are to "lay 
down our lives for the brethren." The temptation comes 
to love other things more, to love self more than we love 
God and the brethren. The Lord permits these trials and 
temptations and difficulties to come to us. The way we 
meet these, we think, will have much to do in deciding 
whether we shall be worthy of the highest crown of life. 

THE CROWN OF LIFE AFTER THE TRIAL 

"When he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life." 
The expression, "when he is tried," does not mean one 
trial merely; but our entire experience is spoken of as a 
trial, a test of loyalty. Our whole life is a matter of 
trial or testing to see how sincere we are, how fully we 
love the Lord, what we are willing to sacrifice, in harmony 
with our covenant. "When he is tried," then, means, 
when his trial is over. Then he will receive the "crown 
of life." He will not get it before. That would not 
necessarily mean, however, that he would get the crown 
the minute the trial was over— as soon as his sacrifice 
was completed in death. Jesus slept until the third day 
before He received His crown. The Apostles and others 
slept for many centuries before they received theirs. 

It does not mean, either, that the very minute or the 
very day on which the Christian had fully demonstrated 
his faithfulness to the Lord he would immediately fall 
asleep or would be instantly ushered into honor and immortality 
by the glorious change of the First Resurrection. 
The Lord might have further purposes of usefulness, 
etc., in regard to His children before their sacrifice 
would be completed. 

R5688 :page 151 

So with every phase of our trial and testing there 
should be a demonstration of our loyalty. Let the trials 
come, then, and let them continue to come. No matter 
what our natural infirmities may be, we shall be granted 
grace sufficient; and we are expected to be loyal under 
all conditions, at all times, until the end. 



R5688 :page 151 

DEVELOPMENT AS NEW CREATURES IN CHRIST 
"Strong meat belongeth to them who are of full age, even those 



who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern 
both good and evil."— Hebrews 5:14. 

THE Apostle here seems to have in mind some 

who are babes in Christ, some who have 

immature conceptions of God and His Plan, 

who lack spiritual development, contrasting 

them with others who are more developed, 

who have become men in Christ Jesus— who 

are "of full age," as St. Paul expresses it, 

mature in Christian attainment. "Strong 

meat" belongs to these. The Apostle has 

given a reproof to some who, considering 

the length of time they have been in Christ, should have 

been strong in the faith, in doctrine, in spiritual life, and 

should be qualified to teach others. Yet still they were 

children, needing others to teach them again the first 

principles of the doctrine of Christ, needing still to be fed 

on milk, even yet not able to assimilate "strong meat." 

Beginners who have not long known Christ, who are 
new in respect to the truths of God's Plan, are not to be 
choked with strong meat. These may be fed upon the 
simpler truths, which they can assimilate. They need "the 
sincere milk of the Word, that they may grow thereby." 
Some of the Lord's people, who have been longer in the 
way, in talking with the newly consecrated unwisely begin 
to tell them the truths regarding immortality, trinity, etc., 
before they are able to digest them. These are giving 
strong meat to babes, and are liable to drive them away 
from the table of the Lord, giving them spiritual 
dyspepsia, so that they are unable longer to eat even of 
the simpler food furnished by the Lord. 

For those who are only beginners in the good way, 
there is plenty of food in God's Word of the more 
easily digestible sort; food which should be helpful to 
New Creatures in Christ who are just beginning to walk 
in the narrow path. We are not to understand, however, 
that they are to continue for quite a period of time 
to live exclusively on milk. As they begin to grow and 
develop on a milk diet, they may be given somewhat 
stronger food, until after a time they will be able to 
digest the strongest features of the Truth, and to draw 
nourishment from them. Some develop and are able to 
digest the strong meat much more rapidly than others. Those 
who have not been falsely taught regarding Scriptural 
doctrines, who have not been steeped for many years in 
the errors brought into the Church during the Dark 
Ages, are often much more ready and able to grasp the 
truth on these subjects than are those who have been long 
under the blinding influence of error along these lines. 

SYSTEMATIC STUDY NECESSARY 

Those who are of humble, teachable mind, seeking a 
"thus saith the Lord" for all they accept, not trying to 
uphold any theories of their own, but to follow only the 



Lord, can generally, by taking the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES and their Bible, and taking up the Plan step 
by step, in a systematic, orderly manner, as it is presented, 
proving every statement by the sure Word of 
God, see the truth regarding these fundamental doctrines 
with little difficulty. In this way they gain a comprehensive 
view of the whole Plan of God, and can see how 
its various features fit and dovetail into one another; 
this would be impossible if they heard first only a portion 
of the Plan, disassociated from the rest. 

R5689 :page 151 

For this reason it is well to urge the newly interested 
one to read and prove for himself, and not endeavor to 
explain too much through conversation. Much harm is 
often done thus by well-meaning friends, in their zeal to 
have the beginner grasp it all at once, which is impossible; 
and often their efforts result in confusing the mind 
of the one seeking the Truth. 

SPIRITUAL EYESIGHT A MATTER OF GROWTH 

As we look at a little babe, we see that it can crow, 
can kick a little, can cry somewhat, and to a certain 
extent can see objects. It has a certain amount of appreciation 
of things beautiful, of things terrorizing, of 
things happifying. But it does not see things very 
clearly nor comprehend them. If we pass our hand 
before its eyes, it apparently has not a focus. As with 
young kittens, which cannot tell what is near and what 
is far off, so with beginners, babes, in spiritual matters. 
The younger ones in their attempt to study God's Word, 
are apt to go tripping along through it, and think they 
see this or that. They cannot be entrusted with important 
truths at first; for they would be pretty certain to 
be stumbled. 

But as these grow older, they can "rightly divide" the 
Truth, they can distinguish Truth from error, they can 
tell what would be hurtful and what would be helpful. 
Even a child that burns itself at the fire learns to look 
out for that which will burn, and learns to approach the 
fire very carefully, very judiciously. As all this is true 
as relates to temporal matters, and as the sense of appreciation 
and comprehension develops in the babe, so in 
babes in Christ, there is a development of the sense of 
appreciation and ability to comprehend the heights and 
depths and lengths and breadths of God's Wisdom and 
Love, and the fulness and grandeur of His great Plan 
with all its varied features. 

NECESSARY FOOD ALWAYS IN "DUE SEASON" 

To gain this appreciation, it is necessary, not only to 
read the Truth, but to think upon it, to make it our own, 
to strive earnestly to conform our lives to it. It is better, of 



course, for one to merely read so many pages or chapters 

of the Bible than to read some worthless thing; but to 

simply read a certain amount in the Bible without understanding 

accomplishes little. The Bible needs to be 

studied; and the Lord has never left His people without 

teachers of His own choosing, who were able to lead the 

dear sheep of the great Shepherd's Fold into the green 

pastures where they could obtain whatever food was 

needed at that time. As the gradual unfolding of Truth 

in its times and seasons has added to the quantity and 

variety of food required by the flock of God for their 

proper nourishment, it has been supplied by Him through 

instrumentalities which he has raised up for the purpose 

in due season. 

The real saints of God have never been left without 
all needed supplies in every age. In our own day more 
Truth has unfolded than at any previous period of the 
Church's history. More and richer food is now necessary, 

R5689 : page 152 

to strengthen the Church for the peculiar conditions 
and testings of this day; and more has been supplied. 
But as we have stated, and as the Apostle in our text 
shows, there are various degrees of development in the 
Church of Christ; and some have been accepted from the 
world in these latter days to take the places of some who 
have through unfaithfulness lost their crowns. Hence 
the wisdom that cometh from above is required to feed 
and nourish these weaker ones properly. 

FIRST LESSONS IN SCHOOL 

In a school there are lessons arranged according to 
the ability and comprehension of the pupils. When the 
primary lessons in spelling are given, the teacher begins 
with small, simple words, instead of long words. Such 
words as c-o-w, cow; c-a-t, cat, are given first. A 
teacher who is wise and understands her business would 
not think of starting little children out with such a word 
as "prognostication," or "hippopotamus." The pupil 
would first be given more simple and easily comprehensible 
words. Object lessons, by pictures, etc., are also 
used at first to attract the eye, and thus to assist the 
child mind. 

And so with religious matters. Those who would 
give proper instructions to others must be qualified to 
teach. The Lord has placed the various members in the 
Body of Christ "as it hath pleased Him." To some He 
has given Apostles and workers of miracles; to others 
evangelists and teachers and pastors. In the early history 
of the Church, in its infantile condition, miracles- 
object lessons and proofs to the eye, to the ear, the outward 
physical senses— were necessary, and hence were 
supplied. As the Church became established, these outward 
evidences in connection with the Truth passed away. 



The Apostle Paul says, "When I was a child, I spake 
as a child, I thought as a child, I understood as a child; 
but when I became a man I put away childish things." 
(1 Corinthians 13:11). And so with every true follower 
of Christ. As he grows and develops, step by step, as 
his senses become exercised to discern good and evil— 
what is true, what is right, what is profitable, what is 
comprehended in the glorious High Calling of the Church, 
what is included in full consecration to Christ— he more 
and more puts away his childish views, his immature conceptions, 
and becomes educated and advanced in the 
things of God— the deep things. A beginner, who had 
not learned to study the Word of God, could take it and 
get out of it things that would be really harmful to him. 
One must learn to take Bible truths in their setting— to 
see what they mean, how they apply, to whom they apply, 
etc.— or all will be confusion and contradiction. One 
can bring sweet music from an instrument only when he 
learns how to manipulate the keys, how to combine the 
various chords; otherwise only discord is the result. 

RESPONSIBILITY OF THOSE LONG IN THE WAY 

There are certain principles laid down in the Bible. 
We need to get a grasp on these principles and apply 
them in our daily lives. There is the principle of Justice 
—a foundation principle. This principle must be recognized 
and practised before we are in a proper condition 
to build upon this foundation the principles of Love, 
Mercy, Gentleness, etc., all of which must be incorporated 
into our lives, our characters, as children of God. We 
need to learn what justice means, what true love means. 
The standards of the world along these lines have become 
much perverted, and we need to be properly taught from 
the only authoritative source— the Word of God. We 
must learn how to apply these principles. 

Those who have been for some time drinking from 
the Fountain of Truth, and feeding at the table of the 
Lord, where the food is pure, unadulterated, nourishing, 
should be fully established in the first principles of 
the doctrine of Christ. Much of the superstructure of 
"gold, silver and precious stones" should be already 
erected, and the good work of character-building should 
be progressing steadily day by day. We should be firmly 
rooted and grounded in Christ, so that nothing can move 
us. We should be able to discern clearly between truth 
and error on every important point. We should be so 
loyal to the Lord and His Word that we shall rejoice in 
the glorious privilege of proclaiming it at every suitable 
opportunity. We should know what we believe and why 
we believe it, and be courageous and uncompromising in 
declaring the Truth which has so blessed our own hearts 
and lives. 



R5690 : page 152 

FORGIVENESS IS BLESSED 

-JUNE 13.-PSALM 32.- 

SINS FORGIVEN, COVERED, BLOTTED OUT-INIQUITY NOT IMPUTED 
-THE GUILELESS SPIRIT -WHO MAY PRAY FOR FORGIVENESS 
-UNDER THE LAW COVENANT-UNDER THE COVENANT 
OF GRACE-UNDER THE NEW COVENANT-SOME SINS 
NOT FORGIVABLE BUT EXPIABLE-"LET THEM PRAY OVER 
HIM "-MORTAL SIN OR SIN UNTO DEATH. 

"Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, 
whose sin is covered."— Verse 1. 

THE Scriptures bring to our attention the 

thought that sins may be forgiven in the 

sense that God will not continue to treat 

us as sinners, the sins, however, remaining 

to be dealt with— merely covered. They 

also show that the time for actually blotting 

out sins is in the future, not in the present 

life. To illustrate: The Christian who has 

transgressed Divine Law quite unintentionally 

and entirely through inherited weaknesses 

may promptly go to God for forgiveness through 

the Redeemer, and is assured that his sin is covered, that 

God will not remember it against him nor treat him as a 

sinner, because Jesus Christ the righteous made full 

atonement for such sin. 

There is another class of sin, partly of weakness and 
heredity, and partly assented to by the mind. This we 
might term a mixed sin. The Lord, in forgiving this sin, 
will restore the joys of His countenance to His child and 
entirely cover or overlook the transgression in proportion 
as it was unwilful, unintentional, through ignorance; but 
He will punish that portion which was of knowledge and 
connivance or assent of the mind. 

There is still another kind of sin, which the Bible 
describes as a wilful sin— against light, against knowledge. 
This is sometimes spoken of as a sin against the 
Holy Spirit, because the light of knowledge and Truth is 
the light of God's Spirit of Truth; and whoever wilfully 
transgresses it transgresses the Spirit of Truth. Such 
sin Jesus declared has never forgiveness, neither in 
this Age nor in the Age to come. (Matthew 12:32.) 
But this does not mean that the individual will be punished 
for it forever. It simply means what it says— that such a 
sin cannot be forgiven and could only be expiated. If, 
however, it were a sin against full light, the expiation 
would mean the Second Death. We have reason to believe 

R5690 : page 153 

that on account of our inherited weaknesses and unholy 



environment, nearly all sins committed by God's people 
may be classed as mixed sins— only partly wilful. 

In any event, a man who realizes his transgression forgiven 
and his sin covered must have great peace and joy 
toward the Lord, and blessing that is beyond description. 
He may, however, at the same time, carry the marks of 
those forgiven sins in his body to his dying day; and he 
may perhaps be troubled with aches and pains and with 
various diseases as a result of sins that are forgiven— to 
his dying moment. The sins, therefore, are not blotted out 
all that while, although they are forgiven. The marks of 
them are seen in his flesh or his mind or in whatever way 
they have blemished him. 

St. Peter tells us that our sins are to be blotted out fully 
at the Second Coming of Christ. We can readily see how 
this will be; for the promise to the Church is that in the 
resurrection they will be given perfect bodies; that which 
is in part and imperfect will be done away, and that which 
is perfect will be theirs forever in the body of the resurrection 
—"sown in dishonor, raised in glory; sown in weakness, 
raised in power; sown an animal body, raised a 
spiritual body."— 1 Corinthians 15:43,44. 

CONDITIONS FOR FORGIVENESS 

Much confusion of thought prevails respecting the conditions 
upon which forgiveness of sins may be expected. 
This is not the fault of the Bible, which makes the matter 
very clear and very plain. It is the fault of our confused 
theologies, which have mixed up everything for us. To 
understand the matter we must remember that the whole 
world, as the children of Adam, rest under Divine sentence 
of death, with no offer of hope directly made to them. 
The Lord's people have a Revelation from Him, informing 
them that God purposes great things for the world by 
and by through Messiah's Kingdom, but that these are not 
applicable to them at the present time. The mercies and 
favors of God, including forgiveness of sins, are all confined 
for the present to those who come into covenant relationship 
with God. 

What is meant by covenant relationship? some may 
ask. We reply that God entered into a Covenant with 
the Jewish nation, through Moses as the mediator of their 
Law Covenant. A part of that arrangement was that on 
the basis of certain sacrifices for sins— sacrifices of bulls 
and goats— God entered into a Covenant, or bargain, with 
that nation. These sacrifices of bulls and goats every year 
on the Day of Atonement imputed to the nation forgiveness 
of sins for that year; that all the people might be in 
relationship with God. Thus they had the right to come 
to God in prayer in respect to any matter of God's promise 
or in respect to the forgiveness of their sins, as in the case 
of David. 

But this privilege did not extend to the Gentiles— it 
was merely an arrangement made with the Jews. And 
even with the Jews it was only a typical arrangement. 



It foreshadowed the permanent arrangement of this 

Gospel Age, based upon the "better sacrifices" of the antitypical 

Moses— Jesus. 

Since the time of Jesus another Covenant has been 
opened, while the Law Covenant may be said to be inoperative 
for the present. The Covenant now applicable 
to Christians is called Scripturally a Covenant of Sacrifice 
(Psalm 50:5), or a Covenant of Grace. It is a 
Covenant of Sacrifice because all who enter into this 
Covenant with God sacrifice their earthly rights and 
interests, accepting instead the spiritual blessings, which 
God has promised and which they can see with the eye 
of faith. 

Jesus was the first One who made the Covenant 
of Sacrifice. Holy, harmless, undefiled and separate 
from sinners, He presented His body a living sacrifice 
to God, saying, "Lo! I come, as in the volume of 
the Book it is written of Me, to do Thy will, O My 
God." (Psalm 40:7,8; Hebrews 10:7.) Thus He surrendered 
His will, and with it everything and every power 
He possessed. During the three and a half years of His 
ministry, He zealously carried out this Covenant unto 
death, even the death of the Cross. For this cause God 
highly exalted Him, giving Him the perfection of the 
spirit nature, to which he attained at His resurrection- 
glory, honor and immortality forever.— Phil. 2:8-1 1. 

The work of this Gospel Age is to call out from 
amongst the sinner race such as may have a similar 
spirit, or disposition, to that which Jesus had. None, 
like Him, are holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from 
sinners; but what they lack in this respect is made up to 
them by the imputation of the merit of Jesus, so that, as 
the Apostle declares, they are accepted of God in the Beloved 
One. And being thus accepted, they are privileged 
to enter into the same Covenant of Sacrifice which Jesus 
entered into. With Him, they say to the Father, Lo! we 
present ourselves in harmony with everything written in 
Your Book, to do Your will even unto death. It is the same 
Covenant! and in describing this, the Apostle declares 
that we walk in Jesus' steps and fill up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ.-l Pet. 2:21; Col. 1:24. 

Many seem not aware that only such as are in covenant 
relationship with God have any right to go to God in 
prayer, to ask either forgiveness of sins or anything else. 
Nevertheless, this must be clear to every one who will 
think on the subject. God declares that He heareth not 
sinners, and that He has made only one provision whereby 
any may come to Him. Jesus is the Way, the Truth and 
the Life. "No man cometh unto the Father but by Me," 
He declares. (John 14:6.) He is the Advocate for those 
who become His disciples and who engage to walk in 
His steps; but He is not the Advocate for the world— 
merely for the special class, His followers. In due time, 
at the close of this Age and the opening of the Millennium, 
He will become the Mediator for the whole world, 
will make satisfaction for all their sins, and will take 



over every member of the race under His Divine supervision. 
His Mediatorial Kingdom is arranged with this 
in view. Even then, the world will not go to the Father 
with their sins nor with their prayers, but merely go to 
the great Mediator between God and men— between God 
and the world. They will have blessings and favors then 
abundantly, under the arrangement provided; but they 
can have nothing now. The only ones who can get God's 
favors at the present time are those who come by the appointed 
Way— through the Covenant of Sacrifice. 

THE ADVOCATE'S ONLY TERMS 

With false ideas in our minds respecting the penalty 
for sin— with the idea that it is to be eternal torment- 
many imagine the Lord Jesus sitting tearfully and dejectedly, 
waiting for sinners to show the slightest sign of 
repentance, when He would fly to their relief and accept 
them without any particular terms or conditions. Nothing 
could be further from the truth— nothing could be further 
from the teaching of the Bible. On the contrary, if 
the sinner thinks of turning from sin to God and comes 
to Jesus to inquire if He will be His Advocate with the 
Father and make him satisfactory and acceptable, he is 
promptly told that he can have this privilege only on 
certain fixed conditions. 

The conditions are stipulated— he must become a disciple 

R5691 :page 154 

of Christ. And this means all that the Master declared 
saying, "If any man will come after Me [be My 
disciple], let him deny himself [sacrifice his own will], 
and take up his cross and follow Me." (Matthew 16:24.) 
There is no short cut. There are no other terms, and 
Jesus does not urge any one to accept these terms. 

Misinformed evangelists may, in the name of the Lord, 
urge and make different terms; but they are that far 
away from the authorized Message of God's Word. On 
the contrary, Jesus said to some in His time, "Sit down 
and count the cost"— be not hasty; know well what you 
are doing, and fully determine the matter before you 
undertake the responsibilities of discipleship. It is better 
not to vow than, after having vowed, to break the vow. 
It is better not to put your hand to the plow to become a 
servant of the Lord than, after taking these vows and 
entering the service, either to turn back or even to look 
back, as implying a half-hearted service.— Luke 9:62. 

THE NARROW WAY-THE FEW 

Some one may perhaps suggest that if these views 
were generally accepted, there would be far fewer professed 
Christians in the world. We agree to this; but 
we insist that the Christians would be of a better standard, 
more acceptable to the Lord. The Lord declares, 



"Strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leadeth 
unto life [in the present time], and few there be that find 
it." These few are to constitute the Kingdom Class, the 
Bride Class, and with Christ are to be the Divine agency 
for blessing all the families of the earth during the thousand 
years of Christ's Reign. 

Another point that might be worthy of notice is that 
when we first come to the Lord, it is not necessary to 
pray for forgiveness of original sin. He informs us that 
all the arrangements are made, completed, for those who 
desire to accept His terms and become his disciples. All, 
therefore, we have to do is to go to the Lord intelligently, 
thoughtfully, and tell Him how glad we are that He has 
made these arrangements; and that we gladly accept the 
terms of discipleship, with the promise that His grace 
shall be sufficient for us, and with His assurance that all 
things shall work together for good to the called ones 
according to His purpose. 

It is after these have come into covenant relationship 
with God that they have need to pray for the forgiveness 
of their trespasses— their sins of omission or commission 
conflicting with their covenant of consecration and 
the Divine requirements. Thus this class is privileged to 
offer the Lord's Prayer, "Forgive us our trespasses, as we 
forgive those who trespass against us." These trespasses 
thus to be forgiven do not include the original sin. That 
was forgiven freely for all those who accepted Christ and 
came under this new covenant-arrangement. The trespasses 
are our failures to come up to the standard required 
of the Lord after His grace has freed us from 
the transgressions that are past. 

"LET THEM PRAY OVER HIM" 

St. James calls our attention to some of the Lord's 
people who might become sin-sick to such an extent that 
they would not have access to the Throne of Grace themselves. 
Because of carelessness of living, neglect of 
duties and privileges, disregard of their covenant obligations, 
a cloud between them and the Father comes thick 
and dark. They are unable to penetrate this cloud. Their 
prayers seem not to reach the Father. He is hiding His 
face from them. Theirs is an extreme case. Through 
the Apostle the Lord says that if any one shall turn such 
a transgressor— a Christian who has gotten into such a 
wrong condition— from the error of his way, he will save 
a soul from death and hide a multitude of sins. 

The Apostle tells the procedure. The sin-sick one 
should realize his need, so that he would call upon the 
elders of the Church— the senior Christian brethren. He 
should confess to them his fault or whatever he believes 
has had to do with separating him from the Lord's 
favor. They in turn, as members of the Body of Christ, 
may intercede for him to the Lord and may anoint him 
with oil in the name of the Lord; and if he have committed 
sins, they shall be forgiven him, and the Lord 



shall raise him up to spiritual health and strength again. 
-James 5:14-16,19,20. 



R5692 : page 154 

PRAYERS THAT ARE HEARD 
-JUNE 20.-PSALM 141.— 



MANY MAY WORSHIP, FEW MAY PRAY-ONLY THE SANCTIFIED 
IN CHRIST JESUS-THEIR FREQUENT NEEDS-"GOD'S EAR 
OPEN'-THEIR PRAYERS ARISE AS INCENSE TO HIM- 
LEARNING TO PRAY-WHAT TO PRAY FOR-WATCHING FOR 
ANSWERS-THE BREATH OF LIFE SPIRITUAL. 

"Keep me from the snares which 
they have laid for me."— V. 9. 

WHEN we think of the greatness of the Creator, 

Maker of Heaven and earth and all 

therein, and when we think of our own 

littleness, our weaknesses and imperfections, 

we are amazed that our God has 

made any provision whereby even the best 

of His creatures might hold communion 

with Him in prayer. We should not fail 

to note the difference between worship and 

praise, which anybody may render to the 

Lord, and prayers and supplications, which are acceptable 

only from the Lord's consecrated people and their 

children while still minors. 

To illustrate: It is one thing that the populace may 
cheer a governor or a king, may remove their hats or 
bow their heads, but it is quite another thing for that 
same conglomeration of people to be received by the king 
or the governor into association as his friends or to have 
communion with him, to tell him about their matters, to 
have his counsel and guidance. So, while God has an 
interest in the whole world of mankind, a deep interest, 
it is not the same interest that He has in His Church. 
And by His Church we mean, not any sect or party or 
denomination, but those individuals who, regardless of 
sectarian lines, have entered into a heart covenant with 
the Lord, renouncing their own wills and accepting, instead, 
the will of God in Christ. These are the Bible 
Church, whose names are written in Heaven. (Hebrews 12:23.) 
These are the ones addressed in the Bible as 
the saints of God, and respecting whom it is declared, 
"All things are yours;. ..and ye are Christ's; 
and Christ is God's."— 1 Corinthians 3:21-23. 

This Church of God, in all the world, is not numerically 
strong. As the Bible says, it contains not many 
rich, not many wise, not many learned, but chiefly the 
poor of this world, rich in faith, heirs of the Kingdom. 



(1 Corinthians 1:26; James 2:5.) Their reigning, their 
power and their control in the world's affairs will not 

R5692 : page 155 

come until they shall have experienced the resurrection 
change, and Messiah's Kingdom shall be fully inaugurated. 
Then these shall live and reign with Christ a 
thousand years.— Revelation 20:4. 

WHO MAY PRAY 

Strangely enough, many seem to have gotten the 
thought that anybody, at any time, may rush into the 
presence of the Almighty God with his requests. The 
intimation even seems to be that God is unhappy because 
people do not come to Him thus. Such views of prayer 
indicate a lack of Bible study, Bible information. The 
Bible teaches that prayer is a great privilege. 

Jesus declared, "No man cometh unto the Father but 
by Me." Furthermore, He indicated the restrictions upon 
those who would approach the Father through Him— 
they must be His disciples; and to become His disciples, 
they must take upon themselves certain obligations or 
vows. They must renounce their own wills, and accept 
the will of Jesus. They must lay all upon the altar; otherwise 
they cannot be accepted, cannot be presented to the 
Father, cannot be begotten of the Holy Spirit, cannot be 
styled or treated as sons of God, cannot be joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ in His coming Kingdom— cannot have 
the privilege of sons of God in the present life either— 
the privilege of prayer and of Divine fellowship, communion, 
instruction. 

All these special blessings the Bible reserves for those 
who become especially, peculiarly, the sons of God. Even 
in respect to these who have become sons of God, Jesus 
intimates a danger of their losing the privilege of prayer. 
He says, "If ye abide in Me, and My words abide in you, 
ye may ask what ye will"— not otherwise.— John 15:7. 

We believe that misinformation on this subject of 
prayer has worked disadvantageously to many. The majority, 
holding intercourse with evil, only occasionally 
flee to the Lord in some trouble, and that without entering 
into any covenant with Him or receiving any recognition 
as sons, and without desiring this. If they were 
rightly informed, the effect upon their minds at first would 
be to stun them. They would awake suddenly to the 
realization that they are without God in the world; that 
their affairs are not subject to His supervision; but that 
as part of the world, they are under the general curse, or 
sentence of death. 

The highest qualities of the human mind, which lie 
at the very top of our craniums, are the organs of worship, 
reverence, veneration, spirituality. Even the wicked, 
at times, feel that they will please God by praying to 
Him and asking Him for some favors. They have not 



learned that God has addressed them, saying, "Unto the 
wicked God saith, What hast thou to do, to take My 
Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hatest instruction 
and castestMy words behind thee?"— Psalm 50:16,17. 

It is high time that the difference between the Church 
and the world shall be more distinctly discerned, and that 
the privileges of the Church shall be appreciated. The 
effect would be to awaken in others a sense of their need 
for God. Then, in their hours of distress, realizing that 
they have no God, would they not be the more likely to seek 
Him earnestly in His appointed way, through the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and through a full consecration— the only 
terms upon which Jesus would accept them and be their 
Advocate with the Father, and secure for them the title 
and privilege of sons of God, valuable both for the present 
life and for that which is to come? 

INCENSE, PRAYER, BEFORE GOD 

The Prophet David, in this lesson, pictures the Christian 
in his distress coming to God in His appointed way: 
"O Lord, I cry unto Thee: make haste unto me; give 
ear unto my voice, when I cry unto Thee. Let my prayer 
be set forth before Thee as incense." This is the same 
thought elsewhere expressed in the Bible— that the prayers 
of God's people rise up before Him as a sweet perfume. 
(Revelation 5:8.) And, by the way, we remember that 
the incense of old, which typified the prayers of the 
saints, was composed of a rare mixture of spices, giving 
forth a peculiarly sweet odor; and that nobody was allowed 
to make that incense except the priests who were 
to offer it. (Exo. 30:34-38; 37:29.) Thus again the 
Lord shows us that the privilege of prayer, of approaching 
Him in an acceptable manner, is confined to the antitypical 
priests, called by St. Peter the Royal Priesthood.— 
1 Peter 2:9. 

Only those of the Lord's people who have consecrated 
their lives to Him, even unto death, are thus represented 
as members of the sacrificing Priesthood, to whom the 
Apostle wrote, saying, "I beseech you, brethren, by the 
mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, 
holy and acceptable to God, and your reasonable 
service." (Romans 12:1.) The Lord has pledged to 
this particular class that He will hear them, yea, that He 
will answer them— not necessarily according to their natural 
preferences, but He will heed the spirit of their cry 
and give to them, according to His Wisdom, the experiences 
and blessings most helpful. 

WHAT WE SHOULD PRAY FOR 

Our prayers should be in harmony with our endeavors. 
Thus in our lesson the Church of Christ are represented 
as praying the Lord to set a guard over their lips. The 
thought is that they are striving to keep their lips, their 
mouths, from utterances that would be injurious to 



others; and that, on the contrary, they may be helpful to 
humanity and honoring to God. Also, because they are 
striving for heart purity and to avoid practising wicked 
works with evil doers, therefore they pray in harmony, 
"Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practise wicked 
works with men that work iniquity; and let me not 
eat of their dainties"— assist me in my determination of 
opposition to all these things. 

How appropriate that the Lord's consecrated people 
should scrutinize their lives when they come to their 
Father in prayer! How appropriate for them to note to 
what extent their blessings, luxuries and dainties have 
come to them contrary to the principles of justice and 
love— contrary to the Golden Rule! Whoever intelligently 
thus prays will surely be examining his life to rectify 
his business relations, so that he may not eat of the 
dainties which would come from injustice or oppression, 
but, on the contrary, rejoice in the commonest things of 
life if they be the best procurable in harmony with the 
principles of righteousness, the principles of love. 

"LET THE RIGHTEOUS SMITE" 

The class that are thus in fellowship with God, 
through prayer and through seeking to be obedient to 
His arrangements and laws, are so fully engaged that they 
are able to say, as in this Psalm, that they will take no 
offense if reproved by the righteous— rather the reproofs 
of such will be to them like an excellent oil, such as a 
guest received from his host in ancient times. The true 
Christians, the class who have the fellowship with God 
through prayer, have the qualities of heart which the 
Apostle describes as the fruits of the Holy Spirit; namely, 
meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, 
love. (Galatians 5:22,23; 2 Peter 1:5-8.) 

R5693 : page 156 

And because possessing these, they are not easily offended, 
but indeed are glad to have such experiences and lessons 
as the Lord's providences may direct to them— especially 
if these come through the brethren, and particularly if 
the brethren who use these administer their rebukes in 
a Christian manner— in meekness, remembering themselves, 
lest they also be tempted.— Galatians 6:1. 

In such cases, the reproof will be a blessing from the 
Lord— if given in that spirit and received in that spirit. 
Neither their heads nor their hearts are broken by such 
Scriptural reproofs; and they themselves learn to administer 
admonitions to others in similar manner, so as not 
to injure, but to help. Their prayers are for each other 
in what seem to be calamities; and in harmony with the 
Lord's promise, these seeming calamities and all the affairs 
of life shall operate together for good to those who 
love Him, to the called ones according to His purpose. 

The American Revision gives the wording here differently: 



"As oil upon the head; let not my head refuse 

it: for even in their wickedness shall my prayer continue." 

In hyperbole the Prophet declares the distress of the 
Church as affecting them even to death. "Our bones are 
scattered at the mouth of Sheol (the grave), as when one 
cutteth and cleaveth wood upon the earth"— like the fragments 
made by the wood-cutter, who considers the chips 
not worthy to be gathered. But while this may be the 
estimation of God's saints from the worldly viewpoint, not 
so is it with God, as the following verse implies: "But 
mine eyes are unto Thee, O God the Lord: for in Thee is 
my trust; leave not my soul destitute." 

But whatever affliction God's consecrated people may 
have in the present life, whatever rejection may be their 
experience at the hands of the great or the wise of this 
world, they have God's promise of glory, honor, immortality, 
in the future. In Him they trust, and He will not 
leave them desolate. He has declared, "The gates of 
Hell (Sheol, Hades) shall not prevail against them"; that 
is to say, the power of the grave shall not prevail against 
the Lord's Anointed, Christ and the Church— they shall 
come forth from the power of the tomb glorious in the 
First Resurrection majesty to reign a thousand years.— 
Revelation 20:6. 

"KEEP ME FROM THE SNARES" 

Satan is represented as a fowler, a hunter, who is seeking 
after the Lord's people even as earthly hunters are 
prone to hunt after speckled birds. Before the invention 
of powder, the hunters more particularly entrapped their 
prey with snares and pitfalls. While Satan is represented 
as being the great Arch-enemy, he also is accredited with 
using agents. Chief amongst his agents, according to the 
Bible, are those fallen angels of whom he is the prince— 
"the prince of devils." But he has amongst men many 
workers of iniquity. These are his servants whether 
they realize it or not. 

As Jesus declared, "His servants ye are to whom ye 
render service." In consequence of this rule, we understand 
that many are professedly servants of God who are 
deceiving themselves, who are really the servants of the 
Wicked One; for his works they do, as Jesus said. They 
colabor for the upbuilding of unrighteousness, iniquity, 
injustice, and in holding down the Truth and in misleading 
the people. 

The Lord will help His people, He will deliver them 
from the various snares of the Adversary; and eventually 
Satan and all his cohorts will fall into their own snares. 
Thus, in ancient times, when the Egyptians thought to 
capture the Israelites at the Red Sea, the Lord opened the 
way for the Israelites and they escaped; while their 
enemies pursued after them, and were themselves entrapped 
and overwhelmed. 

Similarly, in the great Time of Trouble that is approaching, 
apparently Satan and his servants will be 



overwhelmed in that trouble in a manner not expected by 
them. The Church will escape those things coming upon 
the world and will stand before the Son of Man, changed 
in the power of the First Resurrection and called to be 
with Him as His Kingdom class. But the world will be 
ensnared in that great Time of Trouble. Yet, thank God, 
it will be for their advantage as they learn the ways of 
the Lord more fully, and great will be the blessings of 
the Almighty coming to them ! 



R5693 : page 156 

"PROPHESY AGAINST THE SHEPHERDS" 

-JUNE 27.-EZEKIEL 34.- 

SELF-SEEKING SHEPHERDS-FEED THEMSELVES, BUT NOT THE 
FLOCK-THE TRUE SHEPHERD COMES-SEEKING THE SCATTERED 

SHEEP -FEEDING THE FLOCK-CARING FOR THE 
SICK AND LEAN-REPROVING THE SELFISH OF THE FLOCK 
-DAVID TO BE THE NEW SHEPHERD-ONE FLOCK, ONE 
SHEPHERD-"THE LORD IS MY SHEPHERD." 

"I Myself will be the Shepherd of My sheep. "-V. 15. 

TODAY'S Study is a parable, applicable, we 
believe, at the present time. It begins with 
an arraignment of the shepherds, the pastors 
of the Lord's flock. It accuses them 
of neglecting the sheep in favor of themselves. 
It declares that they appropriate 
the wool of the sheep and devour the best 
of the flock, but neglect to feed the flock- 
neglect to lead them to the "green pastures" 
of God's Word and to the "still waters" 
of Divine Truth. The parable pictures the Lord's flock, 
scattered here and there, some wounded, some torn, some 
lean and hungry, all neglected so far as the false 
shepherds are concerned. 

We cannot understand this as signifying nominal 
Christians, but the true saints of God. Nominal Christianity 
fares well enough, but the Lord does not recognize 
merely nominal Christians as His flock. They are 
the tares, not the wheat; they are the goats, not the 
sheep. The shepherds who neglect to care for the sheep, 
to provide them with the spiritual food and to assist 
them to find it, to appropriate it, are often quite busy 
with the goats— the worldly elements of their congregations. 
Their church arrangements are often especially 
for the goat, or tare class. These do not care for spiritual 
food; they must be provided with entertainments, 
suppers, sociables, discourses on politics, or harmless 
dissertations well filled with jokes. Do not they furnish 
most of the money? Would they not withdraw from 



the church if spiritual food were dispensed? For these 
some are providing "smokers," parish houses, well supplied 
with games, etc. 

But the shepherds were not appointed by the Lord 
to look after the goats and the tare class, but to look 
after the wheat, the Lord's sheep. They are unfaithful 
pastors, or shepherds; and this prophecy is a reproof to 

R5693 : page 157 

them. The true flock of God is scattered, some here, 
some there, in many denominations and outside of all. 
They become the prey of the beastly of the world, and 
are ensnared into various false doctrines, but "neither 
did My shepherds search for My flock, but the shepherds 
fed themselves, and fed not My flock. Therefore, O 
ye shepherds, hear the word of the Lord! Thus saith 
the Lord God, Behold I am against the shepherds; and 
I will require My flock at their hand, and cause them to 
cease from feeding the flock; neither shall the shepherds 
feed themselves any more: for I will deliver My flock 
from their mouth." 

THE SHEPHERD GATHERING HIS FLOCK 

Many Bible students believe that this Scripture is 
in process of fulfilment— that we are living in the Parousia 
of Christ, and that He has been present in the world 
for some years past, searching out the truly consecrated 
of His people, and gathering them out of all sectarian 
systems and from the world, to Himself. Surely it is 
true that the shepherds are ceasing to feed the flock; 
for very few of the flock of the Lord's consecrated people 
any longer seek spiritual food at their hands. They 
are wandering in a famishing condition, and much in 
danger of falling into the various snares of the Adversary. 

However, the Great Shepherd Himself is with His 
flock, and is causing His voice to be heard; and the 
sheep will be gathered to Him out of every nation and 
out of every denomination. Truly, Jesus said, "My 
sheep hear My voice, and they follow Me"; and "a 
stranger will they not follow; for they know not the 
voice of strangers." (John 10:27,5.) The voice of the 
Lord, of the Great Shepherd, amongst His sheep is to 
be heard now because it is the time of His Second Presence. 
He is about to complete His flock of this Gospel 
Age and to glorify them with Himself in the First 
Resurrection. Surely, goodness and mercy shall follow 
them; they shall dwell in the House of the Lord forever. 

"Thus saith the Lord God, Behold I, even I, will both 
search My sheep, and seek them out. As a shepherd 
seeketh out his flock in the day that he is among his 
sheep that are scattered, so will I seek out My sheep, 
and I will deliver them out of all places where they 
have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day. And I 
will bring them out from the people, and gather them 



from the countries, and will bring them to their own 
land." Verses 11-13. 

R5694 : page 157 

The Home-land of the Lord's sheep of this Gospel 
Age is Heaven itself, and His bringing them to it will 
mean their resurrection change. Then they shall be in 
the Kingdom with Jesus Himself— still His sheep, still 
His flock, still His Bride, still His members. But He 
declares also, "Other sheep I have that are not of this 
fold: them also I must bring; and there shall be one fold, 
and one Shepherd."— John 10:16. 

THE SECOND FLOCK AND ITS FOLD 

These other sheep of the Lord, we believe, will include 
all of mankind who, during the Millennial Kingdom, 
will be glad to avail themselves of the great provision 
the Lord has made for them in His Plan. They 
are other sheep in the sense that they will be of a different 
nature from the flock which the Lord is selecting 
during this Gospel Age. The flock now being called 
and gathered are being begotten to the Divine nature, a 
spirit nature, and they will attain to this spirit nature by 
a resurrection change; as it is written, "Flesh and blood 
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God."— 1 Cor. 15:50. 

The other sheep will be the great flock of the Lord, 
the great family of Adam, purchased by Jesus. For a 
thousand years the work of calling and gathering mankind 
and separating between sheep and goats will progress, 
as outlined in Matthew 25:31-46. The whole world 
will be granted the opportunity of taking their choice as 
to whether they will be sheep or goats. And nothing in 
the Scriptures informs us whether the sheep or the goats 
will be the more numerous. We are merely informed 
that all will have the invitation to become the Lord's 
sheep, to come under His shepherding care; and by so 
doing and proving their loyalty to Him and developing 
His spirit, His character-likeness, they will be granted 
everlasting life on the human plane, the earthly plane. 

There the Lord will bring the Restitution which St. 
Peter mentions (Acts 3:19-21), and which will be offered 
to Adam and all his race, who will not receive the 
call of this Gospel Age. Theirs will not be so high a 
call, but will evidently be a glorious one. The whole 
earth— a Paradise, an earthly heaven— will be their 
everlasting portion, but it will not be the Heavenly 
Home to which the Church has been invited. The 
world's blessing of Restitution to human perfection, to 
the image and likeness of God in the flesh, will not be 
the equivalent of the spiritual nature granted to the 
Church of this Age, but it will be wonderfully grand. 

As for the goats of that time, thank God! they are 
not to be tormented, as many of us once supposed. Rather, 
they are to be cut off from life, as is implied in the 



Greek word kolasin. "These [the goats] shall go away 
into everlasting cutting off; but the righteous [the 
sheep] into life everlasting." (Matthew 25:46.) The 
Great Shepherd, who is now gathering His flock of this 
Gospel Age, will remain therefore for a thousand years 
to gather out fully all His flock of the Millennial Age, 
to separate them fully from all having the contrary spirit, 
and to destroy completely all except His sheep. All 
who really love righteousness and hate iniquity, when 
given a clear opportunity to discern and to take their 
stand, will choose the right and become the Lord's sheep. 
All others, who will to be wicked, will die; as it is 
written, "All the wicked will He destroy."— Psalm 145:20. 

"I will feed My flock, and I will cause them to lie 
down, saith the Lord God. I will seek that which was 
lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and 
I will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen 
that which was sick; but I will destroy the fat and the 
strong; I will feed them with judgment"— with a 
righteous recompense.— Verses 15,16. 

THE FLOCK CRITICIZED ALSO 

Not merely the shepherds, the pastors, the preachers, 
the ministers, are reproved by the Lord, but also some of 
His flock not in official positions. In the Day of the 
Lord's presence, these also will be dealt with, as we read: 

"And as for you, O My flock, thus saith the Lord God, 
Behold, I judge between cattle and cattle, between the 
rams and the he goats. Seemeth it a small thing unto 
you to have eaten up the good pasture, but ye must tread 
down with your feet the residue of your pastures? and 
to have drunk of the deep waters, but ye must foul the 
residue with your feet? And as for My flock, they have 
eaten that which ye have trodden with your feet; and 
they have drunk that which ye have fouled with your feet. 
Therefore, thus saith the Lord God unto them, Behold, I, 
even I, will judge between the fat cattle and between the 
lean cattle. Because ye have thrust with side and with 
shoulder, and pushed all the diseased with your horns, 
till ye have scattered them abroad, therefore will I save 
My flock, and they shall be no more a prey; and I will 
judge between cattle and cattle."— Verses 17-22. 

R5694 : page 158 

The New Order of things incidental to Messiah's 
Kingdom is here brought to our attention. This already 
has begun in respect to the Gospel Church. Some who 
have been considered quite prominent in Christendom, 
pushing and managing its affairs, and discounting the 
Lord's true sheep as peculiar people, will be reproved by 
the Lord in this Day. The poor, the outcasts, the peculiar, 
are the ones that He styled His flock, and that He 
was to especially gather and especially feed and especially 
heal in this time. And is it not so? Is the Lord not 



feeding His sheep and blessing them irrespective of all 
sectarianism, and wherever they may be, in every land? 
Verily, He is searching them out and feeding them; and 
soon, the Harvest time closed, these will be gathered to 
the Heavenly fold. Meantime, the good work begun with 
the Gospel sheep will be extended amongst mankind. 

Never again will the Lord leave His sheep without 
shepherding. We are not from this to understand that 
He made a mistake when He said, "If I go away, I will 
come again"; but rather that the leaving of His flock 
for a time was incidental to their testing, their proving, 
and development, that those loyal to the Lord, the principles 
of righteousness and the instructions of His Word 
might be manifested, even though they were scattered, 
and that others also might be manifested as unfaithful. 
It is, however, refreshing to know that throughout the 
entire Millennial Age, until all the work of perfecting 
the sheep shall have been accomplished, the Shepherd 
will be with them. Thus we read: 

"And I will set up one Shepherd over them, and He 
shall feed them, even My servant David; He shall feed 
them, and He shall be their Shepherd. And I, Jehovah, 
will be their God, and My servant David a prince among 
them; I the Lord have spoken it. And I will make with 
them a Covenant of Peace, and will cause the evil 
beasts to cease out of the land; and they shall dwell 
safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods."— 
Verses 23-25. 

We are not from this to understand that the Prophet 
David of old is to be made Jehovah's representative and 
given the care of the sheep in the future. The word 
David signifies beloved; and the thought, we believe, is 
that the antitype of David is meant. Jesus is preeminently 
beloved of the Father; and the Bride class, the 
Church, are to be the members of Christ, their Head- 
members of the Beloved. Thus the Lord Jesus said of 
His people, "The Father Himself loveth you." 

We see then that The Christ, Head and Body- 
Jesus and the Church— are to be the antitypical David, 
or Beloved of God, into whose care all who are His 
sheep or who desire to become His sheep during the 
Millennial Age will be committed. The wild beasts, representing 
the evil-doers, those who will devour, destroy 
and do harm, will be caused to cease; and the whole 
world will become "the fold." No longer will there be 
need of making a special fold, building the fences against 
the enemies; for the sheep will be in a quiet and restful 
condition— "in the woods." 

In other words, the close of the Millennium will witness 
what the Lord has declared, that nothing shall hurt 
nor destroy in all His holy Kingdom. (Isaiah 11:9.) 
It will witness also what Jesus has declared; namely, 
that from that time onward, there shall be no more sighing, 
no more crying, no more dying, no more curse, because 
all the former things shall have passed away. 
"And He that sat upon the Throne said, Behold, I make 



all things new." (Revelation 21:3-5.) Even Satan shall 
be bound, to deceive the world no more until Messiah 
shall have fully accomplished the work of perfecting 
the flock. 



R5694 : page 158 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
RE CHARGES OF THE PREACHERS' UNION 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

We appreciated very much the article in the March 15 
WATCH TOWER entitled, "Preachers Back of Malicious Attack. 
Of course, all of us were certain that the charges 
were false, but until the article appeared we had nothing 
with which to refute the falsity of them. Now we are fully 
armed. 

One would hardly believe that reports could spread so 
rapidly. 

We find here in Texas that the opposition to the Truth 
is so thoroughly organized throughout the country that every 
preacher, even in the smallest towns and in the rural districts, 
has in his possession copies, not only of all the books 
written in opposition to the Truth, but also of the charges 

R5695 : page 158 

made against Brother Russell and of our alleged teachings 
of a second chance, no punishment for sin, etc. In our 
Volunteer work we are making it a point to refute these 
charges whenever opportunity presents. 

We are not inclining toward weariness in well doing. We 
are confident that we shall reap unspeakably glorious results 
in due time, and we believe the due time is not far off. 

It is our delight to bear before the Throne of Heavenly 
Grace our dear Pastor and all others who suffer for righteousness' 
sake. And we daily search our own hearts lest 
possibly we may shrink from joyfully sharing with these 
whatever the Lord may allow to come upon us. With continued 
love and prayers for all, we are, 

Faithfully yours in His fellowship and service, 
SETH T. MOORE.-Texas. 



OPPOSITION PROVED TO BE BOOMERANG 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

A short time ago, having heard your teachings roundly 
denounced by one or two brother clergymen, I obtained the 
six volumes of your STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and began 
to study and investigate for myself. The final upshot of 
this inquiry has been that the whole of your views and 



position as set forth in the above volumes has convinced me 
beyond all question that modern Christendom is upon a false 
foundation, and that somehow the "Churches" have lost 
vital integral portions of that Truth which was delivered 
once for all to the saints. I have therefore recently felt it 
to be my duty to resign my position as an Anglican minister, 
as I am now certain that the "Churches" as at present organized 
do not, and cannot, truly and adequately represent 
our Lord to humanity as Redeemer. Why this is so you 
make abundantly and transparently clear in your STUDIES. 

I have been engaged in the work of the ministry for the 
last thirteen years, and during this time have tenaciously 
held on to my position in the Church, although for some 
years I have had the instinctive feeling that in some way 
things were far from right within the borders of "Orthodoxy." 
The difficulty was I did not know how to set about to try 
and remedy matters. Your third volume of the STUDIES, 
"Thy Kingdom Come," shows clearly that there could be no 
remedy in these latter days, for the time of Harvest is 
come, and that the evident decay and disintegration of Christendom 
is the Lord's method of gathering together His 
own Spiritual Elect Church. The whole thing has come to 
me with the force of a Divine Revelation— for such it assuredly 
is. I can only add that it has been the deep desire 
within to try and do my Lord's will that has kept me within 
the "Orthodox" Church until the present. Now, however, 
that I see, as in a mirror, that He is calling me to come out 
of Babylon as with a stentorian voice— in view of her 
wickedness, worldliness, cruelty, hypocrisy and errors— I feel 
that I must obey Him at all costs. I have done this, and 
already I feel a sense of inner peace and tranquility coming 
over me. May God bless and keep you, Brother Russell, 
and all the brethren with you who are now busy making 
ready for the Coming of the King ! 

For myself I just want to do the Lord's will in all things, 
and will be glad to serve and co-operate with you and the 
Association generally as may most effectively tend to assist in 

R5695 : page 159 

the establishment of our Lord's Kingdom. Kindly use me 
as you may judge will be best to this great end. I am a 
married man with three children, but whatever difficulties 
may arise I have already proved that His grace is sufficient 
for me. He has shown me the road to take to do His will 
and He will enable me so to do. 

I have made myself known to the brethren in Toronto 
and they have welcomed me in a most kind and brotherly 
way. If it should be the Lord's will for me to remain in 
this city, it will be a joy and privilege to cooperate with 
them in seeking to further the great end we have in view. 
At the same time I have the feeling that if arrangements 
could be made for me to undertake a short, special course of 
study and training under your direction at Brooklyn it 
would do me much good and enable me to render more 
efficient service later on. I will, however, leave myself 



wholly in your hands and endeavor to begin to serve the 
Association as you may judge best. 

With earnest prayers that your hands may be upheld in 
every possible way, and that God in His infinite mercy may 
shower upon you and the brethren generally still greater 
blessings for the Great Day yet to come, I am 

Yours in the Lord, R. A. ROBINSON.-Canada. 



MOST WONDERFUL MONTHS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I desire to testify to you that the last twelve months— 
for I am now nearly twelve months in the Truth— have been 
the most wonderful in my life. Looking back I can clearly 
see how our dear Lord has led me step by step, and given me 
strength sufficient to walk that narrow path that leads upward 
to Him. What joy and peace He has given me since I 
learned to look to Him, and what marvelous patience He has 
had with me! 

The local Methodist minister (I used to be a member 
of his congregation) has desired me to return to his flock. 
He has used many arguments and has given me booklets to 
read; but he cannot answer me when I point out to him 
that neither he nor any of the denominational ministers 
were able to show me the path my Savior trod, and it was 
not until I came in touch with you, through your writings, 
that my eyes were opened and my ears unstopped to hear 
the call to consecrate my all to Him. How can I turn my 
back on one who has done so much for me! 

Dear Brother, daily I ask God's richest blessings for you. 
Will you pray for me— just once— that through His grace 
and strength I may be able to join you and others of His 
saints beyond the veil? 

With love, your brother, J. C. EDWARDS. -Canada. 



MORNING RESOLVE, VOW, HYMN, MANNA, PRAYER 

MOST DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER IN THE ANOINTED: 

This year, when reading the MANNA for January 1st, I 
made a table of the appointments the Lord has furnished us 
for our building up in the faith, and fitting us to run in the 
narrow way. I was surprised at the number. 

The daily appointments of Morning Resolve, Vow, hymn, 
MANNA and prayer that we have in common with all the 
Household of Faith, have been a blessing to me this year 
as never before. I believe that one reason for this is that I 
am learning more the value of prayer, and I try always to 
ask the Lord beforehand to bless the morning service to me. 
If I forget this, I notice a difference in my response to it. 
The fact that these appointments, though used daily, never 
wear out is a proof to me of their Divine origin. I am 
referring more especially now to the Vow and Resolve. I 



think there has never been a question that the hymns and the 
MANNA came from God. 

In a Second Volume Berean lesson not long ago reference 
was made to the Lord's gathering His people together in 
mental association and spiritual communion. In our home 
here we are realizing the special spiritual communion with 
the whole Israel of God that comes from using the same 
morning service; and I thanked God for the way He had 
arranged, that through the question books the consecrated 
were given the opportunity to come into mental association 
and have their attention drawn to the same thought in each 
paragraph to be especially emphasized. Thus one could 
leave a class in Halifax and go to a class in Los Angeles, 
and be at home in the STUDIES immediately; that is if these 
classes were up to date. There is nothing else like it on 
earth; and the value of this arrangement cannot be emphasized 
too much, as we believe such a wonderful arrangement 
for the building up in knowledge that we may grow in 
grace has been under the direct supervision of our beloved 
Bridegroom and Head, the Chief Reaper in the Harvest. 

I send you a large bundle of that most precious commodity, 
the love that comes because of being a member of 
the Anointed One. May the God of all consolation comfort 
and refresh you continually is my prayer. 

Your Sister by His kind favor, LILLA S. WARD 



BAPTIST PREACHER GETS LIGHT 

DEAR PASTOR:- 

I am constrained to acquaint you with the news that in 
God's hands you have been a means of blessing to us who 
were for some time spiritually cast down. I was aforetime 
a Baptist pastor and evangelist in England, earnest in my 
endeavors for the Gospel's sake, and had to suffer because 
I could not bend to those who thought they had the right 
to lay down the law. I felt that there was something lacking 
in their teachings and was in such perplexity that I 
drifted into indifference and unhappiness. 

Heartily disgusted with the worldliness and "isms" of 
the churches, and worst of all their denial of God's Word, 
I involuntarily cried, "Send out Thy light and Thy Truth; 
let them lead me!" "Restore unto me the joy of Thy 
salvation!" 

About this time my father mailed me a WATCH TOWER 
copy of THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES, but I was so 
prejudiced— regarding you as one of the modern upstarts— 
that I relegated it to the bottom of my box, unread. Again 
I was presented with, this time, a bound copy of the same 
book! In curiosity I began to read, and my curiosity soon 
became deep interest and diligent Bible study and my prayer 
has been answered! 

In God's power I have been able to interest others; my 
brother-in-law has joined in our studies and desires to add 
his testimony to mine in gratitude to God for your ministrations. 



May God continue to abundantly bless you in your 
noble and fearless proclamation of THE Truth! 

As opportunity offers we do our little for the spread of 
present-day truths and have been blessed accordingly. True, 
we have had to endure misjudgment and misunderstanding, 
but we rejoice to be accounted worthy to suffer these things 
for Him who endured so much for us. 

Feeling sure that such testimony will gladden your heart, 
and rejoicingly awaiting the establishment of the Kingdom, 

Gratefully yours in Christ, JOHN A. PERRY. --Australia. 



page 160 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



I. B. S. A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF JUNE 
Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY VIII. 



WeekofJune6 Q. 1 to 4 WeekofJune20 Q. 11 to 15 

WeekofJunel3 Q. 5 to 10 WeekofJune27 Q. 16 to 23 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each; 
or 50 c. per dozen, postpaid. 



page 161 

VOL. XXXVI JUNE 1 No. 1 1 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

The Coming Storm and Its Glorious 
Outcome 163 

The Last Great Day 163 

Present "Signs of the Son of Man" 165 

"Plagues" Upon Babylon 166 

Gentleness A Characteristic of The Christ 166 

Faith the Mainspring of Consecration 167 

"Who Is My Neighbor?" 168 

Thankless, Rebellious Absalom 169 

Solomon, King of Israel 170 

Different Phases of the Word Temptation 171 

How God Tempted Abraham 171 

Why God Cannot Be Tempted to Evil 171 

The Father's Wise Counsel 172 

God's Ways as Shown in Nature 172 

The Class to Be Honored by the Lord 173 

Hating the Sin, Loving the Sinner 173 

The Sin of Self-Sufficiency 174 

Interesting Letters 174 

Infidel Thanks God for Pastor Russell 175 

page 162 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 



SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the Divine 
Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. 1 l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Battle of Armageddon," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 688 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 640 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 



Body under the Head: 750 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 
The above prices include postage. 



R5703 : page 162 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY CLASSES 

From various quarters we learn that the Berean Bible 
Study Classes are increasing in number. This is very gratifying, 
of course, but at the same time it is leading into a certain 
difficulty. Where Classes exceed twenty or so in number, 
they become unwieldy and proportionately less of a 
blessing and an aid. No matter how skillful the leader, it is 
impossible to do justice to larger Classes within reasonable 
hours. We offer a suggestion: namely, that the entire Class 
have a special time or times for meeting on Sundays when a 
part of the service might be in the nature of a short address, 
or several of them, from different Brethren manifesting ability 
along that line. Then, during the week, have Classes in 
homes in various parts of the city or town under different 
brethren manifesting ability as Class leaders. These new 
Classes, ranging from ten to fifteen, will have the opportunity 
of growing somewhat and then, later, develop into additional 
classes. Thus the witness of the Truth will reach larger 
numbers, and various districts will be served, each and all 
having opportunity of participating at every meeting. 

This same rule, we believe, will be found advantageous 
in respect to the Wednesday evening prayer, praise and testimony 
meeting. Let us never forget the importance of furnishing 
an opportunity for each consecrated Brother and 
Sister to participate in the Class Studies and in the testimonies. 
"If thou believe in thine heart and confess with thy 
mouth" is the Lord's suggestion of proper faithfulness. It 
is those who are thus faithful who usually reap the greatest 
blessing. 

page 162 

"WRIGHT" DE LUXE FAMILY BIBLE 

We have secured, at a very low price, a supply of beautiful, 
illustrated Family Bibles and offer our readers the benefit 
of the bargain. This Bible is 8 x 10-1/2 inches, 2-1/4 inches thick, 
weighs 6-1/4 pounds, is bound in black seal skin over boards, 
gilt edges, nine-point type, nearly 1,400 pages containing over 
800 text illustrations. It also contains family records and a 
concordance. Equal to $6 Bibles; our price, $2, charges prepaid. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JULY 
After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 



the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
July follow: (1) 299; (2) 230; (3) 259; (4) 78; (5) 14; (6) 50; 
(7) 303; (8) 293; (9) 144; (10) 164; (11) Vow; (12) 145; (13) 
105; (14) 25; (15) 324; (16) 100; (17) 165; (18) 119; (19) 78; 
(20) 87; (21) 110; (22) 321; (23) 240; (24) 155; (25) 272; (26) 
291; (27) 195; (28) 305; (29) 241; (30) 198; (31) 311. 



R5695 : page 163 

THE COMING STORM AND ITS GLORIOUS OUTCOME 

"He maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still. 
Then are they glad because they be quiet; so He bringeth 
them unto their desired haven. ...Whoso is wise and 
will observe these things, even they shall understand 
the loving-kindness of the Lord."— Psalm 107:29,30,43. 

PSALM 107 seems to be prophetic, tracing to a 

considerable degree the experiences of the 

Church of Christ throughout this Gospel 

Age. It may be applied individually and 

also in a world-wide, international way. The 

cause of all the trouble in the world is sin. 

There might be various ways of trying to 

remove the difficulty, but God in His Wisdom 

arranged the one Plan. He will permit 

sin to bring storms and difficulties of life so 

that humanity shall be tossed about, and thus learn to 

appreciate our great Savior, whom God has provided to 

be the Great Deliverer of the Church and of the world. 

The whole matter has been arranged in a judicial manner, 

and in due time Christ will have the full right to bid all 

storms to cease and to bring order out of confusion. Yet 

this must await the Divine appointment. During the 

present Age the Church class has been selected, and the 

storms and difficulties of life have been valuable to them 

in developing faith, hope, patience and in preparing them 

for the Kingdom honors, privileges and opportunities. 

The world's storms, according to the Scriptures, have 
been varied and have occurred at different times, according 
to the conditions of mankind— sin and selfishness 
always stirring up a storm on every possible occasion. 
There have been many storms in the past— wars, invasions, 
tumults, etc.— all started from envious, selfish motives, 
or because of great injustice on the part of others. 

R5696 : page 163 

Great nations have envied one another their increase of 
wealth, and have preyed upon the weak. Anger, malice, 
hatred, strife, the works of the flesh and the Devil, have 
been cultivated. Now, having sown thus to selfishness, 
mankind are experiencing a mighty whirlwind on the 
social sea. This great storm has not yet reached its 



height. Our thought is that it will be much greater before 
the Lord will step in and say, "Peace, be still!" He 
has permitted this awful storm; for He knows how to 
make it work out for the good of humanity. 

It is ours as God's people to favor peace and righteousness 
and to live in harmony with these conditions. But it 
is ours also to know what is coming on the world— more, 
it is ours to know the outcome, to know something of 
God's Truth. The Lord has already given us an inward 
peace which no outward storm can affect. We are trusting 
in the promises He has given. We realize what the present 
condition is, and rejoice that the Church will soon be 
glorified. What a lasting peace and joy will then be ours 
beyond the veil! This realization brings into our hearts 
even now great rest of soul, a great calm! We remember 
that God is able to make all things work together for good 
to us, and He has promised so to do; therefore we may 
have blessed experiences coming out of these stormy 
times and trials of life. 

The Lord has a peculiar way of bringing peace to His 
people— not usually by interference with people of the 
world. The storms of life may go on just the same as 
ever; our way may be just as thorny as ever. But the 
Lord speaks peace to us! We hear His Voice, the Word 
of God! By the knowledge He gives us, by His precious 
promises, He assures us of His Wisdom, His Love, His 
Power, and of His loving purpose for His people. These 
things give us peace and rest of heart in the midst of 
outward trials and trouble. He makes known to us also 
His great Plan for the world in general. He informs us 
now of the significance of the present conditions and of 
the glorious outcome of the great trouble about to break 
upon the whole world. 

THE LAST GREAT DAY 

We are in the "last days" mentioned by the Apostle 
Paul. He says, "In the last days perilous times shall come. 
Men shall be. ..covetous, boasters, proud,. ..traitors, 
heady, highminded, lovers of pleasure more than lovers 
of God. ...From such turn away." (2 Timothy 3:1-5.) 
Our Lord Jesus repeatedly mentioned "the last day," and 
declared that certain things would occur in the last day. 
We understand Him thus to be referring to the great 
Seventh Day, the thousand-year Day of His Kingdom. 
For instance, He said, in speaking of His disciples individually, 
"And I will raise him up at the last day." 

The Scriptures speak of the last Day as being the end 
of this present Dispensation, the end of the present reign 
of evil. Our Lord referred to the closing days of this 
Age when He said, "As it was in the days of Noah, so 
shall it be in the days of the Son of Man." All the 
Scriptures referring to this Day seem to point to the great 
commotion to come at this time. The Prophet Daniel 
seems to speak of the present Dispensation as a "time of 
trouble such as was not since there was a nation." This 



was to be, he declared, "in the time of the end." Our 
Lord speaks of it: "For then shall be great tribulation, 
such as was not since the beginning of the world to this 
time, no, nor ever shall be. And except those days be 

R5696 : page 164 

shortened, there should no flesh be saved; but for the 

Elect's sake those days shall be shortened." (Matthew 24:21-25.) 

St. Paul tells us that the fire of that Day shall 

try every man's work of what sort it is. The Apostle 

Peter describes it vividly in his second Epistle. That 

Day of trouble and the glory to follow are the theme of 

all the holy Prophets. 

The troubles of this Day are not all of the same nature. 
Jesus tells us that some of His followers will be accounted 
worthy to escape the troubles coming upon the world, 
which St. Peter says will involve the whole earth. In 
the fire of that Day, some who are children of God will 
be found to have built their house of wood, hay and 
stubble, even though building upon the true Foundation, 
Christ. All their superstructure will be burned, and 
themselves "saved as by fire," as the Apostle Paul tells 
us. Others of the Lord's children will be found to have 
built upon the true Foundation "gold, silver, and precious 
stones"; and thus their works will stand. They will have 
a superstructure of truth and loyalty to the Lord built 
upon the Foundation, and this will not be burned. Their 
building will stand the "fire" of this great Day. 

As the Apostle Paul in all his Epistles addresses himself 
to the saints in Christ Jesus, we understand these 
words (1 Corinthians 3:11-15) to refer only to those professing 
full consecration to the Lord, the Church of 
Christ. The true saints must all suffer; for as St. Paul 
forewarned, we must "through much tribulation enter into 
the Kingdom of God." (Acts 14:22.) "Hereunto were 
we called," St. Peter assures us. (1 Peter 2:21.) But all 
these things only work out for us an exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory, if we are properly exercised thereby. 

THE NOMINAL SYSTEMS OF TODAY 

But, as already intimated, we find a very large class 
today professing to be of the Church of Christ, and millions 
of money are being spent by these for the worship 
of God according to the ideas of the nominal church 
systems. Fine church edifices are built and dedicated to 
the Lord. Grand organs and trained choirs are furnished. 
Gymnasia, "smokers," culinary departments with 
dining-rooms, etc., are provided. These churches are supported 
by people a large number of whom are very noble 
in many respects. 

From one viewpoint it would seem that people who 
are spending so much money every year for church purposes 
must be quite religious and very anxious to do 
God's will. We read of how many millions of dollars 



New York City spends annually for its ministers, 
churches, etc., etc. But we find, in fact, that in all these 
churches there is a great deal of formalism. Those who 
sing their hymns are hired to do so, and they say that 
they have no particular interest in religion, but are merely 
doing it for so many dollars. Not many of the ministers 
will acknowledge that their service is of much the same 
nature, but there are those who think that the majority 
of them are serving in a similar manner. Does the Lord 
recognize and accept such service? (See Amos 5:20-23; 
Isaiah 1:13-15.) It is not for us to judge the heart; but 
on every side we find headiness, boastfulness, pride. 
We do not know how the Apostle Paul could better 
have described present conditions if he had been living 
here today. If anything is said to these zealous workers 
in the Churchianity of our day about the worldliness, 
pride and errors of the churches, there is a toss of the 
head, even though some of them acknowledge that there 
is much that they do not approve of. It is found necessary 
to have concerts, teas, frolics, etc., in the churches 
to raise money; for, it is claimed, if they did not have 
these things, nobody would come to church except the 
preachers and some who hold office, and who attend to 
perform the duties for which they are held responsible. 
One such church official said to the Editor of THE WATCH 
TOWER, "I am in duty bound to go to church so often, but 

1 will get out of the office as soon as I can." Having had 
the duty of Elder thrust upon him, he intended to escape 
from it as soon as possible. 

THE PRESENT IDOL OF CHRISTENDOM 

Money-love, acquisitiveness, seems to be the controlling 
factor today. True, many who have a great deal 
of money are giving it out by the millions of dollars; but 
ours is a money-loving day. And it is not merely the rich 
who have this love of money. We find it everywhere. 
The chief desire is to get money— not to lay it up in 
banks, but to spend it; people like the pleasures which 
money will buy. It is a money-spending time as well as 
a money-loving time. Pleasure holds riot today, and 
money is honored and everywhere sought. Our former 
superstitious ideas of the better blood of some than of 
others— "blue blood"— we in America have been largely 
relieved of. We have therefore not that love of aristocracy 
and so-called "noble birth" which prevails in the old 
world. People formerly believed that the kings and the 
nobility were of a different race altogether from the common 
people. But now love of money and of that which 
money will purchase— pleasure, power, influence— have 
driven the world mad. Money is worshiped as an idol. 
If one has money, he can get nearly anything he wants. 
Many such people have a form of godliness, without its 
power. The Apostle says, "From such turn away."— 

2 Timothy 3:4,5. 

This condition of things has grown by degrees. How 



shall we turn away from those who worship these false 

gods? We turn away in the sense that we do not follow 

in the same course. We keep our hearts from the love of 

pleasure and worldliness and from the greed of gain. 

We turn away from all these things, and go in a different 

direction. This seems to correspond with what the Lord 

says in Revelation 18:2,4. When revealing to the 

Apostle John the condition of Nominal Zion, in our day, 

and speaking prophetically as though in our day, He says, 

"Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen. ...Come out of 

her! The Lord's true people are to follow the Lord's 

direction here. They are to stand free from this bondage 

to error and worldliness, and set a good example to others 

also; and then they are to wait for the Lord's further instructions 

and for the accomplishment of His glorious 

purposes. We need not hope at all to turn the tide— one 

man or a thousand men or a million men would be powerless 

to turn the tide of Babylon today. She is fallen; 

therefore forsake her!— Jeremiah 5 1:6-9. 

R5697 : page 164 

OUR QUIET, CONFIDENT STRENGTH 

God entered into His rest when His creative works 
were finished in the earth, so we, the true Church, shall 
soon enter into our rest, the perfect rest beyond the veil. 
God has placed the whole matter in the hands of Christ 
to accomplish in the appointed time. We have confidence 
in the Lord and in His times and seasons; therefore we 
are very restful, and in coming out of Babylon we are not 
worried nor anxious and distressed about others. God 
will bring order out of all the prevailing confusion. All 
who will prove worthy of everlasting life will ultimately 
be glad to work in the way the Lord shall direct. 

The world today is drunk with certain false doctrines, 
and do not know what they are doing. If we were with 
people who were hilarious, intoxicated, we would better 

R5697 : page 165 

not try to sober them up, but stop association with them. 

Yet there may be some in that company who would love 

to be as we— free to serve the Lord. It is our duty to 

help everybody who is feeling after the Lord and amenable 

in any degree to the Word of Truth. We are to do 

good to all men as we have opportunity, "especially unto 

them who are of the Household of Faith." (Galatians 6:10.) 

It is to this end that we have been circulating the 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, THE BIBLE STUDENTS 

MONTHLY, and holding meetings and showing THE 

PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, so that other earnest souls 

may, like ourselves, stand free from the general trend of 

our day and may live a life of sacrifice, and thus be prepared 

for the high exaltation coming to those who are 

faithful to God— a reward that we believe is now near at 



hand. Those who are thus prepared and panoplied with 
the whole armor of God will be kept in a condition of 
quietness and confidence known to no others in this great 
Day of stress, turmoil and shaking. 

PRESENT "SIGNS OF THE SON OF MAN" 

The way by which the Lord informs His faithful, 
watching ones of the import of present conditions in the 
world and of the nearness of Christ's glorious Reign, is 
through outward signs corroborating what we now see 
Bible chronology to indicate. A sign is an indication. 
The putting up of a baker's sign indicates that bread is 
to be bought there; a butcher's sign, that meat is for sale 
at that place, etc. Then we have the sign, or indication 
of coming storms, or of fair weather. We are not to expect 
to see shining letters across the sky or anything of 
that kind to indicate the Lord's presence; but there has 
been a sign in the Church for some time now— about forty 
years— the reaping of the ripe wheat. This has been a 
sign of the Parousia of the Son of Man. It has not been 
possible for the world to discern this sign. We also have 
the sign of the barren fig tree, the Jewish nation, putting 
forth its leaves. We see the foretold worldliness of the 
church systems. We see the beginning of the smiting 
of the nations. 

When the great Time of Trouble shall break, the world 
will begin to see that a new order of things is somehow 
coming about; that a great change is impending. Conditions 
have not been so previously. As men see that the 
Son of Man is about to take His great power and that the 
Messianic Kingdom is coming in, they will be apprehensive, 
not appreciating the fact that this Kingdom is 
designed for the blessing of all. For a time they will not 
grasp the full situation. They will see the trouble, the 
paralysis of business, the distress of nations, socialism, 
anarchism, and their hearts will fail them for fear of the 
things approaching. 

But all these things are now signs to us that the Lord 
is making ready to establish His Kingdom and is preparing 
for the fall of the Gentile kingdoms. This, however, 
will not at first be distinguishable to the world in general 
under the flaming fire of trouble. They will not know 
what to make of these things. We think that the majority 
of people are somewhat perplexed today. Men who 
are very prominent in social matters, financial matters, 
religious matters, are in great perplexity. Many of them 
are beginning to discuss the idea that the Kingdom of 
God is really approaching. 

We are told by some of our friends who attended the 
great Peace Meeting held here in New York City last 
fall that the prominent speakers participating, among 
them the Vice President of the United States, made 
numerous references to the Prince of Peace as being just 
at the door. The Millennium was referred to in like 
manner. We do not know what this means, except that 



they think that the Son of Man is now coming in His 
Kingdom. We think that their perplexity will increase 
as they see still greater stress— financial stress, social 
stress— and as we enter the great Time of Trouble, "a 
time of trouble such as never was since there was a 
nation." A Hebrew gentleman was telling the Editor 
that the Jews in Jerusalem are starving to death. To the 
four millions of Jews living in Galicia and Austria it 
seems to make no difference whether one army or the 
other passes through the country; for the Jews always 
suffer. Wherever the armies have marched, the homes 
have been devastated and the land laid waste. Recently 
the Jews have held a Mass Meeting in New York to collect 
money for their brethren in Galicia and in Palestine. 

If any of you should meet a banker, should you engage 
in conversation with him, you will see his face grow very 
sober. In some instances the tears will come into his 
eyes when speaking of the alarming conditions in finance 
today. Many wealthy people will say that when this war 
broke out they were worth a hundred thousand dollars, 
but that they do not now know what they are worth. 
Their stocks and bonds are not salable. So there is today 
a trouble that reaches increasingly throughout the earth, 
affecting not only all Christendom, but heathendom as well. 

VIEW FROM CLEFT IN THE ROCK 

As our own eyes of understanding have opened, we 
have sought to show to the Church, and to the world as 
far as possible, the great Divine Plan of the Ages— wonderful, 
beautiful, far superior to anything human! Bible 
students the world over are reading the Bible and the 
signs of the times in a new light; for God's own time has 
come for lifting the veil of ignorance and darkness which 
for so long He has permitted Satan to put before our 
eyes. To our understanding the present war is pictured 
in the Bible, as due to begin in 1914. It is a great "wind." 

Following the great war, the Bible teaches, a great 
earthquake— social revolution— will take place. In connection 
with that earthquake will come an exaltation of 
religious sects, Catholic and Protestant, on the side of the 
kings and princes— political, social, financial, religious. 
Next will come the downfall of all present religious systems. 
Speedily the symbolic "fire" of the Bible will consume 
the earth— anarchy. Following the anarchy quickly 
will come the long-promised Kingdom of God, for which 
Christians have prayed, saying, "Thy Kingdom come," 
most of them with but little conception of the true meaning 
of their words. During the Reign of that Kingdom, 
"a still small voice," the Message of Truth and Grace, 
will come to all mankind. The world's uplift will progress; 
and the knowledge of the glory of the Lord shall 
gradually fill the whole earth. The longed-for haven of 
rest will then be attained, "the desire of all nations." 

"MY SHEEP HEAR"-AND FOLLOW 



All the true disciples of Jesus will see and hear in this 
present "due time." "My sheep hear My voice," said 
the Master. If any, therefore, are in Babylon and 
do not hear the voice of the Lord now calling them out 
of this great apostate System, our plain inference is that 
they are not His true sheep. This does not mean that all 
will hear at the same moment. Some are dull of hearing; 
they may not be living very near to the Lord. But so 
surely as they are His sheep they will hear; and so surely 
as they are following in His steps they will hear clearly, 
and obey promptly. They will be eager to come out of 
Babylon before her plagues come like a deluge, as they 
will soon come. We who now have the light should hold 
up the Lord's Message and point other Christians to the 

R5697 : page 166 

present condition of things, and let them hear the Lord 
and then make their decision. 

"PLAGUES" UPON BABYLON 

The "seven last plagues" to be visited especially upon 
Christendom do not mean a particular disease, as the 
black plague or cholera; but the word stands for trouble. 
The Scriptures indicate what these are— death, famine, 
revolution, distress, overthrow. These distresses will be 
both physical and mental. It will be a great trouble and 
distress to Babylon when she realizes that her walls are 
fallen. She has realized for some time that there was 
danger of a collapse, and has been seeking to repel anything 
that might come near to injure her walls. Many 
good people have been fighting for these denominations, 
thinking that they represent the Lord's people— being 
themselves bound more or less by the institutions of the 
present time. 

We do not think that the Gospel Age fully ended in 
September 1914, but merely the Times of the Gentiles. 
The Gospel Age will not fully end, we believe, until the 
Gospel Message ends; and that will be when the door is 
shut, when the last member of the Very Elect shall have 
passed beyond the veil. It is our understanding that the 
elect Church of Christ, the Bride, will not remain in the 
flesh to do much of the teaching of the world, but will 
be glorified in the Kingdom either before or during the 
great Time of Trouble, and be ready to supervise the 
world's instruction from the spirit plane. The great conflict 
is before us. The Prophet Isaiah (63:1-6) depicts 
in very strong language the work of our Lord Jesus 
among the nations at this time and in the days just ahead. 

R5698 : page 166 

"He hath trodden the wine-press alone, and all His garments 
are stained with blood," the wrath of God. See 



STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. 4, pp. 18,19, and p. 51, 
par. 1. We believe that this work has already begun in 
the present European war, which is growing in severity 
and awfulness day by day. 

After the Church shall have been glorified beyond the 
veil, the Ancient Worthies are to be her representatives 
in the world, taking oversight of the instruction of the 
peoples and ruling in human affairs; after the Messiah has 
commanded "Peace" to the angry nations and bidden the 
raging billows be calm. But there may be yet for a little 
while— just how long we cannot surely know— some work 
for the Church to do for the world this side the veil, before 
the Time of Trouble fully sets in, or at the time of 
its beginning. If so, we believe that this instruction to 
the world is now in progress. 

"Whoso is wise, and will observe these things, even 
they shall understand the loving-kindness of the Lord," 
even though for a brief space His righteous sword shall 
be unsheathed for the punishment of iniquity and the 
overthrow of Satan's great Empire. 



R5698 : page 166 

GENTLENESS A CHARACTERISTIC OF THE CHRIST 

"The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all 
men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that 
oppose themselves."— 2 Timothy 2:24,25. 

THE words of our text were addressed by the 

Apostle Paul to Timothy, an Elder of the 

Church. The Lord's people, all who belong 

to the Body of Christ, are sons of God; 

nevertheless, they are all servants— bond-servants 

of Jesus Christ. Every true son 

would desire to serve the interests of his 

father, especially ajust, loving father; and 

every faithful servant would wish to serve 

the interests of his master or his employer, 

particularly a noble, worthy employer or master. Our 

Lord Jesus, who was the special Son of the Heavenly 

Father, made Himself Servant of all, in order that He 

might serve the Father's interests, accomplish His will. 

Our text is applicable to any servant of God, any 
member of the Church of Christ, whether he holds office 
among the brethren or not. It is an injunction which 
applies to all of the Church. Every spirit-begotten child 
of God is to teach according to his opportunity and ability, 
under the limitations of sex, etc., given in the Scriptures. 
"The Spirit of the Lord GOD is upon Me; because 
the LORD hath anointed Me to preach good tidings unto 
the meek; He hath sent Me to bind up the broken-hearted, 
to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening 
of the prison to them that are bound." (Isaiah 61:1.) 



These words of the Prophet apply to every member 
of The Christ, Head and Body. 

PROPER MANNER OF PRESENTING THE TRUTH 

But the Message of the Good Tidings that the Lord 
has given us to proclaim is not one to be forced upon 
people. To be proper servants of the Lord, and in harmony 
with His arrangements, we must not strive, must 
not argue or quarrel. In meekness we are to instruct, 
not with an air of superiority, or a desire to show how 
much we know. Our Message is for those who have "an 
ear to hear." We are not to force ourselves upon people, 
not to intrude upon them, in order to make them 
hear. While we are to be ready to sacrifice our own 
interests to proclaim the Message of our faith, yet in so 
doing we are not to be strifeful, malicious or contentious. 

We would not say of those who are inclined to be 
contentious in presenting the Truth that they are not 
members of Christ, but evidently they have not learned 
the better way. They have not sufficiently developed the 
quality of love; they are lacking in Heavenly wisdom in 
this respect. On one occasion two of our Lord's disciples 
came from a city of Samaria, the inhabitants of 
which would not sell them food, and indignantly asked 
of Jesus whether they should call fire down from Heaven 
to destroy them. In reply our Lord said, "Ye know not 
what manner of spirit ye are of. For the Son of Man 
came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them." 
(Luke 9:55,56.) So there are some today who are ready 

R5699 : page 166 

to quarrel on every occasion. Although this tendency 
does not prove that they are not children of the Lord, 
nevertheless, it demonstrates that they are not in the 
right attitude, that improvement is necessary. 

The things pleasing to God are inculcated in the 
Scriptures. The Lord's followers are to be gentle to all 
men— not only to the brethren in the Church, but to all 
others. They are not to be strife-breeders, not always 
getting into a wrangle, but long-suffering, considerate of 
the opinions and preferences of others. There may be 
times when a Christian is put into a position where he 
will be forced to defend himself; but it is one thing to 
defend one's self in a reasonable way, and quite another 
to be strifeful and aggressive. 

In endeavoring to carry the Truth to others, we 
should remember that our faith is not to be presented to 
everybody. "Cast not your pearls before swine." They 
will not appreciate your pearls. They will wish to do 
you injury because of not appreciating them. But while 
not strifeful, we are to be on the alert to hold forth the 
Word of Life. If the Truth is attacked and honest souls 

R5699 : page 167 



are in danger of being stumbled, we must, as the Apostle 
enjoined, "contend earnestly for the faith once delivered 
to the saints." (Jude 3.) This does not mean, however, 
that we are to be quarrelsome, or to be disputatious, in 
the ordinarily accepted use of those terms. We are to 
be ever ready to proclaim the Truth on every suitable 
occasion— with moderation, meekness and humility, but 
with earnestness and zeal; for this is our business. If 
those to whom we present the Message of Truth are in 
the proper attitude, they will desire it. It is right, therefore, 
for us to be ready to lay down our lives in defense 
of the Truth and its interests. 

The more cool, calm and self-possessed we are when 
opposed, the better we can defend and recommend the 
Message we bear. The greater the contrast between our 
spirit and that of our opposer, the stronger will be our 
argument for the Truth in the minds of others who may 
hear; and the more likely shall we be to disarm prejudice 
in the mind of the opposing one, if he be sincere and 
honest of heart. One who loses his self-control and becomes 
combative and disputatious defeats his own cause. 
One should never lose his head. He will be sure to say 
things that were better left unsaid and to manifest by 
tone and manner that he is not actuated by the Spirit of 
the Master. More harm than good might result from 
such a mistake. We are always to present the Message 
gently, kindly, forcefully. It may be necessary to be 
positive in our statements, but the spirit of the presentation 
is to be gentle, whether in private or in public. 

QUALIFICATION OF A TRUE TEACHER 

The Apostle says that the servant of the Lord should 
be "apt to teach." (1 Timothy 3:2; 2 Tim. 2:24.) St. 
Paul was here especially addressing an Elder in the Ecclesia. 
To be apt to teach is to have the teaching ability. 
Not all have the ability, the gift, of making things plain 
to others. There are some people who the more they 
say the less they are understood. If there are some who 
find themselves in this condition, they should use printed 
matter and then try to learn how to present the Message 
in a way that will be assimilable to the minds of others 
—making it clear, plain and logical. In the presentation 
of the Message to others patience is necessary. Be willing 
to go over the point again and again, having sympathy 
with those you are instructing, remembering how difficult 
you found it when you were trying to emerge from 
darkness into the light. 

Whether presenting the Truth publicly or in private, 
never assume an air of superiority, never manifest 
haughtiness. Never allow yourself to become so irritated 
as to say, "I know more about this in five minutes than 
you do in a year"; nor even imply this thought in the 
expression of your face, or in tone or manner. You see, 
you can express yourself in these four different ways at 



once; but any one of the four would be sufficient to place 
a barrier between yourself and those whom you were 
endeavoring to interest. You are to be meek, lowly of 
heart, humble. 

If some one presents to you an argument or a Scripture 
that he thinks contradicts your position, say to him, 
"Well, brother, let us see whether that is in harmony 
with the teachings of the Bible. We must accept as 
Truth only that which will harmonize all the statements 
of the Word of God. Let us prove the matter." Have a 
meek, teachable manner, one which shows that you are 
willing to learn from another if he can teach you something 
from the sure Word of the Lord. Thus your opponent 
will be more willing to hear what you have to 
say, if he is disposed to be at all reasonable. 

Undoubtedly the Lord's people are learning more and 
more the lesson inculcated in our text— "the servant of 
the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all." It is 
a lesson that all must learn, Elders and Deacons and 
every member of the Body of Christ. It is necessary to 
our own character-building, and necessary in order that 
we may do more effective service for the Master. When 
at first we buckled on the armor and took up the Sword 
of the Spirit, we probably did some flourishing, and perhaps 
often did more harm than good. We felt that we 
had something that no one could argue down. But we 
have been learning to be more gentle, more wise, more 
patient, more loving; and thus we have become better 
qualified to be instructors of others. We have seen how 
we may injure the Cause of the Lord by a wrong presentation 
of the Truth, and how by proper presentation we 
may become more successful in doing the Lord's work, 
in reaching hungry hearts, and more pleasing to our 
great King, whom we all love and long to serve. 



R5698 : page 167 

FAITH THE MAINSPRING OF CONSECRATION 

"Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering 
for He is faithful that promised."— Hebrews 10:23. 

THE Apostle is here writing to some in the 

early Church who had given evidence of 

wavering, who were failing properly to hold 

on. He is telling them that while they had 

been faithful at one time they apparently 

had become lukewarm, at least, respecting 

the Lord and the Christian way. He intimates 

that the firmness of faith in the 

child of God, and the firmness with which 

he holds the profession of his faith, has 

much to do with his consistency in Christian life. Our 

faith was the mainspring that led each of us to make a 



consecration to the Lord. We believed that God had provided 
the Redeemer for the forgiveness of sin. We believed 
that we would be acceptable and our sins forgiven 
through the Lord Jesus Christ; and that we would be made 
sons of God, heirs of God, and joint-heirs with the Lord 
Jesus. These were the inspiring incentives that first led 
us to God. They served a good purpose in leading us to 
the decisive step. 

St. Paul says that these Hebrew Christians had witnessed 
a good profession; but some of them, at least, had 
been growing more or less indifferent. He declares that 
although by this time they should have been teachers, they 
needed to themselves be taught again what were "the first 
principles of the oracles of God." They had lost part of 
their faith, their assurance in the Lord. 

We all know from experience how things that are 
brought before our minds may afterwards become dim and 
hazy. When spiritual things become thus hazy, when we 
cannot grasp spiritual verities as once we could, when we 
are fearful and our joy in Christ is fading, we are getting 
away from this mainspring of our consecration. We 
are losing our faith. So let us earnestly hold fast to this 
anchor of our souls lest we drift and be dashed upon the 
rocks. Unless we do hold fast to our faith we shall lose 
everything; for "without faith it is impossible to please 
God." Without faith it would be impossible to gird on 
the armor and go forth to fight the good fight. We would 
never go out to a battle that we did not believe existed, 

R5698 : page 168 

or to a battle that we did not believe would bring any results, 
any reward for the hardships and suffering involved. 

OUR PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY 

The Apostle's argument is that we should hold fast the 
faith which began our Christian life and which is also to 
be the finisher of our Christian life. The Lord is able to 
carry us through and He will do it, if we do our part. 
But the terms on which the Lord has received us are that 
we purpose to abide faithful. Hence everything depends 
on our holding fast to this faith which we have professed, 
without wavering, without harboring any doubts and 
fears; and the basis of our faith in our ultimate triumph 
is the assurance that "He is faithful that promised." We 
know that in the Bible there are "exceeding great and 
precious promises" for us. While the Lord tells us that 
there is nothing in ourselves that we can depend on, He 
assures us that His grace is sufficient, that His strength 
is made perfect in our weakness. We have only to lay 
hold upon it. If therefore we hold fast to our faith, we 
may obtain all that God has promised us. He will be 
faithful; He will not disregard His promises; He will do 
all that He has said. 

If we hesitate and waver we are either losing our faith 



or losing the spirit of obedience and love. If, therefore, 
we realize that either of these conditions exists, we should 
go at once to the Word of God and to prayer, that our 
faith, love and zeal may be renewed. We should scrutinize 
our hearts day by day, to make sure that we are still loyal 
to the Lord, to see whether we are seeking to lay down 
our lives according to our covenant, to see whether we 
are developing the fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit. 
Thus we shall fulfil our vows, and there shall be "an 
abundant entrance" administered unto us into the "everlasting 
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." 

"Awake, my soul, awake! 

The precious days are flying! 
Yield not to ease nor sloth, 

The far-spent day is dying. 

"Up, and gird on thy Sword! 

Didst dream the battle ended? 
The last fight's on— and no such Cause 

Was ever yet defended! 

"Not yet, but soon, the Prize- 
One last, supreme endeavor 

Is thine, and then the Crown, 
The bliss, the joy, forever!" 



R5699 : page 168 

"WHO IS MY NEIGHBOR?" 

"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."— Matthew 22:39. 

THESE words were quoted by our Lord in His 

summarizing of the Ten Commandments. 

Dividing the Ten Commandments into two 

parts, He showed that one part related to 

the duty and obligation toward God, and the 

other to the duty and obligation toward fellowmen, 

toward the neighbor. The first 

part calls for all the love of our heart, our 

being, our mind, our strength, for the Lord 

and His service; and the second part, which 

relates to humanity, calls for us to love our neighbor as 

we love ourselves. 

In a special sense the Jews recognized themselves as 
being God's people. Therefore under the Law they 
recognized each other as neighbors; for they were all the 
people of the Lord. But they thought that while they 
should cordially love their neighbors, they should hate 
their enemies— all the outside nations that God did not 
recognize. However, the fact that God had in the past 
commanded them to slay or drive out the surrounding 
nations did not mean that the Jews should hate them and 



wish to do them real injury. Our Lord seems to indicate 
that the Jews had taken a wrong view of matters. He 
taught them that to love their enemies, and to do good to 
those who persecuted them, was the better way. He 
showed them that they should have a broad view, a 
benevolence that would take in all the world. 

To this effect He on one occasion gave them a parable 
—that of the Good Samaritan. In that parable He pictured 
a man who was not a Jew ministering to a Jew who 
had been injured. A Jewish priest had seen the wounded 
man and had passed by on the other side. Likewise a 
Levite, not so close in relationship to God as the priest, 
is represented as looking at the man and then also passing 
on the other side. Then came this stranger, a Samaritan, 
one not in relationship to God at all. The Samaritan 
promptly served the injured man— anointed him and bound 
up his wounds. The man had been assaulted, robbed and 
maltreated. The Samaritan "set him on his own beast 
and brought him to an inn and took care of him." He 
remained over night with the injured man, and when he 
left in the morning he gave some money to the inn-keeper 
and said to him, "Take care of him; and whatsoever thou 
spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee." 
(Luke 10:29-35.) Jesus declared that in this Samaritan 
of the parable they had an example of one who was a 
real neighbor. 

This parable is also for our instruction today. If we 
appreciate the conception of a true neighbor which our 
Lord gave, and say that we have the same conception, 
then let us observe this Golden Rule: Whatsoever I would 
have you do unto me, let me do even so unto you. And 
if you feel that if you were on the roadside, plundered and 
injured by highwaymen, you would wish that some one 
would help you, then do the same to others, if you have 
opportunity. And so in all things. From this viewpoint 
the whole world are neighbors, no matter how far apart 
they are— whether they live on our side of the earth or 
on the opposite side. This the broad, general view shows 
our relationship and obligation to all the world, to one 
the same as another. All are our neighbors. All should 
be treated in a neighborly way as we have opportunity. 
There is no exception. 

It will not do to say that one should be kind merely to 
those who have been kind to him, that to such only are 
we to act the part of a neighbor. In that event, the 
Samaritan would not have been the neighbor. He might 
have thought that as nobody had found him by the wayside 

R5700 : page 168 

and done anything for him, he consequently would 
not do anything either. The Lord, in this parable, and in 
His statement of the spirit of the Law as related to our 
fellow-men, was laying down a principle that all should 
be neighbors and treat each other in a kind, neighborly 
manner, which is the only proper rule amongst mankind. 



We are to express our love for our neighbor by being 
thoughtful and considerate of his welfare and interests, 
and helpful to him as far as is in our power, other 
obligations being considered. 

When we come to the Church, there is a special relationship 
and bond between its members. We are to love 
one another as Jesus loved us. This is a new commandment. 
The Golden Rule is not a new commandment; for 

R5700 : page 169 

it properly belonged to man when God created him, and 
is designed to be the rule of life. The Jewish Law, as it 
related to the attitude of the people of Israel toward one 
another, had for its essence the Golden Rule. But Jesus 
said to His disciples, "A new commandment I give unto 
you." He meant this: Those who have become New 
Creatures have a new relationship; they belong to a new 
family— the family of God. 

Our brethren on the spirit plane are nearest to us of 
any. Whoever is a New Creature, and thus a brother to 
all those who are New Creatures, is not merely to observe 
the Golden Rule, but is to be ready to do toward any and 
all of the brethren as Jesus did; namely, to lay down his 
life for them. He is not to say, "I would lay down my 
life for him, and so I expect him to be willing to lay down 
his life for me." No! Regardless of his own interests 
and life, regardless of what others do or do not for him, 
he is to be willing to spend and be spent for the blessing 
of the brethren. He is to have sacrificial love, which goes 
beyond the Golden Rule. Thus are we to be true disciples. 



R5700 : page 169 

THANKLESS, REBELLIOUS ABSALOM 

-JULY 4.-2 SAMUEL 18:1-15.- 

THE STORY OF ABSALOM-HOW DIFFERENT FROM HIS FATHER 
-HIS WASTED OPPORTUNITIES-HIS CONTEMPTIBLE END 
AS A TRAITOR AND DISOBEDIENT SON WHO SOUGHT HIS 
FATHER'S LIFE-THE BOY THE FATHER OF THE MAN- 
THE RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS-THE CHILD WHAT 
THE PARENTS MAKE HIM-EUGENICS NOT SUFFICIENT. 

"Children, obey your parents in 
the Lord; for this is right."— Ephesians 6:1. 

"How sharper than a serpent's tooth it is 
To have a thankless child!" 
OUR Study of today discusses the death of 
Absalom. It is sufficiently explicit without 
comment. It will be of value to us, however, 
to look backward along the life of this 



young prince and to note some of his failures. 

In the first place, he was not well-born. 

His mother, King David's wife, was 

the daughter of a heathen king nearby. His 

mother may have been beautiful, probably 

was; for the Scriptures indicate that Absalom 

was a beautiful boy, a beautiful young man, having 

a fine, courteous manner and being a popular idol. He 

had the disadvantage of being a member of the royal 

family and not being required to labor with sweat of face. 

Absalom is first brought prominently to our attention 
by his murder of his half-brother Amnon, to avenge his 
sister's honor. For this he fled to the protection of his 
grandfather. He was thus still further removed from 
any good influences associated with his father and with 
the true religion. After several years' absence, his father, 
who had never ceased to love him and mourn him, was 
induced to invite Absalom back to Jerusalem— where for 
two years more, he declined to receive his son into his 
presence. All of these influences were unfavorable to the 
young man, but none of them can excuse his treachery 
to his father, Israel's king. 

ABSALOM'S CONSPIRACY 

There were judges throughout the Land of Israel for 
the deciding of the ordinary causes of discontent; but 
when their decisions were unsatisfactory, appeal was 
made to the king as to a superior court. King David was 
busily engaged in preparing the materials for the Temple, 
which was not to be built until after his death. This may 
to some extent have hindered him from his work for the 
people as a superior judge, so that some of their cases, as 
in every superior court, were delayed of a hearing— 
tediously, it seemed to those impatient for desired results. 

We are not sure, however, that there was anything 
lacking on King David's part as respects the administration 
of justice. We merely know that his crafty son, 
Absalom, made himself very popular. He was very 
gracious to the people, very familiar with them, always 
ready to hear their complaints; and he answered them 
very cunningly, expressing sorrow for their delay, and 
saying, Would that I were king! It would be different! 
Thus by deception, by intrigue, by falsehood, we read, he 
"stole the hearts of the people" from his father. The 
people really began to think that if they had such a man 
for a king, they would be immensely better off. They 
seemed to have overlooked entirely the fact that God was 
the King of Israel; and that, as the Bible says, King David 
merely sat upon the Throne of the Lord.— 1 Chron. 29:23. 

Absalom was spectacular, a beautiful prince, with long, 
wavy hair. He rode in his chariot; and before him were 
fifty swift runners, his heralds. The thoughtless people 
admired this; and, apparently, at least one wise man was 
drawn away by the infectious infatuation of this glitter. 

Absalom knew of his father's religious sentiments, 



which apparently he did not at all share. He realized 
that he would not probably be his father's choice for a 
successor; and that the time for a new king was not so 
very far off, as King David was becoming aged. Following 
Satan's course of ambition and disloyalty to God, 
Absalom became disloyal to his father. He recruited an 
army, proclaimed himself king, and did the matter so 
quickly and so thoroughly, with the sympathy of so many 
people whose hearts he had stolen, that King David and 
his regular army and the loyal ones of his court were 
obliged to flee for their lives. Our lesson recounts the 
battle which was fought between the superior forces of 
Absalom and the smaller forces of King David, who, 
however, were better trained soldiers. The victory came 
to King David. Absalom was slain, notwithstanding 
David's urgent request of his soldiers that they should 
not kill the young man, his son. 

What a contrast we have here between the man after 
God's own heart and the man whom the people admired— 
the flashy, the showy, the ambitious, the deceitful, the 
intriguing, the rebellious, who sought his father's life! 
The man of God, notwithstanding his weaknesses, which 
were acknowledged and repented of, had a heart of loyalty 
to God, true as the needle to the pole; and he had a sympathetic 
love for his son which found expression in that 
notable dirge, "O Absalom, my son, my son, would God 
I had died for thee!" 

A VERY IMPORTANT PRINCIPLE 

The human will is wonderful, so that we might almost 
say that each boy is responsible for his own career. Our 
expression, a self-made man, is therefore not far wrong. 

This, however, does not excuse the parent whose duty 
it is to see that a proper child is born into the world, 
reasonably gifted— not merely outwardly beautiful, but 
conscientious, just, loyal to God and to the principles of 
righteousness. Nor does it excuse the parent from giving 
the child proper conceptions of life, proper instruction; 
for the Scriptures say, "Train up a child in the way he 

R5700 : page 170 

should go; and when he is old, he will not depart from 
it."— Proverbs 22:6. 

It seems pitiful indeed that, with all the preaching and 
teaching of centuries, so few parents realize their obligations 
toward the children they bring into the world. So 
few fathers realize that they are the protectors and caretakers 
of their wives and of their off-spring; and that 
not only is it their duty and privilege to select a noble, 
conscientious wife to be the mother of the family, but it 
is also their duty to place her under favorable conditions 
during the period of gestation, and generally to assist her 
to keep her mind and her heart pure, loving, noble, loyal 
to God and to righteous principles, to the intent that their 



child may be well birthmarked, of noble character— less 
seriously marked and blemished with sin than would 
otherwise be the case. Well do the Scriptures declare that 
the people perish for lack of knowledge.— Hosea 4:6. 

True, we have eugenics thrust upon our attention 
everywhere; but to what purpose? Important as this 
teaching is in respect to health and proper choice of a 
life-companion, it sinks into insignificance in comparison 
to the principle we are noting; namely, that the mind of 
the mother during the period of gestation is stamping and 
impressing, favorably or unfavorably, the character of her 
child. It of course would not be possible for a mother to 
produce a perfect child; but with her own ideals high and 
true and unwavering, fixed upon things pure, noble and 
good, we know beyond question that her child would thus 
be greatly benefited both physically and intellectually, 
and also morally. On the other hand, as we have pointed 
out in the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, the perfect 
mother, Eve, could and did mark her son Cain with 
a jealous, unhappy disposition, which eventuated in his 
murdering his brother. 



R5701 :page 170 

SOLOMON, KING OF ISRAEL 

-JULY 11. -1 KINGS 1:1 TO 2:12.- 

KING DAVID AGED-A FRESH REVOLT BREWING-SOLOMON 
CALLED TO THE THRONE OF ISRAEL-HIS ANOINTING AS THE 

LORD'S CHOICE-THE APPROVAL OF THE MULTITUDE 
-THE MEANING OF HIS NAME-HIS NATURAL ADVANTAGES 
AND PREPARATION FOR HIS HONORS. 

"Know thou the God of thy father, and serve Him with a 
perfect heart and with a willing mind."— 1 Chronicles 28:9. 

KING DAVID was seventy years of age; Absalom, 

his eldest son, had died in rebellion not 

long before the present lesson opens. 

David's next oldest son was Adonijah, 

whom the death of Absalom had made the 

heir-apparent to the throne, and who is supposed 

to have been between thirty and forty 

years of age at this time. Joab, for a long 

time the head of David's army, must have 

been well-advanced in years too, and probably 

was on the retired list, not merely on account of age, 

but because he had deeply wounded King David's feelings 

in disregarding his instructions that Absalom's life should 

not be taken. 

Adonijah thought the time ripe for him to proclaim 
himself king, and especially as he had succeeded in gaining 
the friendship of Joab, the long-time military leader, 



and the friendship, too, of one of the prominent priests. 
He made a feast, to which were invited, apparently, all 
of King David's sons except Solomon, who was ostensibly 
known to be more or less a favorite with his father. The 
feast was held not far from Jerusalem, and the arrangement 
was made that in the midst of the feast one of the 
company should salute Adonijah as king. The others of 
his company were expected to echo the sentiment; and 
thus the movement would seemingly be a popular one and 
not a rebellion. It carried out much as planned thus far. 

However, in God's providence, the matter was brought 
to the notice of King David, who promptly made the arrangement 
with the new general, Benaiah, with Nathan 
the Prophet, and with Zadok the priest, to have Solomon 
immediately placed upon the king's white mule, as a sign 
that the king had approved him as his successor. Then 
he was anointed in the name of the Lord; and forthwith 
the military salute was given, and the people of the whole 
city of Jerusalem shouted their joy, "Long live King 
Solomon." Next in turn, by King David's direction, King 
Solomon was brought to the throne and publicly crowned. 

Adonijah, whose plans seemed to be working thoroughly, 
was astounded, and so were those with him, when 
they heard the clamor of the people, blowing of horns, 
etc., and later learned that it meant that Solomon had 
been crowned and enthroned. Adonijah feared for his 
life and fled; and his adherents melted away. Later, 
however, Solomon sent word to his brother Adonijah, 
assuring him of peace. 

Thus beautifully King David's public career ended, 
not in an eclipse, but at his zenith, in his full maturity of 
old age, and in his perpetuation upon the throne in the 
person of his chosen son. To him may well be applied 
the poet's words: 

"He sets as sets the morning star, 

Which goes not down behind the darkened west, 
Nor hides obscured amid the tempests of the sky, 
But melts away into the light of heaven." 

SOLOMON, SON OF PEACE 

Solomon's name has come to signify wisdom; but 
originally, primarily, it meant Peaceful. It surely was a 
prophecy of his wonderful life, in which was no war. 

Solomon was the son of Bathsheba, after she had 
legally become David's wife. Somehow, not explained, 
the Lord had revealed to David that Solomon was to be 
his successor; and David had promised Bathsheba to this 
effect. Solomon was born at a period when King David's 
activities as a warrior had very nearly closed and 
when the great double sin of King David's life 
and his repentance from it had, we believe, wonderfully 
moderated and chastened him. His loyalty 
to God in this serious matter, his earnest prayer 
for forgiveness and his realization of peace from God, 



apparently had made a new man of King David. Even 
though before this he had been loyal to God, he apparently 
was now still more devoted. The peace which he craved, 
and which was a mark of Divine forgiveness, may have 
had something to do with the gentle and thoughtful character 
of King Solomon, and something also perhaps to 
do with his name. It may have been given him as signifying 
that his birth marked peace with God on the part of 
his parents. 

In any event, in Solomon we perceive a different 
character from that manifested by any of his brethren 
whose histories are recorded. He partook of his father 
David's religious disposition more than the others. He 
was thus highly favored, and really probably more 
gifted. Truly it is time for us to estimate to what extent 

R5701 :page 171 

others and ourselves are handicapped or blessed by dispositions 
and character-traits which we inherit. 

Another thing favorable to Solomon would appear to 
have been the fact that his mother was not of a heathen 
family, but an Israelite, and therefore more in sympathy 
with the Divine arrangement, Law, worship, etc., than 
others of David's wives. 

Additionally, the Record seems to show that King 
David, having in mind a successor to his throne, and perhaps 
by that time having realized that he had not done 
his full duty by his other children in allowing them 
to grow up under the adverse influences of the court, 
rectified the matter in the case of Solomon while he was 
still young, leaving him partly in his mother's care, and 
appointing him as the ward and pupil of the Prophet 
Nathan. This excellent start in life doubtless had much 
to do with Solomon's career, which we shall examine in 
our next Study. 



R5701 :page 171 

DIFFERENT PHASES OF THE WORD TEMPTATION 

"Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; 
for God cannot be tempted of evil, neither tempteth He any 
man. But every man is tempted when he is drawn away 
of his own lust [desire], and enticed."— James 1:13,14. 

MANY people— and particularly those of oriental 
countries— have within them a fatalistic 
tendency; as, for instance, the Mohammedans 
would be inclined to say respecting 
any calamity that came upon them, "It is of 
God," and simply to submit themselves and 
make no further effort. These people would 
be inclined to have a similar attitude in respect 



to sin, and to say, "It is God's will 

that I should do wrong; and I am not, therefore, 

blameworthy. If His will is that I should sin, I 

will sin. If His will is that I should bear the marks of 

sin, I will bear the marks of sin." This is a grave error. 

God tempts no man to sin. 

It is, of course, quite proper that we should recognize 
God's hand in His dealings with us and should be very 
submissive. But the Apostle points out that temptations 
are not of God, but of one's self. Many Christians are 
inclined to take the opposite standpoint to that of the 
Orientals and say, "There are no temptations from God; 
hence all our temptations are from the Adversary." 

But the Apostle James points out that our temptations 
are the result of our own natural desires and weaknesses. 
These are stimulated from without— often from our companions 
and associates in life. All about us there are 
examples and influences toward evil, in various forms- 
enticements. These might be charged back primarily to 
Satan; for all sin entered into the world by him. Satan 
had to do with the beguilement of our first parents, and 
so had to do with the introduction of sin. And Satan 
and his demon hosts now operate, as far as possible, in 
conjunction with our weaknesses. But this does not clear 
us of personal responsibility; for none of these have 
power to coerce our wills. Our responsibility may vary 
according to the natural strength or weakness of our 
character. Therefore we are to "judge nothing before 
the time." It is a matter that God alone can fully judge- 
as to how much one can overcome. 

God's people are to realize, then, that no temptation is 
of God; and, resisting temptation, they will be on God's 
side. They are to be overcomers of temptation, resisters 
of temptation, whether from within, or from the Adversary, 
or from the weaknesses of others, which might 
lead them into sin, into things contrary to God's will. 

The Apostle says that God tempteth no man. If we 
should think of God as tempting us to sin, it would be a 
horrible thought; for by reason of His power, none 
could resist what He brought to bear upon us, and we 
would surely be overcome. But when we know that our 
temptations are not from God, we know that He will help 
us and will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are 
able to bear; but that He will, with every temptation, provide 
a way of escape. He will protect us according to 
His promise, as we need protection and assistance. With 
this thought in our minds, we can be strong. 

HOW GOD TEMPTED ABRAHAM 

When we look back to the Old Testament, we read 
that "God did tempt Abraham," saying, "Take now thy 
son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest,...and 
offer him for a burnt offering." The question arises, 
How shall we reconcile this statement, "God did tempt 
Abraham," with the statement of the Apostle that God 



"tempteth no man"? The reply is that St. James in our 
text is limiting the word temptation to temptations to 
evil. God tempts us to do good. He sets before us the 
"exceeding great and precious promises," the wonderful 

R5702:page 171 

promises He has made to us. They act as magnets drawing 
us, as we might say. In this sense of the word we 
are tempted of God. But God does not tempt us to do 
evil, to commit sin. God tempted Abraham, tested him, 
not with a view to do him harm, but with a view to 
doing him good; and because Abraham stood the test, 
God could accord to him the greater blessings. And He 
did so! He gave him great blessings in this life, as well 
as a promise of greater blessings to be his in the life to 
come, in the resurrection. 

The test for Abraham was that he should offer in 
sacrifice his son Isaac, in whom centered all the promises. 
By his prompt obedience Abraham gave proof of 
his loyalty. He accounted that God was able even to 
raise his son from the dead, that the promises might be 
fulfilled. (Hebrews 11:18,19.) When his loyalty had 
thus been tested to the limit, when the knife was raised to 
slay his son, the Lord through the angel stayed his hand 
and provided him with a ram for a sacrifice. 

WHY GOD CANNOT BE TEMPTED TO EVIL 

The further statement of our text is that God cannot 
Himself be tempted with evil. We inquire how this is. 
We remember that our Lord Jesus was "holy, harmless, 
undefiled, and separate from sinners"; but that He "was 
in all points tempted like as we [His disciples] are, yet 
without sin." (Hebrews 7:26; 4:15.) If Jesus was thus 
holy, and fully in accord with the Father, and the Father 
cannot be tempted, how could Jesus be tempted? We 
answer, Our Lord was perfect in the flesh, perfect as a 
human being. But humanity has its limitations of knowledge 
and of endurance. The human brain and the human 
body are not adapted to know everything or to bear 
everything. This is one reason why God does not tell 
us everything. We must walk by faith. The man who 
is begotten of the Holy Spirit, and who is able to understand 
many of the deep things of God, cannot appreciate 
all of the eternal things; for they are beyond his grasp. 

We might take, for illustration, a dog, a very wise 
dog, capable of carrying out our directions to a considerable 
extent. Yet if we should try to talk to the dog 
about trigonometry, or higher mathematics in any form, 
or about astronomy, he would be— we could not say bewildered, 
but— unable to understand at all. And so 
between humanity and God there is a wide gulf. It is 

R5702 : page 172 



not possible for humanity to grasp all the parts, all the 
details, of the Divine Plan. Even with the begettal of 
the Holy Spirit we see things "through a glass darkly," 
and not face to face, the Apostle tells us. We shall, when 
perfected on the Divine plane, behold things fully, completely; 
we shall see from God's standpoint. 

OUR LORD'S TEMPTATION 

So our Lord Jesus, naturally perfect as a man, at 
baptism was begotten of the Holy Spirit and became a 
New Creature; but that New Creature lived in and operated 
through the human body; and as long as He was 
in the flesh, Jesus was subject to limitations. He was 
also surrounded by imperfect beings, their desires, their 
views, their imperfections. In order to sacrifice the 
earthly interests, then, He would need much faith. Therefore, 
He had severe trials of obedience to God, of faith 
in God. He was not tempted because of sin or weakness; 
for he had neither sin nor weakness. He was not 
tempted in the same respects as a natural man would be; 
for He was not like a natural man— He was spirit-begotten. 
He was tempted in respect to His obedience to 
God, in respect to trust in the Father's providential care. 
And we are tempted in like manner, for our development, 
that we may faithfully lay down our lives, may gladly 
give up the things that are seen, that we may attain to 
the things not seen. 

In respect to strength and knowledge, our Lord as a 
man was evidently different from the Father. The 
Father could always know at once the good from the evil, 
and is not weak in any sense of the word— to be tempted 
by anything— is strong to carry out His own will, having 
no inclination whatever to sin, but a repugnance 
to it. Infinite strength dwells in God. Because our 
Lord Jesus assumed the same attitude toward sin, we 
read of Him: "Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated 
iniquity; therefore God, even Thy God, hath anointed 
Thee with the oil of gladness above Thy fellows." 
(Psalm 45:7; Hebrews 1:9.) All of the brethren of the 
Lord Jesus must take the same stand everywhere regarding 
sin, and especially sin in ourselves, and the tendency 
toward sin in us. A continual battle is going on in the 
Lord's disciples as they endeavor to follow His example. 

So then, God tempts no man, neither is He tempted of 
any, to sin. He cannot be tempted of evil. Evil can 
have no influence with Him. Our Lord Jesus is now in 
that condition where He cannot be tempted. He is of 
the Divine nature, and perfect in power. And so when 
we shall have reached this same condition by the resurrection 
"change," we shall likewise not be subject to 
evil or temptation. We shall have perfect power, and 
shall be in full accord with that which is right, that which 
is of God. 



R5702 : page 172 

THE FATHER'S WISE COUNSEL 

"My son, give Me thine heart, and let thine 
eyes observe My ways."— Proverbs 23:26. 

SOLOMON, the wise man, had many wives; 

we may therefore reasonably suppose that 

he had sons. Yet to suppose that he addressed 

these words to one of his sons or to 

each of them in succession would not, in our 

judgment, seem reasonable; for we can 

scarcely think that Solomon would wish to 

call special attention to his own ways— 

"Let thine eyes behold My ways." He was 

not always a good pattern for a son to follow. 

It seems to us that we must look further for the 

meaning. We remember that Solomon was early granted 

special wisdom from the Lord, because of his earnest request 

in that direction just after he had become king. We 

might understand that he was personating Wisdom, that 

Wisdom was saying, "My son [whoever desires to be a 

son of Wisdom], give Me thine heart." Since Wisdom 

would be only another name for the Creator, we might 

understand that God is giving an invitation to His sons 

to give their hearts to Him and observe His ways. This, 

at all events, seems to be the good lesson that we may 

gain from this Scripture. 

HOW SONSHIP IS LOST OR MAINTAINED 

We see that God, who was the Father of our race, 
gave us our being, made us perfect, at first, in our father 
Adam. He also gave perfect life and being to the angels, 
and He wished that all these give their hearts to Him. 
They were His sons from the time they were created. 
Lucifer was a son of God. Adam was a son of God. The 
proper course for a son of God would be to turn himself 
over entirely to do the will of his Father. But in the 
case of Lucifer, we find that instead of turning his heart 
over to the Father, he was self-seeking and attempted to 
do his own will; and he miserably failed. In the case of 
some of the angels who kept not their first estate, though 
they were sons of God they did not give their hearts to 
the Lord; and they miserably failed. In sinning all these 
lost their sonship. Only by continued loyalty and obedience 
can sonship be maintained. 

God has arranged that humanity may come back to 
Him. Likewise we understand that any of the fallen 
angels who repent may in the great Judgment Day come 
back into fellowship with God. His message would in 
due time be, to as many as desire to return to Him, "If 
you would be My son, give Me thine heart, and let thine 
eyes observe My ways." 



Not until since the time of the First Advent of our 
Lord Jesus, had this opportunity of becoming sons of God 
been given to any of His fallen creatures, and then only 
to a certain class of the fallen race of Adam. These were 
called to be sons on the Divine plane of being, an offer 
never before made by Jehovah to any of mankind. Our 
Lord Jesus as a Son had wholly given His heart to God. 
And although when He came to earth this course of loyalty 
and obedience led by the way of tribulation, it led to 
glory, honor and immortality. Those who have since 
then sought to become sons of God, hear the message that 
the Father will not receive any except those who come 
through His Son Jesus as their Redeemer, and then make 
full consecration of themselves to do God's will. 

We see that any who have attempted to be people of 
God and have stopped short of meeting these terms have 
made a serious mistake, and have not attained that which 
they wished to attain. We are to hold back nothing. We 
must yield full allegiance to the arrangements which God 
has made for our salvation. Our hearts must be brought 
into this attitude of full consecration, and held there. To 
those who in loyalty of heart meet all these reasonable 
requirements of the Lord He says, "Be thou faithful unto 
death, and I will give thee a crown of life."— Rev. 2:10. 

GOD'S WAYS AS SHOWN IN NATURE 

Those who give their hearts to the Lord are exhorted 
further to observe His ways. What does this mean? Are 
we to attempt to do all that we see God do? It is proper 

R5703 : page 173 

for the Lord to execute judgment and to lay penalties 
upon those who are out of the way, who need chastisement. 
Would it be proper for us to judge or condemn 
in this way? No. It is not ours to condemn, to pass 
sentence, on any. We may condemn sin, and may disapprove 
of what appears to be sin in act or word, and may 
kindly point out what we believe are good reasons for 
thinking it is sin. We may rebuke in love. But we are 
very liable to mistakes in such matters; and to condemn 
a person as unfit for the Lord's family, etc., is not our 
province. So we are not to follow the Lord's ways in 
this respect. But we see in the Lord's ways illustrations 
of His character— His Wisdom, His Justice, His Love, 
His Power. We note these qualities of His character by 
observing His ways; and they call forth our admiration 
and reverence. All God's ways will be ours sometime, 
but not yet; for we are not like Him, perfect, and not yet 
in a position of responsibility. 

The world does not, perhaps, realize that they are 
copying the Lord's ways in very much that they are 
doing in this wonderful day— making force-pumps, engines, 
dealing with electricity, etc. Very few realize 
that they are attempting to follow God's ways. For instance, 



in the human body there is a wonderful mechanism 
by which the blood is pumped through the arteries and 
veins and by which the blood is checked. This mechanism 
is only copied in the best engines in the world. If men 
had only known how to copy from the nerves of the body, 
they would have known long ago how to run trunklines 
by electricity, etc. Any one who will observe God's ways 
will be much wiser than those who fail to do so. But the 
world knows not God. The people of God, however, even 
though they may not be inventors, may gain great blessings 
by observing God's ways in nature. 

Note further the wonderful and superior wisdom 
manifested in the human body— a machine run with a 
very small amount of supply, which it takes at intervals 
and by which it is enabled to keep up the energies of life 
and its strength. And consider the horse. The amount 
of oats and hay that the horse will eat is comparatively 
small, yet the amount of energy and strength this will 
produce is wonderful. But with the human being there 
goes with this strength and activity an intelligence, a 
power to think and reason, which is very wonderful, and 
the more we examine it the more wonderful we find it. 

GOD'S WAYS AS SEEN IN HIS WORD 

When we become sons of God and begin to observe 
His ways, we begin to get faith, knowledge, the spirit of 
obedience, more devotion to God. All who are sons of 
God will study His ways. We especially learn of His 
ways from the study of His Word. This does not mean 
merely reading or memorizing the Bible. There are people 
who can quote whole chapters or books of the Bible, and 
yet do not understand what they read. In thinking that in 
the reading of so many chapters we are doing a meritorious 
thing we are mistaken. It is not the mere reading of 
the Bible that is helpful to the Lord's people, but with it 
the renewing and strengthening power working in us to 
will and to do His good pleasure. 



R5703 : page 173 

THE CLASS TO BE HONORED BY THE LORD 

"Them that honor Me, I will honor."— 1 Samuel 2:30. 

THE words of our text are found in conjunction 
with the story of Eli and his family. 
Eli was God's representative in a very special 
sense— a priest and a judge of Israel. 
Eli's sons were also priests; yet they seem 
to have been egregiously wrong in their 
course of conduct, living in licentiousness, 
favoring injustice, taking advantage of 
their own position and that of their father 



to do violence to the principles of righteousness. 

Eli was reproved of the Lord because he did 

not maintain a proper control over his sons and prevent 

their doing the things that were unjust, unrighteous, contrary 

to God's will and a disgrace both to His Cause and 

to their priestly profession. These words of reproof were 

uttered to Eli, through the boy Samuel, as an indication 

of what was God's mind and to show him why the honor 

that had been given to him and his family would be taken 

away. The Lord's view of the matter is shown in the 

words of our text, "Them that honor Me, I will honor." 

RESISTING THE PROUD, GIVING GRACE TO THE HUMBLE 

We believe that this is a principle that holds good always. 
Now, today, those who are seeking to honor God 
He will be sure to honor. Those who are seeking merely 
self-honor may obtain some of that honor, may glorify 
themselves to a certain extent; but it will not be the Lord 
that will glorify them. In the service of His Cause, His 
Truth, they will not be honored by Him. "The Lord resisteth 
the proud, and giveth grace [favor] to the humble." 
The way to honor God is to seek to know His will 
and to do it from sincere hearts, to have God first in all 
our affairs, to show forth His praises. We are to never 
mind ourselves, our own honor. We are to serve in accordance 
with the principles which the Lord is promoting. 
To seek the glory of God is the proper course for us 
who are His children and whom He has blessed. 

It might seem as if our text is in conflict in some 
sense with the words of our Lord, "Love your enemies." 
When we come to analyze the text carefully, we perceive 
that although the Lord says that He will honor them that 
honor Him, and declares, "They that seek Me early shall 
find Me," yet He does not say that He will do harm to 
those who do not love Him and honor Him. On the contrary, 
the Lord's provision is so comprehensive as to include 
"all the families of the earth." God thus loves 
those who are His enemies— loves them to the extent of 
providing a Sacrifice for them and a reconciliation with 
Himself. But He does not honor His enemies. 

HATING THE SIN, LOVING THE SINNER 

We may well believe that God loves those especially 
who seek to do His will. We are commanded to love our 
enemies, but this does not mean that we are to love our 
enemies in the same way that we love the members of 
the Body of Christ. The difference is that we would love 
our enemies with a sympathetic love, while we would love 
our brethren in Christ with a holy love, a love of kinship, 
of comradeship. Sin is not lovely to God; or to any one 
else who is in relationship with God and is possessed of 
His Spirit. Sin is a deformity, an enormity, displeasing 
to the mind, the Spirit, of God. But God has a sympathetic 
love for the sinner; and He wishes us to have the 



same, to be ready to do good to those who would do us 
injury, who would treat us unkindly, who would persecute 
us. We are thus to be imitators of God. 

God has been pleased to choose certain ones of the 
human family to be His ambassadors. Instead of speaking 
to humanity directly, the Lord speaks through these 
representatives, His children. These are the ones He will 
be pleased to honor, to make His representatives— these 
who seek to do His will, who are loyal to His Word. 
Would God choose ambassadors who would not properly 

R5703 : page 174 

represent Him? Surely not! We, His children, can enter 
into the spirit of the Lord's testimony here; and it is 
for us, therefore, to seek to honor Him by showing forth 
His praises to others, both by proclaiming the pure Message 
of Truth and by our exemplary lives, that we may 
have His blessing now and may have the great honor 
that He has promised His faithful in the Kingdom, so 
near at hand. 



R5704 : page 174 

THE SIN OF SELF-SUFFICIENCY 

"Everyone that is proud of heart is an 
abomination to the Lord."— Proverbs 16:5. 

PRIDE would seem to be an inordinate and excessive 

amount of self-esteem or self-conceit. 

Everyone should have a reasonable amount of 

self-appreciation, to the extent that he would 

be able to know what powers he really has, 

so that he will not be negligent in the use of 

these. The feeling that would lead one to 

think he had no ability when he had ability 

would be an injurious kind of humility, an 

excessive humility. There are, indeed, differences 

of talents— some having a larger number 

and more valuable talents than others. These 

are to be esteemed and appreciated, but they are not to be 

a matter of pride. 

Some use the word pride incorrectly. They say "I am 
proud of my family," when they mean, "I rejoice in my 
family," or, "I am very pleased with my family— I am glad 
that my family is what it is." To have an inordinate prejudice 
that would appreciate everything done by one's family 
or one's friends and depreciate everything done by the 
family or the friends of another would be wrong. There 
is no excuse for pride— and especially none for self-conceit. 
It is generally due to ignorance; although, of course, when 
due to ignorance, it is the more excusable. 

The pride mentioned in our text is not due to ignorance. 



It is too great an appreciation of self. All such pride, the 
Lord tells us, is an abomination in His sight. This is not 
merely that God does not like it, but that there must be a 
reason why He abhors it. No creature has any real cause 
for pride. As the Apostle asks, "What have we that we 
have not received from the Lord?" We have absolutely 
nothing. If we had ten talents instead of one, our ability 
would be nothing to be proud of; we did not produce these 
talents. On the contrary, they were given to us. But to 
display the talents or to boast about them would show that we 
thought they were our own, and that we were proud because 
of our possession of them. 

No man has a right to be proud because of receiving something 
from another. To that extent he is a debtor, a recipient. 
In the case of humanity, we are all recipients of 
the Father's favor. All of the blessings of life— both temporal 
and spiritual— are of Divine provision for us. And if 
we have many of these blessings, there is still no occasion 
for pride. Pride implies a self-sufficiency. 

The Scriptures represent Satan as saying that he would 
like to have an opportunity of displaying his wisdom, his 
ability. He was confident that he could do something. He 
did not realize that everything that he had received came 
from God, and that the one blessed could not rise higher than 
the Fountain of Blessing. He did not realize that his wisdom 
and powers were inferior to those of God. Hence, Satan 
became a transgressor. 

We may be sure that if the Lord's people cultivate any 
heart pride, they have thus a sign that they are not right 
in the sight of God. Even before they become the Lord's 
people He has assured them that if they are of a proud heart 
He will not receive such into His family, will not beget them 
of the Holy Spirit. Humility is the essential of all who 
would be of the Lord's family. "Humble yourselves, therefore, 
under the mighty hand of God, that He may exalt you 
in due time."— 1 Peter 5:6; Matthew 23:12. 

PRIDE LEADING TO DESTRUCTION 

Yet there is a spirit of pride in the world. Some are proud 
of their ancestors; others are proud of their talents, etc. It 
would not be good that God should bless those who have 
any other than a grateful feeling of being a recipient of 
Divine blessing. In fact, the Time of Trouble that is just 
upon us is the result of pride. All people seem to be proud. 
We may not be able to judge of the heart, but we do know 
of their attitude— their feeling of self-sufficiency. Each nation 
feels that theirs is the greatest talent, theirs are the 
finest guns, theirs the best everything; and it is this feeling 
of self-sufficiency that led the nations into the present conflict. 
Some of them express themselves as trusting that the 
Lord is on their side. They think that the Lord has always 
favored them— they are so good and so great that God could 
not help giving them the victory; and under these delusions 
they have gotten into this great war. 

In respect to this great war and all the troubles that will 



ensue the Scriptures say, "The proud, yea, all that do wickedly, 
shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn 
them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them 
neither root nor branch." (Malachi 4:1.) Pride leads into 
all sorts of mischief. Before the Millennium is over, God 
will see to it that there will not be a root of pride in the 
whole earth. So at the end of the Millennium there will be 
no pride amongst the inhabitants of the earth, but there will 
be an appreciation of God and of what He has done for mankind. 
There will be a spirit of thankfulness, gratitude, just 
as we believe it is in Heaven. 



R5704 : page 174 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
SERIOUS FAULTS NEEDING CORRECTION 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

For quite a while I have been desirous of writing to you 
of some matters which happen in some classes, yet I have 
not had the courage to do so for fear I might be in error. 
The matter, however, has come to my attention so often, and 
it seems to be so injurious to the Lord's cause, that I am 
impelled to drop a few lines, asking your pardon for whatever 
may seem to you as bad judgment on my part. 

Some good brethren are elected as Elders; they are zealous 
to do the Lord's will. Berean meetings are tendered 
them and accepted. Some of these dear brethren seem to 
get the thought that it is important to "feed" outsiders, but 
not so important to "feed the flock of God." So often when 
one comes to a Berean meeting, the leader will say as he 
opens the meeting, "Dear friends, I am sorry to say that I 
have not looked over the lesson," or, "I was so busy doing 
thus and so that I do not know where the lesson begins." 
Often I have heard this remark by leaders: "The class is 
pretty well posted on these things, and it does not make 
much difference whether I know much about it or not." 

This thought seems to make them careless and indifferent. 
It seems to be so distressing to have a good-sized class and 
then hear the leader make such remarks of ignorance. What 
is the result? The meeting opens; a question is asked. 
Brother A. gives his view, then Brother B., then Brother C, 
then Sister D., etc. The views apparently conflict. A brother 
who thinks he knows all about it, says, "That is all wrong: 
it is thus and so"; then some more discussion follows; then 
the same brother again jumps up and says, "That is not 
right." The leader is embarrassed, and not having studied 
his lesson dares not say a word, and finally the question is 
passed by without any definite decision. 

I notice that in some meetings some of the dear friends 
who are backward go home without opening their mouths, 
because they are not encouraged. Some who are well up are 
called upon to do all the talking, and sometimes the class 



has to sit and listen to a little debate between three or four. 

Another matter: While it has been mentioned so many 
times in THE WATCH TOWER nevertheless some leaders, as 
well as the class, when they begin the lesson, have the question 
book in one hand and the STUDIES in the other. Since 
much reading is done, discussion is shut out, with the occasional 
remark, "It is so plain in the STUDIES that discussion 
is hardly necessary." 

If these thoughts I have brought to your attention are 
out of the way, Brother Russell, kindly throw the letter in 
your waste basket. Nevertheless, until then, it shall be my 
earnest prayer to the Lord that something may drop from 
your guided pen which may correct these conditions and help 
the dear brother Elders to realize their responsibility in this 
branch of the Lord's service— feeding of the flock. 

I daily remember you in my prayers, wishing God's comfort 
and strength in your trials and joys. With warm love, 

Your Brother in the one Hope, . 

[If brethren chosen to be Elders are found incapable, it 

R5704 : page 175 

is the duty of the Class to elect others— perhaps some of 
less ability, who, by study, will be more helpful. A good 
leader is not the one who talks too much, but the one who, 
by coaching the diffident, will help them to the correct expression; 
or who, if the expressions are in his judgment incorrect, 
will very kindly suggest the proper thought without 
particularly calling attention to the mistaken views that have 
been presented— backing up his own expression with Scripture 
citations and citations from the "STUDIES."! 



page 175 

FOUND "THE SATISFYING PORTION" 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

At our recent election we, wishing to manifest our approval 
and appreciation of your pastoral care over us, through 
the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, THE WATCH TOWER and 
visits of the Pilgrim brethren, unanimously elected you as 
our Pastor until such time as your services this side the 
veil shall have terminated. 

It may never be possible for you to be personally present 
to look after our interests, but realizing that the Lord has 
so wonderfully blessed us through you, through the above-mentioned 
channels, we cannot do less in showing our appreciation 
of His tender watch care over us, than to acknowledge 
in the way we have the channel through which those 
blessings have flowed. 

Words fail when we would express our gratitude to our 
Heavenly Father for His full and complete provision for 
His Very Elect! 

When we stop to consider that many of us searched for 



years before we found the "satisfying portion," when we 
consider that the vast majority of the professed ministers 
of Christ are unfaithful shepherds of the flock— "wolves in 
sheep's clothing" (Jeremiah 23:1-4), and that we despaired 
of ever finding the Truth because of the extent of the 
"famine" resulting from their unfaithfulness (Jude 12), we 
have cause for great rejoicing and thanksgiving that the 
Lord has raised up faithful shepherds who are not ruling 
with force and cruelty, but are feeding us in the green pastures 
of Truth and Love, free from all fear, undismayed and 
lacking nothing. 

We esteem you very highly for your work's sake and 
fear we can never repay the debt of love we owe you. We 
assure you of our continually petitioning the Throne of Heavenly 
Grace for needed wisdom and strength to assist you 
from day to day, defending your character when "all manner 
of evil is spoken against you falsely for Christ's sake," 
as we have opportunity, and defending those principles of 
truth and righteousness which to your own heart are more 
precious than life itself. 

Your brethren in Christ, TWIN FALLS ECCLESIA.-Idaho. 



R5704 : page 175 

A JOYFUL EXPERIENCE 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

An experience which we recently had so filled our hearts 
with joy, it seems we must extend the blessing to you: 

A sister requested me to go to the depot with her to distribute 
literature to passengers awaiting trains. I replied 
"Yes," but no sooner had the answer left my lips than various 
suggestions of the opposite spirit came to me. As we neared 
the station I felt "faint," but the thought of our prayer meeting 
text, "I keep my body under," came to me and I was 
glad for an opportunity to overcome. Everyone received the 
papers with a smile or a "Thank you," which encouraged me. 

R5705 : page 175 

I suggested that we go to the cemetery and leave "Where 
Are the Dead?" and "What Is the Soul?" in the open mausoleums, 
which we did. On the car we noticed a young man 
reading his Bible and left a paper for him. We had not 
gone far into the cemetery when we heard someone call, and 
found it was the young man coming, tract in hand. We had 
thought him a Training School student and expected a "lecture," 
but he asked if we were associated with the I.B.S.A., 
saying he had been trying to find our meeting place, and had 
wired the Head Office for information. Then we learned 
that a relative of his had taken home a tract from a public 
lecture, through which he had sent for STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
had read these, and started out to identify himself 
with a class. 



We invited him to our home and to the evening meeting, 
from which a brother invited him home for the night. The 
following day he symbolized his consecration. 

Our cup of blessing was running over! I was so happy 
that for a time I could not pray, but could think only of the 
Scripture, "In everything give thanks," thanks, THANKS! 
Had given out hundreds of tracts, but never had been so 
filled with the Spirit nor received such "wages." 

We never cease praying the Lord's richest blessings for 
you, hoping soon we shall meet in the Kingdom. 

It was from our dear Brother Rutherford that I received 
the first message of Truth over four years ago. 

Your sister by His grace, 

MRS. E. L. BENNETT.-New York. 



INFIDEL THANKS GOD FOR PASTOR RUSSELL 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

It is with pleasure I take this opportunity to write and 
thank you for the comfort I have received from your 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. I will thank God for them as 
long as I have breath. I appreciate better than I can express 
the good work you are doing. I know that the Lord 
will reward you abundantly. 

Although some of the preachers may try to paint you 
blacker than Satan, any man with a grain of common sense 
can see through their game. I am only a working-man with 
a limited education, and from what good I have received 
from your writings, I would be willing to stake life itself 
that you are not what your enemies paint you. 

They say you are making infidels. We can thank God 
for such infidels (?). The sooner people get knocked off 
the creedal foundations, the sooner they will begin to build 
upon something solid, something reasonable. 

I can say with positiveness that I know Pastor Russell's 
teachings are making Christians out of infidels, for I was 
an out-and-out infidel up to a few months ago. I feel that 
I would have remained so if I had not come in contact 
with the writings of Pastor Russell. 

It was quite a few years ago that I made up my mind 
that death ended all, and that one would better get all he 
can out of life. But thanks be to God my eyes have at last 
been opened through the good Pastor of New York. I am 
now determined to do what I can to assist in spreading the 
Truth. 

I should like some tracts that would assist evolutionists 
and Jews to an appreciation of the true doctrines of the 
Bible. 

Brother Sargent, of Halifax, and Sister Mason, of the 
States, are doing a good work here. Please remember me 
in prayer. 

Yours to win Christ, J. A. TAYLOR. -Nova Scotia. 



PROFITABLE BEREAN STUDIES 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have noticed in this and other parts of the country that 
some of the brethren leading Berean Studies seem to be 
under the impression that they are supposed to do a good 
deal of talking. Now, for the leader of a study to give a 
five-minute discourse on every question or remark is surely 
a mistake; rather he should see that his place is to see that 
the study is conducted in an orderly manner, endeavor to 
get expressions from as many as possible, and then with his 
own brief comment close the question. 

Sometimes I have noticed, too, that there may be a brother 
in a class who has a good deal more ability than have the 
remainder. He will comment at length on every question 
and remark. Would it not be wiser for such a one to control 
his zeal that others not so able may feel more free 
to express their thoughts? We say sometimes that "brevity 
is the soul of wit." Brevity in our Berean Studies might 
be helpful all around. With much Christian love, 

Yours in our Lord, F. H. HARRISON. 

ANSWER TO ABOVE. 

[We agree that a leader of a Berean Class, to be most 
helpful, should draw the answers from the Class— otherwise 
the brethren might nearly as well each read for himself at 
home. We have endeavored to give this thought in STUDIES 
IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. VI. We cannot, however, agree 
with the writer above that the leader's comments should always 
be very brief. There might be questions which the most 
skillful leader would not be able properly to draw answers 
from the Class. In such cases, after doing one's best, the 
proper course would be for the leader to answer the question 
very thoroughly, but in as brief form as possible. Indeed, 
all of the answers or suggestions should be brief and 
to the point. Any one addicted to the habit of long talks on 
every question should be kindly reminded of proprieties by 
the leader in a private way at first, but, if necessary, in a 
kindly way before the Class. If he still persists, an alternative 
would be to ask the questions of different members of 
the Class by name, giving only a fair opportunity, and to 
avoid calling for general answers. This, however, is not 
desirable if it can be avoided.] 



Page 176 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CLASSES 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 



SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the 
Divine Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption 
and restitution: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner 
and time of the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible 
Testimony on this subject: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. 
(Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies 
which mark events connected with the "Time of the End," 
the glorification of the Church and the establishment of the 
Millennial Kingdom; it also contains a chapter on the Great 
Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the dates and other 
teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 
6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Battle of Armageddon," shows that the 
dissolution of the present order of things is in progress, and 
that all the panaceas offered are valueless to avert the predicted 
end. It marks in these events the fulfilment of prophecy, 
noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of Matt. 24 and 
Zech. 14:1-9: 688 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats 
an all-important subject— the hub, the center around which all 
the features of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the 
most careful and prayerful consideration on the part of all 
true Christians: 640 pages in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative 
Week (Genesis 1,2), and with the Church, God's "New 
Creation." It examines the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, 
obligations and hopes appertaining to those called and 
accepted as members of the Body under the Head: 750 pages, in 
embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) 
$3.00 (12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (2s. 6d.) 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: German 
and Swedish, six vols.; Dano-Norwegian, five vols.; Greek, 
four vols.; Finnish, three vols.; French, two vols.; Hollandish, 
Spanish, Italian, Hungarian, Polish, Arabic, Roumanian, 
Chinese and Japanese, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform 
with English edition, prices the same. 

For the Blind in American Braille, English Braille and 
New York Point. 



page 177 

VOL. XXXVI JUNE 15 No. 12 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

Conquest of the Antitypical Canaanites 179 

Christians to be Non-Resistant 179 

Battle of Spiritual Israel Today 181 

Courage in this "Hour of Temptation" 181 

Prayer— Its Use and Abuse 182 

"Abide in Me and I in You" 182 

Blessings Easily Gained not Appreciated 182 

Evidences of Possession of the Holy Spirit... 184 
The Source of True Promotion 185 

Putting Down and Setting Up in 

the Church 186 

"Ask What I Shall Give Thee" 187 

Are Dreams Significant? 188 

Dedicating the Temple 188 

Preparation of the Living Stones 189 

Work of the Glorified Church 189 

How We Are to Wait on the Lord 190 

Traits Necessary to Success 190 

An Interesting Letter 191 

Colporteuring in Office Buildings 191 

page 178 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 



not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



ADDITIONAL CONVENTIONAL GATHERINGS 

(Continued from April 15th issue.) 
Information respecting board and lodging at economical 
rates, etc., should be obtained from the Class Secretaries: 
TOLEDO, O., July 11. 

H. R. E. Kuehn, Sec'y, 517 Magnolia St. 
OLEAN, N.Y., July 12. 

F. S. Ganoung, Sec'y, 204 East Ave. 
TORONTO, ONT., July 18. 

Thos. W. Kirby, Sec'y, 75 Yonge St., Arcade. 
BELLEVILLE, ONT., July 19. 

Mrs. Wm. Rose, Sec'y, 96 Dundas St. 
BERLIN, ONT., July 20. 

Mrs. W. A. Schmidt, Sec'y, 39 Mansion St. 
OWEN SOUND, ONT., July 21. 

Jas. Frizzell, Sec'y, 774 10th St., W. 
LONDON, ONT., July 22. 

John Kumpf, Sec'y, 372 Grey St. 
CHATHAM, ONT., July 23. 

Albert Sheldrick, Sec'y, 120 King St. 
BRANTFORD, ONT., July 24. 

G. A. Oliver, Sec'y, care Express Office. 
HAMILTON, ONT., July 25. 

P. A. Lee, Sec'y, 374 Main St., W. 
SPRINGFIELD, MASS., July 25 to August 1. 

H. F. Spear, Sec'y, 48 Scott St. 
PORTLAND, ME., August 12 to 15. 

I. I. Margeson, Sec'y, Westwood, Mass. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF JULY 

Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDIES VIII.-IX. 

Week of July 4 Q.24 to 29 Week of July 18 Q. 8 to 14 

Week of July 11 Q. 1 to 7 Week of July 25 Q.15 to 21 



Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each. 



R5705 : page 179 

OUR CONQUEST OF THE ANTITYPICAL CANAANITES 

"Be thou strong and very courageous."— Joshua 1:7. 

JOSHUA records these words of Jehovah God, 

spoken to him at the time when, after 

Moses' death, he took command of Israel. 

The Israelites had then had their forty 

years' experience in the wilderness, and were 

just about to cross the Jordan and take possession 

of the land of Canaan. Joshua 

had become Moses' successor. The people 

had learned many lessons in their wilderness 

experiences; and now that Moses was 

dead, they looked to Joshua as their leader. 

Joshua expressed his inability to serve in the place of 
Moses, through whom God had signally manifested Himself. 
But the Lord assured Joshua that He would bless 
him all the days of his life, even as He had blessed 
Moses. Joshua had been found faithful in all his experiences. 
He was one of the two survivors of the wilderness 
experiences who, when starting out from Egypt, were 
over twenty years of age. Because of the faithfulness 
of Joshua and Caleb, the Lord had promised them that 
they alone of all the adults who left Egypt should enter 
the Promised Land. The others had died in the wilderness, 
save Moses and Aaron, Aaron dying in Mount Hor 
and Moses a little later in Mount Nebo, before the people 
crossed over Jordan. 

The Lord's exhortation for Joshua to be strong and 
very courageous was in connection with the instruction 
that the Israelites were to take possession of the land of 
Canaan and destroy the inhabitants of the land. This 
command of God has been a stumbling-block to many. 
They have supposed that the Bible could not be of God 
when it bears such instructions. They have felt that it 
would be an act of injustice for the Israelites to go in and 
possess Canaan. What right, they say, had Israel to kill 
those people and take possession of their land? It belonged 
more to the people who already possessed it than 
to anybody else. To invade their country, destroy their 
lives and confiscate their lands and their possessions 
would be very unjust. The course of Israel is held up 
as an illustration of the "land-grabbing" disposition of 
the natural man, which has seemed to grow stronger century 
by century, notwithstanding the increase of civilization 
and his professed appreciation of justice. 

This is the view that many take, and much to their own 
injury; for they do not understand the matter they discuss. 
When we say that they do not understand the 



matter, we do not mean that they are people of inferior 
mind, but that they have not taken God's viewpoint. 
From any other than the right viewpoint, the whole course 
of Israel in this matter must seem to be unjust and ungodlike. 
From the right viewpoint, however, the matter 
is seen to be reasonable, just and righteous altogether. 
The sins and abominations of these Gentile people were 
such that their destruction was a very desirable thing. 
God had a great surprise in mind for this land of Canaan, 
which they inhabited. Moreover, the Jewish Age was an 
Age of Types. Both Israel and these corrupt Gentile 
nations were typical. 

R5706 : page 179 

CHRISTIANS TO BE NON-RESISTANT 

In the present Age, the Lord's people are not to take 
possession of either the persons or the property of others. 
They are not to destroy life under any circumstances. 
They are not to battle with any kind of carnal weapons. 
They are to be non-resistant. We are not of those who 
would defend the course of the professed Christian nations 
of modern times along these lines. As Christians, guided 
by our Master's example and instruction, we should seek 
to do good to all men as we have opportunity, and to leave 
them in peaceable possession of their homes, their property 
and their liberties. There is a great difference between 
the Divine Law of Love, which is the motive power 
operating in the true children of God today, and the law 
of selfishness, under which the masses of mankind— including 
the vast majority of nominal Christendom— still 
operate, and will continue to operate until the New Dispensation 
shall be fully ushered in by Divine Power. 

Nevertheless, seeing that the true Church is separate 
from the world in the Lord's Plan and His dealings, we 
can look with comparative equanimity upon the overriding 
of justice and equity by the kingdoms of this world, and 
may realize that the Lord, especially at the present time, is 
taking advantage of their natural disposition toward warfare 
and conquest and empire-building. He will cause 
the wrath of man thus to work out certain features of His 
Plan which will prove later on to be for the blessing of 
the whole world, those now in their graves as well as 
those yet living. 

Not being able to see behind the veil into all the gracious 
purposes of our Heavenly Father, and not being wise 
enough to know how these purposes could be carried out, 
the peoples of the earth are groping on in darkness, thinking 
they are managing their own affairs, not knowing that a 

R5706 : page 180 

Mighty Hand is so directing the affairs of nations that His 
own glorious designs shall be outworked in all things, not 
knowing that nothing can thwart His purposes. The 



Lord's people occupy largely the position of spectators in 
respect to the course of this world— its policies, politics, 
conquests, its frantic efforts to carry out its selfish projects. 
-John 17:16. 

Were we to take a hand in the affairs of the world, 
on either side of the great questions with which they are 
grappling, we would surely be working contrary to the 
Divine Program. The Lord does not purpose to give the 
victory now to either party in the strife. We are to be 
separate from the world and to give our thought and attention, 
our sympathy and interest, to the affairs of the 
Heavenly Kingdom; and while our voices, if ever raised 
at all on such questions, should be raised on behalf of 
justice, mercy and peace, yet we can view with great composure 
whatever events and changes may take place in 
the world, knowing that our Heavenly Father has all 
power to overrule these matters to His own praise and 
to the ultimate good of mankind. 

A RETROSPECTIVE VIEW 

But the world tells us that we are too peaceable. They 
say that mankind could not get along without a certain 
amount of warfare. We answer that no one can understand 
God's methods except as he is guided by His Word, 
by the Spirit of the Truth. God's dealings are different 
in different ages and for different purposes. These seemingly 
conflicting presentations of God's will are perfectly 
reasonable and harmonizable from the proper viewpoint. 

Let us see. Back in Eden, the sentence, "Dying thou 
shalt die," was pronounced upon Adam because of wilful 
disobedience to the Divine instruction that a violation of 
God's command would bring death. After the fall, mankind 
gradually became more and more estranged from the 
Lord. Many of the angels, who then had access to earth 
with powers of materialization, fell from their holy estate. 
Mankind became a prey to these angels who "lusted after 
strange flesh." (Genesis 6:1-4; Jude 6,7; 2 Peter 2:4, 
Diaglott.) This condition of things was finally overthrown 
by the great Deluge of Noah's day. 

But in time the world again became very sinful. Then 
God made selection of one man from amongst mankind; 
namely, Abraham. He promised that if Abraham would 
walk in His ways, He would guide Abraham's affairs to 
his good and make of him a great nation and would bless 
his seed. And so we have Abraham, Isaac and Jacob as 
God's special servants. The descendants of Jacob, God 
took into covenant relationship with Himself during the 
days of Moses. Under Moses as their mediator, God 
promised to be their God and to recognize them as His 
people. If they would be loyal to Him, He would bless 
them. If they should be disloyal to Him and go over to 
the idolatry of the neighboring nations, then He would 
punish them for their sins and give them chastisements; 
but He would not forsake them. 

The peoples of Canaan were in a very degraded condition 



morally. They had progressed so far in sin that it was 

no longer advantageous that they should continue in possession 

of Canaan. The Israelites were to drive out these 

peoples— and they were to be destroyed when necessary. 

There were certain nations which God especially commanded 

Israel to utterly destroy.— Deuteronomy 20:10-18. 

When thinking of this command of God, we are to rid 
our minds of the superstitions of the past. These people 
who were to be slain did not go into eternal torment, but 
into death, into Sheol, Hades, the tomb. This would be 
an unconscious sleep. Those who perished by the sword 
are still asleep; they are not in pain, not in anguish of any 
kind. They are merely cut off from life until the general 
awakening time; for God has made a provision whereby 
those people may return to life, may be called forth from 
their sleep. All the blessings of everlasting life God has 
made provision for through Messiah. Messiah is to have 
a Kingdom; and this Kingdom is to rule the world in 
righteousness (see Psalms 96, 97, and 72), blessing not 
only the living, but also those who have fallen asleep in 
death. (Isaiah 25:6-9; Hosea 13:14; Romans 14:9; 8:20,21, 
Diaglott.) Many Scriptures declare this in unmistakable 
terms. Indeed this is the tenor of the entire 
Word of God. The Divine Plan runs like a golden chain 
through the whole Bible, both Old and New Testaments. 

This great Messiah, who is yet to bless all the race of 
Adam, must needs be their Redeemer, and thus the Owner 
and Deliverer of the people, as the Scriptures declare. 
Through His sacrifice for man He has obtained the "keys 
of Hades and of death," as He tells us. (Revelation 1:18.) 
He gave His life as the offset to Father Adam's 
life. This purchase price has not as yet been applied for 
the world in general, but will be applied, we believe, in 
the very near future. The Millennial Kingdom of Christ 
is for the very purpose of giving all of Adam's children, 
not previously enlightened, as well as Adam himself, a full 
opportunity for everlasting life, after having had experience 
in the nature and results of sin. 

From this broad viewpoint, we see that with these 
peoples of ancient Palestine— the Canaanites, the Amorites, 
the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, the Jebusites, etc. 
—it was a blessing that they died at the time they did. 
Vile and debased in morals, they were no benefit to themselves 
or to others. It was all the same whether they died 
by some kind of disease— consumption, pneumonia, cholera 
—or in some other manner. 

Should any one ask, Why did God choose to have these 
ancient peoples die in battle instead of by disease? The 
answer is that the peoples inhabiting the land would be a 
constant menace to the morals of the people of Israel. 
They were not only idolatrous, but practised licentious 
rites, divination, etc. Furthermore, God purposed that the 
land should be put to a far different use. He had a great 
Plan, in which it was His design that Canaan should play 
an important part. The land and its inhabitants were to 
be typical of God's dealings with Spiritual Israel in the 



Gospel Age. The type in which the land of Canaan was 
designed of God to figure could not be carried out without 
the expulsion of these heathen, or their destruction. 

SPIRITUAL ISRAEL EXPELLING THE CANAANITES 

Is it asked what type was here shown? We believe 
that the expulsion and destruction of these sinful nations 
by Israel was a type of how the people of God today, 
Spiritual Israel, are to take possession of their human 
bodies. We are, as New Creatures, to conquer, to destroy, 
these tendencies of the flesh which would enslave us. If 
we do not overcome and destroy them, they will overcome 
and destroy us. We are to vanquish the evil propensities, 
evil habits, vices, thoughts, desires, which have inhabited 
our minds, and are by our new wills to take entire control 
and fill the place of the former occupants with holy, pure 
thoughts, desires, ambitions, purposes, habits. 

These human bodies are now the property and possession 
of the Spiritual Israelites, the New Creatures in 
Christ. There is to be no peace between the New Creature 
and his flesh. We are to take warning from Natural 
Israel in this respect. Failure on their part to drive out 

R5706 :page 181 

and destroy their enemies completely, as God commanded, 
was a source of constant trouble and ensnarement, and a 
cause of much idolatry and sin to Israel. And their experiences 
"were written for our admonition." Our warfare 
against spiritual foes must result in the utter destruction 
of the fleshly mind, and will also mean the death of 
the human body. 

This warfare of Israel against their enemies may also 
be a picture of conditions in the Millennium. During the 
Millennial Age the world, under the guidance of Christ 
and the Church, will be brought into a condition which will 
fit them to have possession of the whole earth. Satan will 
be bound for a thousand years. Sin and the curse of 
Adamic death now resting on the world will be destroyed, 
together with everything contrary to righteousness. All 

R5707 :page 181 

these things belong to the reign of that "strong man" who 
has so long oppressed the world. Christ, the Antitype of 
Joshua, will then be in control, and will show man how to 
exterminate these things of sin and thus eventually come 
into possession of the earth, the Eden of God, and each 
man be a king, a sovereign. 

While the Natural Israelite was to be a man of battle 
and to take possession of the land of the enemy, we are 
not to see in this fact anything that was not in it. For instance, 
it was not the Israelites who were to say that they 
would go up and possess the land of Canaan. It was God 
Himself who was to give them possession. Nor are we to 



think that God was negligent of the real interests of these 
Gentile peoples. He declares that their iniquity had come 
to the full. It was no longer profitable at that time that 
their lives should be prolonged. Thus we see that justice 
was not infringed upon in giving the Israelites that land 
for an everlasting possession. This had been previously 
foretold by the Lord; but the testimony of the Lord, at 
the time the promise was made, was that it would not then 
be an appropriate time for its fulfilment, but that there 
should first be a dark time, until the iniquity of those nations 
had come to the full. 

BATTLE OF SPIRITUAL ISRAEL TODAY 

Coming down to the Gospel Age, we see that the 
Spiritual Israelites have had a great conflict. It is a warfare 
against the whole world— no warfare so mighty and 
so momentous has ever been waged. Yet the conflict 
fought by the Lord Jesus and His followers has not been 
a fight with guns or other carnal weapons. We have today 
millions of people in great camps intent upon destroying 
one another. They are being goaded on by their rulers. 
There may be here and there a Christian among them, one 
who has truly given his heart to God; but these are the 
exceptions. The great mass of the world acknowledge 
that they have taken no such step as consecration to the 
Lord. Yet they are instructed by their rulers that they are 
God's people and are fighting His battles. 

According to the Bible, only the saintly, only those who 
have taken the specific steps laid down by the Master for 
His disciples, are Christians at all. All others professing 
to be Christians are merely imitations— "tares." Through 
a study of the lives of saints of olden time true Christians 
are enabled to see more clearly the mind of God, the will 
of God, for themselves. They gain from the lives of 
Moses, Joshua, the Prophets, and other faithful ones of 
past ages lessons of faith, of courage, of zeal. They are 
instructed that all these Scriptural records are meant as 
types and as admonitions for the Gospel Church; and they 
are thereby warned, strengthened and encouraged. 

The Lord's people should not feel strong in themselves 
nor boastful, but, on the contrary, very humble and very 
insufficient— just as Joshua did. All of God's children are 
to realize their insufficiency in their own strength. They 
should feel that God has called them to a great work, and 
that they would make an utter failure unless the Lord 
gives His blessing. They are to look to the Lord and to 
receive His promises into good and honest hearts, believing 
that these promises are theirs, so long as they are 
loyal and true to Him. Thus doing, they may be strong, 
very strong; they may be very courageous. 

SHINING EXAMPLES OF THE PAST 

We have noted the courage of our Lord Jesus Himself, 
with a whole nation against Him! It has been thus 



with all His faithful followers— most of them the poor of 
this world, who have had very little wealth or influence or 
honor of men. The true people of God throughout 
the Gospel Age have been a humble class, yet they have 
been very strong and courageous. The people in the days 
of the Apostles "took knowledge of them that they had 
been with Jesus" and had learned of Him. Those disciples 
of Jesus had seen His readiness to lay down His 
life in the Father's service. They had seen His courage 
when He was facing death of the most cruel kind, when 
He said, "The cup which My Father hath poured for Me, 
shall I not drink it?" And so we who have followed the 
Master since then have taken note of the spirit which our 
dear Lord manifested at all times, under the most trying 
and crucial experiences; and it has proven a wonderful 
inspiration to us. 

The faithful ones have all along as a rule been little 
known in the world. They have not usually been of the 
great, the learned, the rich. In the past there may have 
been some prominent ones, some of noble birth, who were 
saints of God, living up to what light they had in their 
time; but they were the exceptions. We know that there 
have been many true saints who have lived quiet, uneventful 
lives, yet who have seemed to live up to all the light 
they possessed and to walk with God until they fell asleep 
in death. The world has generally ignored these saints 
of God, even when they were not actively persecuted. We 
cannot surely know who are entirely loyal and sincere at 
heart; but we may be sure that "the Lord knoweth them 
that are His."— 2 Timothy 2:19. 

COURAGE IN THIS "HOUR OF TEMPTATION" 

Coming down to our own day, there never was a time 
when more strength of character and more courage were 
needed than just now. The iniquities of the whole world, 
and especially of so-called Christendom, have now about 
come to the full; and all present governments are about to 
be swept away, to make room for the glorious Kingdom 
of God under the whole heavens— the glorious Reign of 
the King of kings. All the ecclesiastical systems of today, 
calling themselves the Church of Christ, are arrayed on 
the side of error and are battling against the Truth and 
its advocates. So we need to be strong in the Lord and in 
the power of His might. 

Whoever starts out to battle in his own strength against 
this stronghold of error will be sure to be defeated. But 
if he goes in the strength of the Lord of Hosts, and has 
Divine direction as to what he shall do or say, he may well 
be of good courage. Many earnest hearts are now asking 
for the Bread of Life, they are captives in Babylon or 
are famishing out in the "field," the world. These need 
our assistance. 

Our strength will be tried— our hold upon God and 
upon the Truth, and our courage in defending the Truth. 
These will surely be put to the test; for Babylon is opposing 



our way. God will not have any in the Kingdom who 

R5707 : page 182 

have not faithfully endured. Yet in meekness let us seek 
to instruct those who oppose themselves to the Word of 
the Lord; and let us look for the hungry and thirsty ones. 

We do not know in what form some of our trials and 
tribulations will come. But we who are living in this "evil 
day," yea, in the very close of this day— in the final "hour 
of temptation"— surely need to have on the whole armor 
of God. We need to have our loins girt about with 
Truth; we need the helmet to protect our minds, our intellects, 
from the shafts of error; we need the breastplate 
of righteousness; we need the Sword of the Spirit— 
the broad two-edged Sword; we need the sandals of "preparation 
of the Gospel of Peace." We need all these to 
overcome the Canaanites in our own breast, and to overcome 
all the surrounding obstacles. 

Thus armored and furnished, we may indeed come off 
"more than conquerors" in the great conflict, which is 
daily increasing. We shall conquer "through Him who 
loved us and bought us with His own precious blood." 
Let the promise of the Master be our daily inspiration: 
"To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in 
My Throne." 

"Arise, then, O Army of Gideon! 

Let him that is fearful return; 
Jehovah wants only the zealous, 

Whose hearts with the love of Truth burn! 

"Your sword is the 'Sword of the Spirit'; 

Your lamp is the light from His Word; 
Your pitcher, this poor earthen vessel 

You break at the voice of your Lord. 

"Is your light burning bright in your pitcher? 

Doth your trumpet give forth certain sound? 
Soon the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon 

The enemy's host will confound. 

"For sure is the victory promised, 

And great is the peace He awards; 
Then 'stand' in your place, all ye faithful— 

The battle's not yours, but the Lord's!" 



R5707 : page 182 

PRAYER-ITS USE AND ABUSE 

"And He spake a parable unto them to this end, that men ought 
always to pray and not to faint." "Pray without ceasing." 
—Luke 18:1; 1 Thessalonians 5:17. 



IN THE first text under consideration, we see 

that our Lord used a parable to point out 

the lessons He designed to give. A parable 

is a word-picture designed to illustrate some 

truth, but is not necessarily a statement of 

facts. On the contrary, it seems very rarely 

to be a statement of facts, but is merely a 

suppositionary case. More than this, in a 

parable the thing said is never the thing 

meant, literally. The wheat and the tares 

of one of Jesus' parables were not literal wheat and tares, 

but were the children of the Kingdom and the children 

of the Adversary. So the parable here is of an unjust 

judge, who had no appreciation of justice. Notwithstanding 

R5708 : page 182 

this, a poor widow came to him again and again importuning 
for help. To get rid of her he finally gave her 
the relief desired. 

The Lord uses this parable as an illustration of our 
coming to the Heavenly Father— not that the Heavenly 
Father is an unjust Judge nor that the Church is a 
widow, but that the parable is merely an illustration of 
the reward of importunity in prayer. The woman's persistency 
in continually coming to the judge illustrated 
what Jesus wished to emphasize. In concluding the 
parable, He says that if an unjust judge would grant this 
poor widow her petition because of her continued asking, 
what might we expect of our Heavenly Father? When 
His children cry unto Him day and night, He is sure to 
hear their prayers. This implies that the prayers are 
proper ones for the Lord to answer. We cannot think 
that God would do anything but that which is just and 
right and proper, and in harmony with this thought the 
instruction to the Lord's people is that in coming to the 
Lord in prayer we should make sure that we ask only for 
the things pleasing to Him. Therefore Christians who 
live near to God are the best qualified to offer prayer that 
would be acceptable and would be answered. 

"ABIDE IN ME, AND I IN YOU" 

Our Lord Jesus was thoroughly informed regarding 
proper prayer. We have His own testimony, "I know 
that thou hearest Me always." He never had a refusal, 
because he always asked the things in harmony with the 
Father's will. There must be two conditions met in 
order that our prayers may be answered. We must first 
have accepted Jesus as our Savior, and then have made 
a consecration to God in His appointed way. These steps 
must both be taken before we can be in Christ at all. 
When accepted of the Heavenly Father in Christ Jesus, 
we become New Creatures in Him. It is to the New 
Creature that all God's promises apply. Whoever has not 



become a New Creature by being begotten of the Holy 
Spirit is outside of all these promises— but not outside 
of hope; for we see that, in God's Plan, there is a broad 
hope for all the world. But in this "acceptable time," 
none can offer acceptable prayer except in this special 
appointed way. 

There is but one sheep-fold in the present time. Only 
those who are in this fold are in God's favor. These 
have a right to pray. But there is a second consideration, 
after consecration has been made; namely, Are these 
abiding in Christ or are they going out of harmony with 
Him? God's Word must abide in us— not merely that we 
should once have read the Bible through, or that we 
read so many verses or chapters each day— but the Word 
must remain in us, its teachings and principles must be 
assimilated and incorporated into our lives. Thus we 
shall be able to see what God's mind is, what is pleasing 
to Him, what we should ask for and what we should not 
ask for, under His terms. All who thus abide in Christ, 
and in whom His Word abides, may ask "what they will." 
They may ask anything that is guaranteed in God's Word, 
and this means that they may ask whatsoever they will; 
for His Word dwells in them richly, and they would not 
think of asking anything not authorized therein. 

BLESSINGS EASILY GAINED NOT APPRECIATED 

Our lesson teaches continuity in prayer— not merely 
that we pray once, and then say, "I have prayed about 
this matter, and now I will leave it." But the question 
may arise, "Why continue to ask? God knows every 
need. Why not leave the entire matter with Him?" The 
Scriptures seem to answer this question by showing us 
that we need to ask for our own benefit, that we may be 
ready to appreciate the answer when it comes. If we 
get things without our realization of our need of them, 
they would come to us so easily that in our fallen condition 
they would be unappreciated. 

Indeed it is true that the majority of people receive 
daily many, many blessings that they are never thankful 

R5708 : page 183 

for; they do not appreciate them. God sends the sunshine 
and the rain, as our Lord Jesus told us, upon the 
evil and the good; and He intimates that these are great 
blessings from God. Yet how few people really appreciate 
the rain as a blessing from God! How few, when 
they see the sunshine, appreciate the blessing God is 
sending to them through the sunshine! Because these 
blessings are very common, and come without the asking, 
they are very little appreciated by the majority. 

But the Christian, having the eyes of his understanding 
opened, appreciates more and more all these blessings 
as from the Lord. Therefore as he comes to realize his 
needs, and what is promised in the Lord's Word, he knows 



that he may advantageously go to the Lord in prayer that 
these needs may be supplied. His heart has come into 
that receptive attitude where he is ready to receive God's 
blessings thankfully and profit by them. 

What, then, should we ask for as God's children? 
What do the Scriptures tell us to ask for? In the first 
place, they tell us not to use "vain repetitions." How 
should we understand this? Our Lord explains that we 
should not use vain repetitions "as the heathen do," who 
think that they will be heard on account of the number 
of times they repeat the prayer. The Chinese, for instance, 
have praying wheels, by which they can say a 
hundred prayers a minute. Thus they save time, voice, 
etc. But such prayers are only vain repetitions. Many 
professed Christians, we believe, practise vain repetitions; 
they say many prayers, which we fear often do not come 
from the heart, but are said over and over from an 
imaginary sense of duty or obligation. 

NOT FOR OLD CREATURE, BUT FOR NEW 

The proper heart condition would be one in which we 
would feel the need of the Lord's blessing and assistance, 
and would go to Him in a trustful attitude, presenting our 
petition, and waiting for His time and way to answer. 
As to the things that we should ask for, the Master points 
out in one of His discourses that the heathen, the people 
of the world in general, all not believers, ask for earthly 
blessings— "What shall we eat? What shall we drink? 
Wherewithal shall we be clothed?" So might a child pray 
for these earthly things in its innocence of mind. But 
children of God should pray for earthly blessings only to 
the extent that they would minister to the growth or 
usefulness of the New Creature. 

As the Christian grows in grace and in knowledge he 
should come to realize more and more that he is a New 
Creature, and that the New Creature is to pray for itself 
and not for the old creature. The New Creature must 
take into consideration the needs of the mortal body 
which is its tabernacle and its servant, but must ask for 
this body only what will be necessary that the New 
Creature may properly develop, and may accomplish the 
work given him to do by the Lord. He may ask nothing 
merely that the old creature may be gratified; for the old 
creature is reckoned as dead. He may ask the Lord to 
supply his real needs according to His unerring Wisdom. 

We should pray for strength to overcome the flesh, for 
wisdom to know how to deal with ourselves, for strength 
of character and for the development of the fruits and 
graces of the Holy Spirit. We should pray for spiritual 
food, for grace and wisdom to keep our garments unspotted 
from the world and to put on the whole armor of 
God. We should ask for wisdom as to how to understand 
the Word of God, and how to appreciate the Spirit of 
the Truth. All these things would be proper subjects of 
prayer, because they are part and parcel of what goes to 



make up the New Creation. 

In these prayers for the higher things, we are not 
ignoring the body and its needs, though we are not to seek 
after the things that the Gentiles seek (the name Gentiles 
including all those who are not in covenant relationship 
with God). Those who are in this covenant relationship 
with God should not ask as do those who are not in such 
relationship. God does not hear the prayers of those who 
have never come into His family. They have not been 
instructed to pray. And we are to pray for things different 
from those for which they would pray. In all the 
words that Jesus spoke there is no suggestion that His 
disciples should pray for better shoes or dress or better 
home or how to pay off the mortgage. Jesus and the 
Apostles never prayed for such things. What they prayed 
for is a suggestion of what we should pray for. 

We are to distinguish between prayer, petitions to God, 
and adoration. Any one may worship God, may bow 
down and adore Him. But in the matter of prayer there 
is a limitation. Only certain persons may pray to the 
Lord with any assurance of being heard. And these are 
they who have become His people by a definite covenant. 
Any who have come into such covenant relationship with 
God have the privilege of prayer. This was true of the 
Jews under the Law Covenant arrangement; and it is true 
of us who have made a Covenant of Sacrifice with the 
Lord through Jesus Christ. But even when privileged to 
pray, we must note the conditions of acceptable prayer. 
The conditions are that we should pray in harmony with 
the Divine will and not seek to bend the Divine will to 
ours. This would lead us to study the Word of God to 
find out the things which the Lord has promised us, and 
we should not ask outside of the Divine promises. 

BODY CARED FOR AS PROPERTY OF NEW CREATURE 

We should appreciate the fact that throughout the 
Gospel Age the Lord deals with His children as New 
Creatures in Christ, and that all His promises to us are 
to the New Creature. The New Creature is interested in 
the old body, because this body is its property. The 
body's interests are ours as New Creatures only in so far 
as these interests are beneficial to us in making our calling 

R5709 : page 183 

and election sure to our Heavenly inheritance, in so 
far as their consideration will in no wise interfere with 
our spiritual interests— but no farther. We are not, 
therefore, to tell the Lord what we prefer, but are to take 
what He sees best to give; for this will be what is for 
our best interests. This does not mean that we are not 
to mention to God our bodily needs. But we are to do 
so in the way that our Lord indicates to us in His sample 
prayer: "Give us this day our daily bread," our daily 
provisions, acknowledging that the daily food comes from 



Him, whether it is fine or common, bountiful or not. 
It will all be for the best interests of the New Creature. 
The prayer of one who asks only in harmony with the 
Lord's Word is certain to be answered. Good earthly 
parents are pleased to give good gifts to their children, 
gifts that they see are for their children's real interests. 
But if they see that the child is unappreciative of favors 
received, they might the next time withdraw the favors 
until proper appreciation is manifested. And so it is 
with our Heavenly Father. In bestowing His best gifts 
He waits for us to become really hungry for them. He 
does this that His blessings may do us the more good 
when they are granted. 

PRAYER FOR SPIRIT-BEGETTING UNNECESSARY 

In respect to the giving of the Holy Spirit some people 

R5709 : page 184 

have a wrong conception. Many not consecrated pray 
that the Lord would give them the Holy Spirit; but they 
have not studied the Scriptures enough. The Lord gives 
the Holy Spirit without our asking for it specifically, 
just as with the disciples at Pentecost: they presented 
themselves before the Lord and waited. They were praying, 
but they did not know enough about the Holy Spirit 
to pray for it. But the Lord gave the proper thing at 
the right time. And so it is with us, irrespective of 
prayer for the Spirit, provided we meet the required conditions. 
When we make our consecration to God through 
Christ, we do not need to ask for the begetting of the 
Holy Spirit— no more than a child in its natural conception. 
The child does not ask for its own begetting. How 
could it? But after we have received the spirit-begetting, 
we should pray that we may have God's sentiment, God's 
mind, God's will, as our sentiment, our mind, our will. 
God loves righteousness and hates iniquity. So we, 
realizing that we are surrounded by evil and selfishness, 
need to cultivate the spirit of love, that we may have that 
spirit which would appreciate and love righteousness. We 
are to learn gradually to love righteousness and to hate 
injustice and iniquity in large things and in small. We 
are to hate unrighteousness so much that we would scorn 
to do an injustice or an injury knowingly to anybody. 
The New Creature sees these things but dimly at first— 
what are just and what are unjust things, what are righteous 
and what are unrighteous things. We wish to have 
the Lord's sentiment as our sentiment in everything. Thus 
by studying the Lord's character as revealed in His Word, 
and striving day by day to be conformed thereto, we are 
"changed into the same image, from glory to glory, by the 
Spirit of the Lord." And thus we become more and more 
filled with the Spirit. 

EVIDENCES OF POSSESSION OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 



As the child of God develops, the possession of the 
Holy Spirit is more and more evidenced in his meekness, 
patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, love. These 
are the elements of character, of disposition, that God 
wishes us to have. These are to rule in our hearts, in our 
thoughts, and more and more in our outward lives. Anger, 
malice, hatred, strife, evil-speaking, envy, jealousy, all 
these are evidences of the unholy spirit, the spirit of the 
world and the Adversary, which we as children of the 
Heavenly King are to put away. They are the works of 
the flesh and the Devil. 

Since all of us have a measure of the unholy spirit 
in our flesh, some more and some less, it is right to pray 
daily for a larger measure of the Spirit of the Lord, more 
and more of the spirit of harmony with His perfect will. 
But we must cooperate with these prayers; for the Lord 
never arbitrarily fills any heart with His Spirit, even after 
the begetting has taken place. By coming to the Lord 
in sincere prayer for these blessings continually, by asking 
along these lines, we shall be preparing ourselves to look 
for the evidences of the Holy Spirit in our life. We 
shall be enabled to see whether we have more meekness 
than we once had, or whether we still lack in meekness. 
We shall perceive whether we are more gentle and more 
patient, whether we have more self-control, and in what 
respects we especially need to develop more in spiritual 
fruitage. Undoubtedly all of these qualities are lacking 
to a greater or less extent; but as we watch and pray, we 
shall learn to find the answer to our prayers; and as we 
grow in knowledge, in love, in Christlikeness, we grow in 
likeness also to our Father in Heaven. 

IMPROPER VIEWS OF PRAYER 

Prayer, as we have shown, is very essential, absolutely 
indispensable, to Christian growth, yea, to spiritual existence. 
Yet we have never thought of praying in the extreme 
way that some do. We have never thought of telling 
the Lord all about His Plan and of our wishes as to 
how He shall govern the Universe, and when and how to 
bring to pass our own will. We think there is far too 
much praying along this line. The sooner it is stopped 
the better. In answer to the request of His disciples, the 
Master gave them a sample prayer, which was surely very 
different from the prayers that the majority of people 
offer, who seemingly do not heed the example at all. 

The proper thing is to hearken to the Word of the 
Lord and not do too much speaking to Him. We are to 
do a great deal of listening, while He speaks to us. The 
poet has well expressed this important thought: 

"Master, speak! Thy servant heareth, 

Waiting for Thy gracious Word, 
Longing for Thy voice that cheereth, 

Master, let it now be heard! 



I am listening, Lord, for Thee! 
What hast Thou to say to me?" 

We understand that the Bible is the Divine presentation 
of the Divine will, purpose, plan, concerning us as 
His children. It is the Truth that the Lord designs shall 
sanctify us. "Sanctify them through Thy Truth; Thy 
Word is Truth." So declares our Master. He does not 
say, Sanctify them through prayer! The Master's prescription 
is that we study the Word and become sanctified 
thereby. And who is wiser than He? If we have not 
written a volume on prayer, it is because we find no 
Scriptural authority or precedent for so doing. 

While prayer is absolutely indispensable to the Christian, 
as we have said, yet it is the Word of God which 
teaches us God's will and Plan and which points out the 
way for us to go. We believe it is the failure to see this 
that has been largely responsible for the great want of 
faith of many professed children of God. No amount of 
praying will make up for a neglect of the study of the 
Lord's Word, which is the only Lamp to our feet given 
us as our Guide in this long, dark night in which sin has 
reigned in the world. "Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet 
and a light unto my path."— Psalm 119:105. 

We are to "pray without ceasing." We are to do this 
in the sense of not being discouraged when the good 
things promised us and asked for do not come quickly. 
We are to remember that the Word of Promise is sure. 
We are to rest in these promises and to continue to ask 
and to wait for their fulfilment— patiently, hopefully. 
Thus we pray unceasingly, "Thy Kingdom come," not by 
repeating the words every moment or every hour, but by 
continuing the thought, the expectation, the waiting for 
it, and by laboring in the interests of that Kingdom and 
in the preparation of our characters in order that we may 
have a share in it. We have known some to fall into 
difficulty by supposed communion with God— remaining 
on their knees for some time beside an empty chair on 
which they tried to imagine the Lord to be seated, etc., 
etc. We believe that they were in danger of falling into 
a snare of the Adversary by such unscriptural proceedings. 

For our part we feel that the Lord has already granted 
so many blessings that we would be ashamed to ask for 
many more. Our own requests, therefore, must be few. 
The Editor's presentations at the Throne of Heavenly 
Grace are thank-offerings, praise-offerings, indications of 
his devotion to the Lord and trust in Him, petitions for 
wisdom and grace to guide in life's affairs. We recall the 

R5709 :page 185 

Divine promises all the time, and not merely when on our 
knees. We seek to live in harmony with our prayers, and 
would encourage others to do the same. However, we 
are not all constituted alike; and having stated the matter 
from the Bible viewpoint, as we believe, also as viewed in 



the SCRIPTURE STUDIES and in other WATCH TOWER articles, 
we must leave it, trusting that the Lord's providence 
will guide His people aright. 

THE HOLY SPIRIT THE SPECIAL OBJECT OF PRAYER 

The reason why the prayers of so many Christians are 
unanswered is that their prayers are for things God has 
not told us to pray for or that they were not offered in 
sincerity. They have asked for wealth or temporal blessings, 
or perhaps for the conversion of a specified number 
of souls at their revival meeting, or something else unauthorized, 
or they have not really desired what they asked 
for, if it was for spiritual blessing. The Lord might 
grant a request for some temporal thing to a babe in 
Christ who prayed in his ignorance, not being properly 

R5710 :page 185 

instructed. But it would be different with an advanced 
Christian. The little child at the table might ask for 
something improper and violate the rules of etiquette 
without blame; while a person of mature age, advanced 
in education and in knowledge of etiquette, should know 
better. The things for which the Lord's children should 
especially pray are specified in His Word. The Holy 
Spirit is the special gift of God to His children. 

When we come to know that the Holy Spirit is the 
influence, the disposition of God, then we know what we 
are praying for. We want more and more of the Holy 
Spirit of God, that it may make us more gentle, more 
kind, more loving; we want more and more of the mind 
of Christ (mind and Spirit being used here interchangeably). 
We realize that we must strive to have this mind 
of Christ. If we day by day cultivate the spirit of the 
Devil, we cannot expect ever to attain the mind of Christ. 
If we determinedly cultivate the Spirit, the mind, of 
Christ, then the spirit of the Adversary can gain no entrance 
into our hearts; and we shall become more and 
more sound in mind. We come to know more and more 
the perfect will of God as we are filled with His Spirit. 
Thus we are being prepared for an abundant entrance 
into the everlasting Kingdom. 

PRAY IN FAITH, NOTHING DOUBTING 

The Lord in the lesson under consideration, tells us 
that we must not "faint," the word faint being used in 
the sense of faint-heartedness— "Consider Jesus, ...lest 
ye be weary and faint in your minds"; "for in due season 
we shall reap, if we faint not." We may ask for more 
of the Holy Spirit, feeling that we need grace along some 
particular line. For instance, we may feel that we need 
more patience. While praying for patience, we should 
not say, "I shall never be patient; I was not born that 
way!" But we are to expect our prayer along this line 



to be answered. We are to ask and then wait for the 
patience, continuing our petition, knowing that the patience 
will come, if we strive for it in harmony with our 
prayers. An excellent and practical way to assist in this 
is to impose a punishment upon ourselves for every outbreak 
of impatience. 

The Lord's people have long been praying, "Thy Kingdom 
come; Thy will be done on earth." This prayer has 
been offered for more than eighteen hundred years, and 
God's children have not yet seen His Kingdom established. 
Shall we cease to pray? Ah, no! We are assured 
that it will indeed come. Even now it is at the very 
doors! God's Kingdom shall be fully set up; and the time 
will come when there will be no disloyalty in all the earth, 
as now there is none in Heaven. Our prayers will not 
bring God's Kingdom one minute sooner than He has 
planned, but we pray by way of assuring the Lord that 
we are waiting for the Kingdom and expecting it in harmony 
with His sure promise. By so praying and not 
fainting, the children of the Lord are strengthening themselves. 
God's glorious Kingdom will be manifested— and 
soon! Then all who have attained the character-likeness 
of our Lord Jesus Christ shall be exalted to reign with 
Him in this Kingdom. 



R5710 :page 185 

THE SOURCE OF TRUE PROMOTION 

"Promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, 
nor from the south; but God is the Judge. He putteth 
down one, and setteth up another."— Psalm 75:6,7. 

ONE watching the stars night after night, 
would observe that while each one has its 
own motion, yet all seem to revolve around 
a fixed point which we call the North Star. 
This fixed star is apparently motionless, and 
therefore is a point by which a man may 
gage his course. As we all know, the magnetic 
needle of the mariner's compass always 
points due north. 

From the clearer astronomical knowledge 
of our day, it has been ascertained that while the planets 
of our solar system revolve around our sun, yet there 
are vast numbers of other suns each having its own 
retinue of planets, which with their satellites are revolving 
around it as a center. Furthermore, Science declares 
that there is a far mightier Center, around which these 
countless millions of suns revolve, accompanied by their 
planets and satellites. This great Center seems to 
be associated with the Pleiades, particularly with Alcyone, 
the central star of this renowned group. For this reason 
the suggestion has been made that the Pleiades may represent 



the Residence of Jehovah, the place from which 

He governs the Universe. This thought gives new force 

to the question which the Almighty asked the patriarch 

Job: "Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, 

or loose the bands of Orion? Canst thou bring forth the 

constellations of the Zodiac in their season?"— 

Job 38:31,32. 

There seem to be fewer stars in the North than in 
any other part of the heavens. Thus the North seems to 
have been given a very prominent position, the other 
points of the compass giving it homage, as it were. This 
fact was observed by the ancients, as the Prophet Job 
declares— "He stretcheth out the North over the empty 
space, and hangeth the earth upon nothing." (Job 26:7.) 
Throughout the Scriptures the North seems to be 
closely associated with Jehovah's government of the earth. 

LESSONS IN THE RESULTS OF SIN 

For six thousand years this planet Earth has been a 
rebellious province in the Universe of God; and God has 
permitted mankind to work out their own designs, to 
manifest what they could do. He not only gave His 
chosen people Israel certain promises and blessings, but 
He afterwards gave opportunity also to various nations 
of the world to exercise great power, to become indeed 
world-empires, as representatives of Gentile wisdom, to 
show what the unregenerate heart could give to men in 
the way of order, law, prosperity, blessings, peace. The 

R5710 :page 186 

period during which He gave this opportunity to the 
nations is Scripturally called the "Times of the Gentiles," 
a period of 2,520 years, which began with Nebuchadnezzar 
king of Babylon at the time the Lord permitted His own 
typical kingdom of Israel to be overthrown, to so remain 
until Messiah's Day.— Luke 21:24; Ezekiel 21:25-27. 

During this interim the world has had four great universal 
empires. These world-governments have attempted 
to bring various blessings to mankind, yet they have all 
proven weak so far as righteousness is concerned, and 
strong so far as evil and viciousness are concerned. 
Evidently this is the great lesson which God designed 
that mankind should learn— that in this fallen condition 
human government cannot be a success; that perfection 
of being and perfect conformity to the Divine Law alone 
can give true happiness; that mankind in their present 
sinful, dying condition, can meet with only ultimate failure 
and disaster. Thus through actual experiences mankind 
will come to realize their own helplessness and 
their need of God. 

But while God has been permitting man to prove his 
own weakness, He has also been preparing for the blessing 
of the whole world, as He has foretold in His Word. 
The time when He will take charge of man's affairs, 



through the Kingdom of Messiah, will be the time when 
true and lasting promotion will be realized. All who will 
then come into harmony with God will receive this true 
promotion— the attainment of all the good things which 
were originally provided for mankind in God's Plan, but 
which were lost by the disobedience of our first father 
and our first mother, Adam and Eve. 

"God is the Judge; He putteth down one and setteth 
up another." The Lord will put down the attempt of 
the great usurper Satan to rule the world. Satan, originally 
Lucifer, conceived an ambition to exalt himself to 
"sit upon the sides of the North," to "be like the Most 
High." (Isa. 14:12-17.) But very soon now he will be 
bound for a thousand years, and will finally be destroyed. 

So far as earthly kingdoms are concerned, we may say 
that God has a general supervision over them in so far 
as they might otherwise thwart His purposes; and He 
sometimes puts down one and favors the exaltation to 
power of another. We are not able to say, however, that 
this putting down or setting up is in the nature of 
Divine judgment for sin; for some of those put down 
have not been the unworthy, and some of those raised to 
power have not been the best, but often very evil. God 
has been merely so overruling as to cause all things not 
only to work together for the ultimate outworking of the 
great Plan which He has arranged, but also to teach men 
the necessary lessons of the exceeding sinfulness of sin. 

"MOUNT ZION ON THE SIDES OF THE NORTH" 

God's particular dealings with the world will be in the 
future, and for the first thousand years will be through 
the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. All things are of 
the Father, and by the Son. In this glorious work of 
judging the world, Christ Himself will be the Judge, and 
the Church, His Body, will be the associate judges. They 
will render righteous judgment in all cases, will set up 
only those who come into full accord with God, and will 
overthrow and eventually destroy all others. 

In the meantime God has a special dealing with His 
people— those who have already left the world, who have 
consecrated their lives to Him, who have been accepted 
through the Lord Jesus Christ and counted members of 
Christ's Body. These are in the way to a promotion, a 
prominence, greater than that of all others. Satan's ambition 

R5711 :page 186 

was for self-exaltation; Christ's ambition, on the 
contrary, was to please the Father and to do good. So 
likewise the class called to be Christ's associates in the 
Kingdom have a similar purpose and spirit to that of 
their Lord and Head. They also seek to do only the will 
of the Heavenly Father. They also are moved, not to 
promote their own selfish interests and to gratify their 
fleshly propensities, but to lay down their lives in carrying 



out God's great Purpose and Plan. 

This is the class which will receive the preeminence 
over all other classes, all other stations, in earth or in 
Heaven. With their Lord they are to receive glory, 
honor, immortality. They will be exalted far above angels 
and be granted the Divine nature, as has been their 
Master and Forerunner. (Romans 2:7; 1 Corinthians 15:53,54; 

1 John 3:2,3; 1 Corinthians 1:26,27; 2 Thessalonians 2:14; 

2 Peter 1:4.) These will share the First 
Resurrection, Christ's Resurrection. (Revelation 20:5,6; 
Philippians 3:10.) Their mortal bodies, now merely 
the instruments of the New Creature, will be laid down 
forever in death— "Sown in weakness," they will be 
"raised in power"; "sown in dishonor," they will be 
"raised in glory"; "sown an animal body," they will be 
"raised a spiritual body." 

A careful study of the above citations of Scripture 
will be very helpful to those who are comparatively new 
in the study of the High Calling of the Church of Christ. 
It is a subject but little understood by Christians in general. 
But such is the great promotion which God purposes 
to give His true saints of this Gospel Age, and this 
promotion can be received from no other quarter than 
God Himself, on His own terms. This is the glorious 
inheritance of Zion. When she has been thus exalted 
and glorified with her Lord, it will be said of her, "Beautiful 
for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is Mount 
Zion, on the sides of the North, the City of the Great 
King." (Psalm 48:2.) Thus the great eminence which 
Lucifer in his pride and presumption sought to grasp, 
that he might "sit upon the sides of the North," will be 
granted as a reward to The Christ, Head and Body. 

PUTTING DOWN AND SETTING UP IN THE CHURCH 

This is the great prominence which the people of God, 
called to this high station, should be seeking, by faithfulness, 
humility, love and zeal in the service of the Lord. 
During the present life, experiences of developing and 
testing are necessary preparations for this exaltation. 
All those begotten of the Holy Spirit as New Creatures 
are now called the Church of Christ, although the elect 
Church proper will not be organized and completed until 
the First Resurrection. Not until then will the personnel 
of the Church of glory be manifested. But God deals 
now with all those who have made a Covenant of Sacrifice. 
(Psalm 50:5.) When they meet, even two or 
three of them, the Lord's presence is in their midst; and 
each has the Lord's blessing in proportion as he has His 
Spirit. God is now judging in the Church through His 
Son. He is not judging the world at present. 

The principle expressed in our text is operating now 
in the Church— the setting up of one and the putting down 
of another. That the Lord does take an active part in 
the affairs of the Church we truly believe. St. Paul says 
that "God hath set the members, every one of them, in 



the Body as it hath pleased Him." (1 Corinthians 12:18.) 
This surely indicates a Divine supervision in the Church. 
We believe that a great deal of trouble is caused by the 
failure of many of the Lord's people to view matters 
from this standpoint. They are too apt to forget about 
the supervision and oversight which the Lord is taking 
of His Cause. Some therefore have felt great distress 

R5711 :page 187 

if they were not elected to be a Deacon or an Elder in 
the Church. Instead of looking at the matter from this 
viewpoint— that the Lord Himself has the supervision of 
the affairs of His Church— they are too liable to think, 
It was that brother who opposed me, or this brother, etc. 

We believe that these take a wrong view. Perhaps 
the Lord permitted the matter to result thus in order to 
test their humility. The Apostle James intimates something 
of this kind: "Let the brother of low degree rejoice 
in that he is exalted, and the brother of high degree 
in that he is made low." We should look beyond the 
mere circumstances of the moment; we should consider 
and remember well that all prominence, all promotion, 
and all control of the Church, is in the hands of the 
Lord. Not only might the Lord wish to give a lesson to 
a brother who might have been a faithful Elder or a 
faithful Deacon, but it might also be a good lesson to 
the Class. They might have failed to appreciate what 
zeal, energy and ability this brother had. If so, their 
neglect to reelect him to the position would in time prove 
a lesson to them. The same is true in the case of a 
brother who has energy, zeal and ability with spirituality, 
who has never been elected to eldership by the class. 

In any event it is for each of the Lord's children to 
exercise faith, and to remember that real prominence, true 
exaltation, is of the Lord. As the Apostle Paul shows, 
he that "desires the office of an overseer [from a real 
wish to serve], desires a good thing." So it is not wrong 
to appreciate such office in the Ecclesia; and we are to 
appreciate it when we are chosen Elders, because we 
shall thus have special opportunities for service and for 
laying down our lives for the brethren. But we are not 
to be self-seeking in the matter. 

When brethren who have served as Elders or 
Deacons are not reelected, yet are rightly exercised and 
manifest no resentment, but say, "I am just as glad to 
serve in one place as another," and enter cheerfully into 
whatever service is open to them, it will no doubt prove 
a blessing to their own hearts, and also a blessing to the 
Class, who note their Christlike spirit. So such brethren 
should say to themselves, "I will do everything I can to 
forward the Lord's Cause. The vote of the Class has 
not given me the responsibility of initiative and direction, 
but I will do my best to help on in other ways the work 
of the Lord." Thus they would show the proper spirit 
of humility and submission to the Lord's providence in 



the decision of the Class. 

"HE CALLETH HIS OWN SHEEP BY NAME" 

We believe the principle of our text should be considered 
in the daily lives of all the Lord's people. Some 
may fail to see the particular interest which the Lord 
takes in each one who is His. Every true child of God 
is the Lord's in the particular sense of having entered 
into a Covenant of Sacrifice. We should always remember 
this. Thus as we grow in grace we shall undoubtedly 
come to see that all "the steps of a righteous man are 
ordered of the Lord, and He delighteth in his way." "He 
keepeth all his bones; not one of them is broken." (Psalm 37:23; 
34:20.) The Lord will surely direct the path of 
such. The Master emphasized His peculiar and personal 
interest in each of His followers. He calls Himself their 
Shepherd, and says, "He calleth His own sheep by name, 
and leadeth them out." (John 10:3.) This means a very 
special supervision of the affairs and interests of each 
one of His true disciples. Whatever may come to these 
is not a matter of chance or luck. 

The steps of the world are not ordered of the Lord. 
But God's people in proportion as they walk by faith and 
realize that "all things are working together for good to 
them that love God, to the called according to His purpose," 
in that proportion will they be able to have joy, 
blessing and peace in every experience that comes to 
them. Failing to do this, some of God's people, we continue 
to see, are fretting and chafing, feeling that things 
are working wrong with them, fearing that the Lord has 
forgotten them, or that the brethren have forgotten them, 
and that everything is amiss in their case. They are 
failing to recognize that God has to do with all backsetting. 
If He sees best not to promote them, not to use 
their talents for a time as they would like, let them learn 
a lesson of humility and submission, of patience and trust. 
Let them be willing to cheerfully await God's own good 
time for their promotion. 

To us, then, the great lesson of our text is that promotion, 
exaltation, cometh neither from the East nor 
the West nor the South, but from Jehovah, who alone 
is the Judge, who setteth up one and putteth down another 
—and all in love. If the putting down seems at 
times to be the result of mistakes or lack of appreciation 
on the part of the brethren, let us remember that it has 
come in the providence of the Lord, and is designed of 
Him for our good, and perhaps for the good of others in 
one way or another. The experience will prove a blessing 
if received in the right spirit. "No good thing will 
He withhold from them that walk uprightly." Nothing 
can by any means hurt us if we keep close to the Lord. 
Then in due time, we shall be promoted to sit with Christ 
in His Throne. 



R5714:page 187 

"ASK WHAT I SHALL GIVE THEE" 

--JULY 18.-1 KINGS 3:4-15.- 

WHAT ARE DREAMS?-- WHEN THEY SHOULD BE FOLLOWED 
-SOLOMON'S DREAM-HIS HEART CONDITION REFLECTED-HIS 
REALIZATION OF HIS RESPONSIBILITIES-HIS HUMILITY 
-HIS REQUEST OR CHOICE-GOD'S APPROVAL AND THE 
HAPPY RESULTS. 

"The fear of Jehovah is the beginning 
of wisdom."— Proverbs 9:10. 

WE HAVE nothing to indicate that Solomon 

ever became very haughty, proud, although 

he certainly would have been a marvelous 

man had his great wisdom, honor and wealth 

not affected in some degree the childlike 

simplicity which he expressed to the Lord in 

the dream recorded in today's lesson, which 

gives us a wonderful insight into Solomon's 

true character. Incidentally, it is valuable 

to every man, every woman, particularly at 

the beginning of life or in connection with the starting 

of any enterprise, and in proportion as the enterprise is 

a serious or a difficult one or one directly related to God 

and His Word. 

Solomon initiated his reign by making a feast to 
some of his friends and the prominent people of his 
realm. The place chosen was Gibeon. The account tells 
us of his offering a thousand burnt offerings unto the 
Lord. This does not signify that a thousand animals 
were burned entire; but rather that certain portions of 
them, particularly the fat, were burned as an offering to 
the Lord, while the food portions became the basis of the 

R5714:page 188 

feast. Less meat was eaten then than now, except on 
such feast occasions. We can see the wisdom of such a 
general acknowledgment of God and of His inauguration 
of a new king; and the feast for the people signifies 
figuratively the good will of the king and his desire to 
make his reign one of prosperity, blessing, rejoicing, and 
helpfulness to all. The Divine ordering of the matter 
was recognized by the Israelites, who perceived that all 
things were to be done with an eye to God's approval. 

ARE DREAMS SIGNIFICANT? 

It was during this feast, which probably lasted several 
days, that Solomon had the wonderful dream here narrated. 
That it was supernatural there can be no doubt. 



Similarly God revealed Himself to others in ancient 
times, and especially to His people Israel, who had come 
into covenant relationship with Him at Mount Sinai under 
Moses. But God was not in similar relationship with 
other peoples, who were, as we read, strangers, foreigners, 
outcasts— not in covenant relationship with Him. 

Although the Christian Church is peculiarly in relationship 
with God, and in a much closer relationship than 
were the Jews under their Law, nevertheless we must not 
suppose that all dreams which even consecrated Christians 
may have are to be regarded as inspired. Very evidently 
the majority of our dreams are merely wanderings of 
our mind because we are not soundly asleep. For God to 
make fewer communications with Spiritual Israel by 
dreams would not signify a lesser interest in their affairs, 
but rather that He has otherwise provided for them, for 
their guidance— in the Bible. Additionally, we learn that 
He wishes us to walk by faith and not by sight; and to 
direct us continually by dreams would be to interfere with 
this walking by faith. 

St. Paul gives us the key to the matter, saying that 
"the Word of God is sufficient," that the man of God 
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good 
work." (2 Timothy 3:16,17.) But there is nothing to 
hinder God from using a dream as a means of instructing 
His spiritual children if that should seem at any time 
to be the appropriate course. Many of the Lord's people 
have had more or less experience with such profitable 
dreams, which seemed to give them the needed instruction 
or suggestion. Nevertheless there is but one sure way 
of receiving dreams; namely, to interpret them only in 
full accord with the Scriptures. The Apostle suggests 
that if an angel should proclaim to us any other Gospel 
than this, it should be rejected; and similarly, if a dream 
should suggest any other Gospel, it should be rejected. 
The Divine Word is to be the great talisman, test, standard, 
for everything for the Christian. 

SOLOMON'S WISE CHOICE 

In Solomon's dream the Lord appeared to him, saying, 
"Ask what I shall give thee." So God is asking of 
all who would become His children. He desires to do 
them good, but He wishes them to realize their needs 
and to make requests accordingly. The Apostle suggests 
something along this line, saying, "If any man [Christian] 
lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth liberally." 

Solomon's answer in his dream shows us a beautiful 
simplicity of character for a young prince just come to 
the throne. He recounts God's mercy to his father David, 
and declares that this was in proportion as King David 
had walked faithfully with God in righteousness of heart. 
He expressed appreciation of the fact that God had 
brought even him to the throne because of Divine appreciation 
of his father David. Then he recounted to 
God his own littleness, weakness, and insufficiency for 



the great position. Touchingly he declared, "I am but a 
little child." This reminds us of the Apostle's words, 
"When I am weak, then I am strong." This was really 
the strength of Solomon's character; namely, that he was 
meek, was teachable, like a little child— not boastful or 
self-confident, not blind to his privileges and obligations. 

Because of the responsibilities of the kingdom, for 
which he felt himself so incompetent, Solomon prayed, 
"Give therefore Thy servant an understanding heart to 

R5715 :page 188 

judge Thy people [to administer justice to them], that I 
may discern between good and bad: for who is able to 
judge this Thy so great a people?" Is it any wonder that 
we read further that in the dream the Lord manifested 
His good pleasure at this request? "And God said unto 
him, Because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not 
asked for thyself long life; neither hast asked riches for 
thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast 
asked for thyself understanding to discern judgment 
[justice]; therefore, I have done according to thy words: 
lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart; 
so that there was none like thee before thee, neither after 
thee shall any arise like unto thee. And I have also given 
thee that which thou hast not asked, both riches, and 
honor: so that there shall not be any among the kings 
like unto thee, all thy days." 

"I knelt before Thy gracious Throne, 

And asked for peace with suppliant knee; 

And peace was given: not peace alone, 
But love, and joy, and ecstasy." 



R5713 :page 188 

DEDICATING THE TEMPLE 

-JULY 25.-1 KINGS 8:22-30.- 

WHAT THE TEMPLE TYPIFIED-DOUBLE ANTITYPES-THEIR 
DEDICATION-KING SOLOMON'S PRAYER-GOD'S PERSONALITY - 
HIS DWELLING-PLACE IN HEAVEN-"THE GLORY OF 
THE LORD FILLED THE TEMPLE" -ITS ANTITYPE. 

"My House shall be called a House 
of prayer for all people."— Isaiah 56:7. 

POSSESSED of reverence for the Lord, full 
of zeal for Him, full of appreciation of the 
Divine promise that King David's successor 
should build the House of the Lord, the 
Temple, for which David had for years 
made preparations of money and valuables, 



we find King Solomon speedily giving attention 

to this matter. In the fourth year of 

his reign, preparations had reached such a 

development that the construction of the 

Temple was begun; and seven and a half years later the 

scenes of this Study were enacted— when the Temple was 

ready for dedication. Strange to say, it was dedicated 

about a month before it was completely finished. Doubtless 

this contained some important typical lesson, which 

we may some day more fully understand. 

Built of white marble, the Temple must have been a 
very imposing structure, although not lofty. It was of 
but one story; nevertheless, its position on the mountain 
top surely gave it a very commanding appearance, its 
glittering, white walls overtopping the entire landscape. 
But we are interested in the Temple of Solomon more 
than in any other building because it was a type, as well 
as a reality. Let us note the Apostle's references to it 

R5713 :page 189 

and his declaration that its antitype is found in God's 
holy people— the Church. We read, "Know ye not that 
ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God 
dwelleth in you?" "For ye are the Temple of the living 
God; as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in 
them; and I will be their God, and they shall be My 
people."— 1 Corinthians 3:16; 2 Corinthians 6:16. 

PREPARATION OF THE LIVING STONES 

In the picture which the Apostle thus brings to our 
attention, the Church corresponds to the Tabernacle rather 
than to the Temple. As God was with the Children of 
Israel from the time they entered into covenant with Him 
until the Temple was dedicated by Solomon, He indicated 
His presence by a manifestation of the Shekinah Light 
in the Most Holy of the Tabernacle. And so with us now 
as Christians: from the time we become sons of God— 
from the time of our consecration, justification, sanctification 
and begetting of the Holy Spirit— our bodies are 
tabernacles, or temporary dwelling-places, of God's Holy 
Spirit. His Spirit in us is represented originally by the 
begetting influence which we receive as the start of our 
new existence as New Creatures in Christ Jesus; and that 
light, or holy illumination, spread abroad in us fills us 
with the light of the knowledge of the glory of God more 
and more. The Tabernacle in one sense of the word was 
a temple— in the sense that any place where God is would 
properly be called a temple, a holy place. But, as suggested, 
it is preferable that we think of our fleshly bodies 
as tabernacles of God— His temporary dwelling-place. In 
a fuller sense, by and by, there will be a great transfer. 
The Lord's saintly ones will be changed from flesh to 
spirit by the power of the First Resurrection, and will 
thus be more perfectly represented by the beautiful 



Temple which Solomon built. 

But there is a still more beautiful thought brought to 
our attention by St. Peter. He tells us that the various 
members of the Church of Christ— the saints— are living 
stones, which are in process of chiseling and polishing, 
preparatory to the uniting of all these in one grand, 
glorious Temple of God beyond the Veil. (1 Peter 2:5,9.) 
Any not enduring the chiseling and polishing will be 
discarded as unfit for the glorious Temple. 

The bringing together of these living stones beyond 
the Veil will be by the Resurrection Power, beautifully 
illustrated in the erection of Solomon's Temple, of 
which we read that its stones were prepared at the quarry 
and then finally assembled for the construction of the 
Temple, and that they were so perfectly shaped and 
marked for their various places that they came together 
without the sound of a hammer— without need for chiseling 
or for other labor upon them at the time of the construction. 
So, St. Paul says, the Church is God's workmanship. 
(Ephesians 2:10.) And His work will be so 
perfectly accomplished that there will be no need of 
rectification or alteration beyond the Veil. 

It is this viewpoint that is especially interesting and 
profitable to the Lord's people. Such of them as can 
realize that they have been called of God to this High 
Calling, to membership in the Temple, can fully appreciate 
thereafter the necessity for the trials and difficulties 
of life which are shaping them, fitting them, for Heavenly 
glory, honor, immortality. These are the "all things" 
working together for good to them that love God— preparing 
them for the spiritual blessings and services of 
the future.— Romans 8:28. 

WORK OF THE GLORIFIED CHURCH 

When we think of the Church as the Temple under 
construction, it impresses upon us the thought that there 
is a future work to be accomplished. Why construct a 
Temple, and then not use it? Serious injury came to us 
through various errors of the past: for instance, the 
thought that the Church alone is to be saved and all the 
remainder of mankind to be lost; and a further thought, 
that at the Second Coming of Christ the world is to be 
burned up, and the Divine Plan ignominiously terminated. 
With such a view, the construction of the Church as the 
great Temple would seem to be a waste; since there 
would be nobody to be blessed by it. 

However, as our eyes of understanding open more 
and more clearly, we begin to see beauty in the Divine 
Plan and arrangement. So far from God's Plan terminating 
at the Second Coming of Christ, it will merely 
begin there, so far as the world is concerned. The 
Church, in one figure, will be the Royal Priesthood for 
the blessing of all the families of the earth. (Galatians 3:29.) 
In the other figure, the Church will be the great 
Temple through which all the world of mankind may 



have access to God and return to harmony with Him. 
Thus, eventually, this glorified Church, or Temple, 
will be the House of Prayer for all people, all nations— 
not that they will pray to a house, but that they will 

R5714:page 189 

approach God through the glorified Church, in which His 
Presence will be manifested and His mercy will be available 
to all. From this viewpoint, the Temple with its 
Shekinah glory represented the Church in the glory of 
the future, in association with Christ; and God will dwell 
in and operate through that glorious Church for the 
blessing of the world, represented by all those who will 
worship God looking toward His Holy House. 

DEDICATING THE TEMPLE OF GOD 

There is an important thought in connection with a 
dedication which some seem to overlook. It was necessary 
for the Tabernacle to be dedicated, or set apart to 
God, before He deigned to recognize it and to use it. 
Similarly with all of God's people; it is necessary that 
they should positively and formally dedicate themselves 
to God and to His service before being recognized of 
Him and filled with His Spirit. It is not enough that they 
should know of Him and of the Lord Jesus Christ, and 
be persuaded of these things— not enough even that they 
should know something of the glories of the Coming Age 
as revealed in the Word of God. It is necessary, also, 
that they make formal dedication of themselves to God, 
fully surrendering their own wills that God may come 
into them by His Holy Spirit and, accepting their sacrifices, 
constitute them thereafter His tabernacles. 

When the Temple was ready for dedication, Solomon 
presented it to God with the prayer which constitutes the 
basis of today's Study— a prayer beautiful in simplicity 
and indicative of King Solomon's perception of the great 
truth that God is a personal God, whose dwelling-place 
is not everywhere, but in Heaven. It shows us that the 
king fully understood that the Temple which he had 
made, like the Tabernacle before it, merely represented 
God's power and grace amongst His people. The presence 
of the Temple indicated that there were sinners who 
needed to be atoned for by its arrangements, and that 
mercy and forgiveness would be needed and that prayers 
toward God would be appropriate. "Hear Thou in Heaven 
Thy dwelling-place; and when Thou hearest, forgive." 

So during the Millennium, all the world will have the 
opportunity of approaching God through His great 
Temple of which Jesus is the Chief Corner-Stone, and 
the Church the living stones under His Headship. And 
God will hear the prayers thus properly presented, and 
will forgive the sins of the people; and as a result the 

R5714:page 190 



work of Restitution will progress to a grand completion. 

As Solomon dedicated the Temple, so the Church of 
Christ will be dedicated, formally presented to the Father. 
The great Antitype of Solomon will do this; namely, the 
Lord Jesus Christ, presenting us all as His members, as 
the Temple which is His Body, reared up on the Third 
Day— the Third Thousand- Year Day from the time of 
His death-Hie dawning of the Great Sabbath. (John 2:19-22.) 
As a result of the dedication, the glory of the 
Lord will fill the House. The fact that the typical Temple 
was filled with the glory of the Lord before it was entirely 
completed seems to imply that at this present time there 
will be some manifestation of God's favor toward His 
Church in glorification while yet the work of construction 
is not quite finished. However, it is difficult to read 
prophecy in advance of its fulfilment. We must wait to 
see what will be the fulfilment of this feature. 

"God moves in a mysterious way 
His wonders to perform." 



R5711 :page 190 

HOW WE ARE TO WAIT ON THE LORD 

"Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and 
He shall strengthen thine heart."— Psalm 27:14. 

THE expression, "Wait on the Lord," does not 

mean so much a rendering of service to the 

Lord, as a waiting for the Lord, a waiting 

before Him, to see what is His will for us. 

We do not understand that it has the 

thought of ministering to the Lord, as a 

servant would wait on his master, but of 

patient watching until we learn what our 

Lord would have us do. Each child of God 

should wait to be guided by Him, and not 

run on before Him unmindful of what is the Lord's 

purpose for him. "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, 

R5712:page 190 

and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy 
ways acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy paths," 
is the counsel of the Wise Man. (Proverbs 3:5,6.) Many 
of the children of God have made mistakes along this line. 

Having committed our ways to the Lord, we should 
go forward only as He leads us. If we are not clear as 
to His will, let us not be in too great a hurry, nor try to 
guide ourselves, but present the matter to the Lord in 
earnest prayer, asking that we may have no will or way 
of our own, but may be guided only as He wills. Then 



let us wait and watch for the indication of His providence, 
and follow as He seems to lead, leaving the results 
with Him. We are not to follow our own choice, without 
evidences that it is God's will. The question may sometimes 
be asked of us, "Are you going to do this way or 
that way? Are you going to this place or to that place?" 
Our attitude and our reply, if we have not as yet clearly 
ascertained the Lord's will in the matter, should be, "I 
am not yet fully decided. I will consider the Word of 
the Lord, to see how His instructions seem to apply in 
this case." Or, "I am watching to see what the Lord's 
providences seem to indicate, and am praying over the 
matter, that I may be guided aright." The poet expressed 
the right thought: 

"I am afraid to touch 

Things that involve so much." 

Those who wait on the Lord do not always seem to 
prosper best, from outward appearances. But the Psalmist 
declares that we should be of good courage as we thus 
wait on God. We are pursuing the right course, and shall 
have His blessing. We make no mistake when we wait 
upon Him. Others may seem to be getting ahead of us 
at first, but we are to "wait on the Lord." 

Take no step unless you feel sure that the Lord is 
directing and guiding. Watch for the meaning of His 
providences. Study His Word. Let not your faith depart 
from its moorings. "Be of good courage!" "Good" 
courage is courage of a good degree, not merely a little 
courage. Be of strong courage; "and He shall strengthen 
thine heart; wait, I say, on the Lord." The word heart 
here may be understood to mean the soul, the being— 
especially the intelligent portion of us. The Lord will 
support us, He will fortify us and make us strong to bear, 
strong to do His will as it is made known to us. They 
that wait upon the Lord shall not want any good thing. 

TRAITS NECESSARY TO SUCCESS 

Courage, fortitude, persistency, in the service of the 
Lord are very necessary to the child of God. Such traits 
are needful even to the world. Whoever lacks these qualities 
of character is pretty sure to make poor success in 
life. Lack of courage, lack of hope, is one of the chief 
causes of failure in the world. Our text, however, calls 
attention, not to the world, but to those who belong to 
the Lord. The precious promises of God's Word, which 
are only for His people, those who are wholly His, give 
these every reason for hope; they have full authority to 
be strong and of a good courage. The children of God 
will have trials and experiences similar to those of the 
world, besides experiences and trials peculiar to them as 
followers of Christ. These come not to us in a haphazard 
way, however, as to the world, but are under the direct 
supervision of the Lord. 



Those who are new in the service of the Master might 
think for a time that matters should run smoothly for 
them, that they should not have the difficulties common 
to the world; that now as they were God's children He 
would protect them from afflictions and mistreatment. But 
as they study the Lord's Word, they soon see that this is 
not true; they see that they are to walk by faith, and not 
by sight. They learn that they are not to expect to have 
outward and tangible manifestations of His favor, but 
that they are to suffer with Christ— that hereunto they 
were called. (1 Peter 2:20,21; Acts 14:22.) They learn 
that they must be obedient, and they come to see what 
obedience means. 

The Master learned obedience— learned what obedience 
meant— "by the things which He suffered." The 
narrow way is not an easy path. His followers learn that 
the Lord is now calling a class that have faith in Him, a 
class who accept His Word fully. In time they come, 
too, to see that "If God be for them, who can be against 
them?" If matters do not go as they had expected, if 
trials come, they will say, "We know that all things work 
for good to them that love God." 

So these learn, as they are guided by the Word of the 
Lord, that they are to be of good courage as they pursue 
their onward way. There are many difficulties to be surmounted, 
and it requires courage to surmount difficulties. 
But the courage born of faith in God and in His "exceeding 
great and precious promises" strengthens them when 
otherwise they might be overwhelmed. It gives them a 
strength to which all others are strangers. 

TRUST WHERE WE CANNOT TRACE 

If a child of God becomes discouraged and loses his 
hope and strength, it is because he has lost his hold upon 
the Lord's promises to help. To lose courage is to lose 

R5712:page 191 

faith. Loss of faith and courage makes a child of God 

powerless before his foes. We must trust our Father 

even when the meaning of His providences is veiled from 

our eyes and when our efforts to serve Him seem to be 

hedged up. We look back at the Apostles and their experiences. 

The Apostle Paul was very desirous of carrying 

the Message of the Gospel to others. Several times 

he tried to go into Asia, but he was not permitted to go. 

He began to wonder why this was, why his efforts continued 

to prove failures. But the Lord revealed to him 

that he was to go into Greece instead. In his first Epistle 

to the Church at Thessalonica, he writes, "Wherefore we 

would have come to you, even I Paul, once and again, but 

Satan hindered us." (1 Thessalonians 2:18.) But we 

are sure that the Lord would overrule the machinations 

of Satan and cause them to work out His own glory, and 

the lesson of patience and submission would be a blessing 



to His children. 

We see that in the Garden of Gethsemane our Lord 
had not lost faith in God, but was fearful for a time. 
As He came to the closing hours of His experiences on 
earth, He wondered whether or not He had faithfully 
conformed to all the Father's requirements. He knew that 
the slightest infraction of God's Law would mean His 
death. Had He completed His sacrifice acceptably? 
Would He be ushered from death into Heavenly glory by 
a resurrection? Then He received from the Father the 
assurance that He had been altogether faithful. All the 
trials and difficulties which the Master underwent in the 
laying down of His life preceded Him as a sweet incense, 
a precious perfume, beyond the veil, into the Most Holy 
as shown in the type.— Leviticus 16:12,13. 

A PROPER FEAR 

After the Jewish high priest had crumbled the sweet 
incense upon the fire of the golden altar, after its fragrance 
had penetrated beyond the second veil and had 
covered the Ark of the Covenant and the Mercy Seat, he 
then himself passed beneath the veil. Every time the high 
priest raised the veil thus to pass under it he probably 
feared; for in case he had failed in any particular to carry 
out his sacrificial work acceptably he would have died as 
he passed under the veil. So our Lord Jesus knew that 
His work must be acceptable in the most absolute sense, 
else He would forever forfeit His existence. He would 
become as though He had not been; He would lose all. 

There was no earthly being to give our Lord encouragement 
along this line. There was no one to say, You have 
done everything perfectly; you could not have done better. 
So the Master went alone to the Father for this assurance 
and for strength and courage. He prayed, "Not My will, 
but Thine be done"; and the Father heard His prayer and 
gave Him the needed assurance and strength. He was 
heard in respect to that which He feared; and during all 
that night and the following day, up to the hour of His 
crucifixion, He was calm and courageous. 

So the Lord's people should have a proper fear. Proper 
fear is good for them. But it should not proceed to the 
point of hindering their efforts and dissipating their courage. 
They should have the fear enjoined by St. Paul 
when he said, "Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of 
entering into His rest, any of us should seem to come 
short of it." (Hebrews 4:1.) This proper fear the 
Master had. He never became discouraged, never held 
back from the work which the Father had given Him to 
do. His fear was a filial one, which engendered a watchfulness 
and care, a circumspection of walk and of life, 
that He might be wholly pleasing to the Father. This all 
Christians should have. We should watch lest we neglect 
some privilege or duty. 

This proper fear will lead us to careful inspection of 
ourselves. We should ask ourselves, "What do I believe? 



Why do I believe it? We should go over the ground 
again. We should again go over in our minds the proofs 
of the correctness of our Faith. By so doing, the Lord 
will strengthen us in the Faith, He will strengthen our 
heart. If any hope in themselves, and lean upon their 
own strength mainly, it will be to their advantage that the 
Lord shall allow them to come to the point of discouragement, 
that they may become more timid, may lose all self-assurance, 
may realize their utter helplessness and weakness 
and their need of leaning wholly upon the Lord, of 
looking constantly to Him for guidance and support. As 
the Lord's children thus learn to wait upon Him, to them 
is fulfilled the promise, "They that wait upon the Lord 
shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with 
wings as eagles; they shall run and not be weary; they 
shall walk and not faint."— Isaiah 40:31. 



R5713 :page 191 

AN INTERESTING LETTER 
COLPORTEURING IN OFFICE BUILDINGS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

For some time I have been wanting to tell you about 
our wonderful privileges and opportunities in the Harvest; 
and today when I read your letter in the May 1 WATCH 
TOWER to the departing members of the Bethel Family— that 
some of them might enter the Colporteur service— I felt 
prompted to write, that these and others might be encouraged, 
and that especially now, in your travels, you might encourage 
the Colporteurs in their work. 

For the last year Sister and I have been making it a 
specialty to call on the business men in the large office-buildings; 
and have had very good success. We do not feel that 
this is due to any great ability on our own part, but that it is 
all by the Lord's grace and His "ever-present help." 

Many dear Colporteurs do not realize what a great privilege 
they are neglecting when they do not call upon the 
business men; or, after calling on several they fail to arouse 
interest and become discouraged, while if they would persevere 
they would find their efforts crowned with success, 
just as much or more than in the homes. 

We also find that delivering is so much easier among the 
business men, as we often get orders for several sets in one 
office, and sometimes for several hundred volumes in one 
building, all of which are quite sure to be delivered. 

Business men, on account of the present financial condition, 
are becoming more and more awake and are looking for 
an explanation; besides, hundreds of these men are reading 
the sermons, have absorbed a great deal of Present Truth, 
and are anxious to get the books. 

Many of us have been timid about entering the large office-buildings, 
fearing to meet these busy people. By letting them 



know that we will not be a nuisance to them, detaining them 
only a few moments, they usually grant us a little time, or 
tell us when they will be at leisure. It is best to see the 
Manager of each office before speaking to the employees. 

In all the cities there are thousands of stenographers, 
bookkeepers and professional people, who cannot be reached 
at their homes, and therefore have never come in contact 
with the STUDIES. Many of them are earnest Bible students, 
and we feel it a great privilege to meet these and bring them 
just the help they need and are often looking for. 

While at present sister and I principally are working in 
the cities, yet we have also had the same experience in the 
smaller places. Business men in the small towns are even 
more easily approached, and invariably want the whole set 
of STUDIES. 

We are still rejoicing in the Master's service, and received 
many rich blessings at the three-day Convention here. 
Yours in our Redeemer, 
FRIEDA SCHLATTER.-Kansas City, Mo. 



page 192 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 193 

VOL. XXXVI JULY 1 No. 13 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

View From The Watch Tower 195 

The Fire of This Day 195 

The Lord's Brethren Not In Darkness 196 

Present Advantages of Faith 197 

"Without God, Having No Hope" 197 

Credulity Not Faith 198 

"The Hour of Temptation" 199 

His Servants We Are to Whom We 

Render Service 200 

"Children of Light" to Be Proven 200 

How to Proclaim the Truth 201 

Natural Qualities That Need Restraint 202 

Our Standing Only In Christ 202 

Israel's "Seven Times" of Chastisement 203 

"Door" Probably Not Yet Closed 204 

Queen of Sheba Visits Solomon 204 

"A Greater Than Solomon" 205 

The Wisest King Misled 205 

How to View Denominationalism 207 

False Reports Injurious 207 

page 194 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



RATES TO SPRINGFIELD, MASS., CONVENTION 
JULY 25 TO AUGUST 1. 

All railroads in New England and Middle Atlantic States 
have joined in a flat rate of 2c per mile in each direction, 
going and returning via same route; tickets on sale July 
23-25 (24-26 in New England), with final return limit Aug. 3. 
Confer with your ticket agent a few days in advance that he 
may secure the necessary ticket-forms on account of 
I.B.S.A. Convention. 

For board and lodging, address H. E. Spear, Sec'y, 48 
Scott St., Springfield, Mass., as previously announced. 



NEWSPAPER CLIPPINGS 

Interesting clippings are still greatly appreciated by us, including 
attacks. When forwarding please give name and date 
of paper, or preferably the whole page, marking article plainly. 
Address Watch Tower B. & T. Society, File H, 17 Hicks St., 
Brooklyn, N.Y. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR AUGUST 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
August follow: (1) 267; (2) 117; (3) 125; (4) 48; (5) 325; (6) 
14; (7) 152; (8) 299; (9) 91; (10) 179; (11) 119; (12) 330; (13) 
129; (14) 214; (15) 293; (16) 25; (17) 222; (18) 136; (19) 221; 
(20) 172; (21) 303; (22) 94; (23) 230; (24) 50; (25) 113; (26) 
78; (27) 324; (28) 120; (29) Vow; (30) 251; (31) 195. 



CREATION SCENARIO SALES PRICES 
Some of our readers believe that the Drama Scenarios 



are most convincing and interesting; and that if obtainable 
at a special price for selling or for giving to friends, they 
would do much good. 

We have a quantity on hand and will endeavor to meet 
the demand as follows: 10-cent edition, 3 for 25c, we will 
supply at 10 sets (30 booklets) for $1.00 postpaid. 



ADDITIONAL CONVENTIONAL GATHERINGS 

Information respecting board and lodging at economical 
rates, etc., should be obtained from the Class Secretaries. 

NEW YORK CITY TEMPLE, July 4. 
TOLEDO, O., July 10 to 12. 

H. R. E. Kuehn, Sec'y, 517 Magnolia St. 
OLEAN, N. Y., July 12. 

F. S. Ganoung, Sec'y, 204 East Ave. 
TORONTO, ONT., July 18. 

Thos. W. Kirby, Sec'y, 75 Yonge St., Arcade. 
BELLEVILLE, ONT., July 19. 

Mrs. Wm. Rose, Sec'y, 96 Dundas St. 
BERLIN, ONT., July 20. 

Mrs. W. A. Schmidt, Sec'y, 39 Mansion St. 
OWEN SOUND, ONT., July 21. 

Jas. Frizzell, Sec'y, 774 10th St., W. 
LONDON, ONT., July 22. 

John Kumpf, Sec'y, 372 Grey St. 
CHATHAM, ONT., July 23. 

Albert Sheldrick, Sec'y, 120 King St. 
BRANTFORD, ONT., July 24. 

G. A. Oliver, Sec'y, care Express Office. 
HAMILTON, ONT., July 25. 

P. A. Lee, Sec'y, 374 Main St., W. 
ST. CATHARINES, ONT., July 25. 

Chas. Lounsbury, Sec'y, 62 Henry St. 
SPRINGFIELD, MASS., July 25, to August 1. 

H. E. Spear, Sec'y, 48 Scott St. 
PORTLAND, ME., August 12 to 15. 

I. I. Margeson, Sec'y, Westwood, Mass. 
ST. JOHN, N. B., August 16. 

Alicia Wood, Sec'y, 126 Broad St. 
HALIFAX, N. S., August 17. 

G. U. Evans, Sec'y, 17 Williams St. 
KENTVILLE, N. S., August 18. 

Fred W. Young, Sec'y. 
TRURO, N. S., August 19. 

G. B. Dakin, Sec'y, Box 372. 
COLUMBUS, O., August 22. 

Frank D. White, Sec'y, 147 Winner Ave. 
NEWARK, O., August 22. 

Dr. H. R. Emery, Sec'y, 52 Fulton Ave. 
WHEELING, W. VA., August 23. 

W. H. Scatterday, Sec'y, 1061 McCollough St. 
STEUBENVILLE, O., August 24. 



Chester Harper, Sec'y, 1609 Ridge Ave. 
CROOKS VILLE, O., August 25. 
Ralph W. Hull, Sec'y, Box 150. 



R5715 :page 195 

VIEW FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

THE FIRE OF THIS DAY 

PRAYERS that God would stop the great 

European war have not been answered. On 

the contrary, as pointed out in these columns 

nearly a year ago, the entire world is involved 

and distressed. The Bible predictions 

that the armies of all nations would 

be gathered to the valley of Jehoshaphat is 

proving true. (Joel 3:9-14.) The Valley 

of Jehoshaphat is the name of the cemetery 

outside the walls of Jerusalem, and the 

prophecy signified that the armies of all nations would 

be gathered as one vast cemetery. With a battle front 

of over sixteen hundred miles, and with all kinds of infernal 

machinery, the flower of Europe's manhood goes 

down to death. All the participating nations are regretful, 

for each had hoped for greater successes than yet 

achieved. The Bible indicates great disappointment of 

all nations— no great victory for any, but, on the contrary, 

humiliation and impoverishment. Already the 

bonds of all the warring powers are greatly depreciated. 

All national debts are so heavy that many thoughtful 

people are expecting that a result of the war will be 

repudiation of all national debts, as well as social revolution. 

Great victories and final achievement console the 

people for great losses; and similarly, great national disasters 

in the face of a successful foe, tend to cement the 

national spirit; but with a terrible war, with heavy losses, 

peace will mean discontent, revolution and, according to 

the Bible, ultimate anarchy. How consoling the thought 

given us by the words of Jesus, that for the Elect's sake 

these days shall be shortened, but that otherwise the 

entire human family would be obliterated as the reign of 

selfishness and enmity would progress! 

Thanks be to God that we know who the Elect are- 
Jesus and His saintly followers glorified! Thanks be to 
God that we can have confidence that these will constitute 
the Kingdom of God's dear Son, and be backed by all the 
Power of Heaven in the establishment of the Reign of 
Righteousness! Thanks be to God that we can have full 
confidence in the Divine promises to the effect that the 
outcome of Messiah's Reign will be "peace on earth and 
good will toward men" in a world-wide Eden! Thanks 
be to God that we can trust His promise that Messiah's 
Kingdom will be successful in the complete uplift of the 



fallen race out of sin and death— back to the image and 
likeness of God for whosoever will! Thanks be to God 
that after all shall have had full opportunity for such 
recovery, all wilfully wicked will be utterly destroyed in 
the Second Death! 

Thus far we are told the war is not deeply felt nor 
deeply impressed upon the average non-combatants. In 
all the warring countries business is fairly good. Money 
is kept in circulation by the manufacture of munitions of 
war and military equipment and supplies. Thus far the 
chief brunt falls upon the soldiers in the ranks and upon 
bereaved widows and orphans. The chief evidences of 
war, except on the scenes of strife, are the numbers of 
men everywhere in military uniform, and the numbers of 
women wearing mourning. However, as credit depreciates 
and gold becomes more scarce, the prices of commodities 
of every sort will advance, wages in Europe will 
be forced upward, with accompanying labor troubles, leading 
on to the foretold great earthquake— revolution (Rev. 16:18); 
leading on still further to the predicted fire 
which is to consume every vestige of present civilization 
—not a literal fire, but anarchy. 

This fire has already begun as respects religious faith. 
Hearken to the Apostle Paul, "The fire of that day shall 
try every man's work of what sort it is." It will prove 
who have builded character and faith with the gold, silver 
and precious stones of Divine promises, and who have 
builded their hopes with the wood, hay and stubble of 
human tradition. The latter, the Apostle declares, will 
be utterly burned or destroyed by the symbolic fire of 
this Day, while the former class of faith alone will be 
able to withstand that fiery time. Do we not already see 
this? Do we not see that the great professors of colleges 
and nearly all the great ministers of the various churches 
have completely lost faith in the Bible? Do we not see 
that the greater enlightenment of our time is making the 
creeds of all denominations ridiculous, absurd, to their 
own upholders and to all mankind? Do we not see that 
those who have abandoned the Bible have practically 
nothing left— merely their own guesswork? Do we not 
see that the guesswork of evolutionists is already proving 
unsatisfactory to them, and that they are losing all faith 
in a personal God, and merely assuming the possibility of 
an immortality of which they have no proofs and of the 
character of which they have only speculation? Ah, as 
the Apostle indicated, those who have the faith, the character 
structure represented by the gold, silver and precious 
stones of Divine Revelation— these alone have an anchorage 
of soul sure and steadfast which enters into that 
within the veil, and fastens for support to the merit of 
the sacrificial death of the great Redeemer who, "by the 

R5715 :page 196 

grace of God, tasted death for every man," and who by 
the grace of God is to be the great King whose Kingdom 



will deliver Adam and his race from sin, death, ignorance, 
superstition, into the liberty of the children of God. 

THE LORD'S BRETHREN NOT IN DARKNESS 

Present conditions are very favorable for the spread 
of the Truth. Everywhere the public are thinking more 
than ever respecting religious things, and wondering what 
it means that great nations, each purporting to be Christ's 
Kingdom, should be so locked in deadly strife. Their 
perplexity and questions furnish excellent opportunity 
for explaining the Bible hopes and teachings. They are 
ready as never before for the message that these kingdoms 
are deceived into thinking themselves Christ's 
Kingdoms, whereas the Bible calls them "kingdoms of 
this world" and Gentile kingdoms. They are ready for 
the Message that Messiah's Kingdom is to furnish the 
remedy for all the ills of the world by uplifting mankind 
out of ignorance, superstition, sin and death. They are 
ready for the information that although Christ was 
eighteen hundred years ago declared worthy to become 
the King He has not yet taken office in the full sense of 
the word, but is waiting for the completion of the 
Church, which has been in process of calling and disciplining 
and polishing for more than eighteen hundred 
years. They are ready for the Message that Christ is 
now taking to Himself His great power and beginning 
His reign, and that the present disturbance of Europe 
is what is described in Revelation as the nations being 
angry, and God's wrath having come, etc.— Rev. 11:18. 

In view of these favorable factors, we perceive our 
privilege in continuing to give no uncertain sound upon 
the silver trumpets of Jubilee. Apparently many of 
God's servants are being sealed in their foreheads with 
this knowledge, this Present Truth, as the Scriptures predicted: 
"Ye brethren are not in darkness that that Day 
should overtake you as a thief" (1 Thessalonians 5:4), 
though it shall come upon the whole world as a thief and 
a snare. As the Savior said, perplexities are causing the 
hearts of men to fail for fear and for looking after the 
things coming upon the world, still future, but because 
of the sealing in our foreheads— the clear intellectual 
knowledge— the servants of God may, as Jesus suggested, 
be lifting up their heads and rejoicing, realizing from 
present developments that their deliverance draweth nigh 
—that the resurrection of the Church and her glorious 
establishment as Messiah's Bride in the Kingdom, are 
near at hand, even at the door. 

WINDS OF WAR LET LOOSE 

How plainly now we can see what we saw less distinctly 
in the past— that the winds of war have been held 
back for approximately forty years to give opportunity 
for the sealing of the servants of God in their foreheads, 
for the spread of true Bible study all over the world, in 



all languages. Any one thinking of the present war as 

being suddenly thrust upon the nations is surely short-sighted. 

R5716 :page 196 

For forty years the newspapers of the world 
have been foretelling this war as imminent; every fall 
they would declare that it must come by spring; every 
summer they would declare that it must come by fall, and 
it was so long held back by Divine interference that many 
began to wonder whether or not the war might be ultimately 
avoided. But not so; the war is the only way in 
which the Kingdom of Messiah can be established. It 
will be in vain that the message might be sent to the Czar 
of Russia, to the Kaiser, or to the Emperor Francis 
Joseph, or to the British King that the time has come for 
Messiah to set up His Kingdom, and that all kingdoms 
of earth should now be turned over to Him. They would 
laugh at such a proposition and resist it at every cost. 
Instead, God merely lets loose the winds of war— He 
will no longer restrain— He will allow human selfishness 
to take its own unwise course. He will allow all nations 
to deceive themselves into thinking that they will be more 
firmly established, and enlarge their domains and pave 
the way to future prosperity by this war. Surely it is in 
view of this that all nations have been preparing for this 
war for forty years, by the building of great dreadnaughts, 
the organizing of great armies, etc., each according to its 
sphere of influence and greatest power. Is it not a master 
stroke of Divine Wisdom which permits the nations 
claiming to be Christ's kingdoms to destroy each other's 
power, to weaken each other, and to demonstrate by their 
strife that they have not even the first conception of the 
Spirit of Christ, of which, the Apostle says, "If any man 
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His," a principle 
which is applicable to nations as well as individuals? 
At the same time it should not be forgotten that there are 
saints of God in every land, and that doubtless there 
are saints in every army— in these armies because of 
conscription— in these armies to fulfil the demands of 
the governments, but with fullest determination that 
they at the same time owe their highest allegiance to the 
kingdom of kindness, and fully determined that they will 
kill nobody. We are hearing from the front, that they 
are seeking to live up to the teachings of the Word of 
God, pointed out in the sixth volume of SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES, and that they are being blessed in so doing. 
What more could we ask? 

"WAIT YE UPON ME, SAITH THE LORD" 

Inquiries come to us respecting the advisability of enlisting 
in hospital corps, rather than to be conscripted for 
the regular service later on. Our advice would be to 
wait for the leadings of the Lord's providence and to 
take such steps only when fully assured of their wisdom. 



Now is a good time to remember the words of the Lord, 
"Wait ye upon Me, saith the Lord." It would be a mistake, 
however, for any of the Lord's people to think 
themselves called upon to interfere in any manner with 
the world's course in respect to enlistment. Let the 
worldly use their own judgment, while God's consecrated 
people use theirs. To be "subject to the powers that be," 
implies not merely a willingness to serve under compulsion, 
but implies also that we will not oppose earthly 
governments in any public manner. The public reproof 
and overthrow will come from the Lord. The smiting of 
the image, which will grind it to powder, will come not 
from the Church in the flesh, with carnal weapons, but 
from the Church in Kingdom glory, backed by Divine 
Power.— Daniel 2:45. 

There never was a time of greater need that all of 
God's people should remember the Apostle's instruction, 
"Let your moderation be known to all men." Even in 
discussing the Time of Trouble emphasis should be laid 
not so much upon the trouble as upon the glorious Kingdom 
which will be inaugurated at that time and through 
the instrumentality of the trouble. Let us remember one 
another in prayer at this time and especially those who 
are in desperate situations. The Lord seems to have provided 
the Vow as a special means of comforting and 
supporting one another. Approximately 15,000 have already 
indicated to us that they have taken the Vow, and 
that therefore they belong to this great world-wide Prayer 
Circle which remembers each other and all the laborers in 
the Lord's Kingdom daily at the Throne of Grace. 

R5716 :page 197 

KILLED, WOUNDED AND PRISONERS 

RED CROSS SOCIETY REPORT TO MARCH 1, 1915. 

Prominent newspapers are publishing the following: 

The total killed in the European conflict up to March 1 
of this year was 2,136,000; seriously wounded, 1,150,000; 
slightly wounded, 3,781,000; prisoners, 1,764,000, making a 
total of 8,831,000. 

These appalling figures were compiled by the Red Cross 
Society, and were furnished by the German consulate in 
Denver today. 

The tabulated figures show the losses as follows: 

Germany. Austria. France. England. Russia. Totals. 

Dead 482,000 341,000 464,000 116,000 733,000 2,136,000 

Wounded: 

Slightly... 760,000 618,000 718,000 185,000 1,500,000 3,781,000 
Seriously.. 97,000 83,000 439,000 49,000 482,000 1,150,000 

Prisoners... 233,000 183,000 495,000 83,000 770,000 1,764,000 

Totals 1,572,000 1,225,000 2,116,000 433,000 3,485,000 8,831,000 



Allies, without Belgians, Serbs and Montenegrins, 6,034,000. 
Germans and Austrians, 2,797,000. 



R5716 :page 197 

THE PRESENT ADVANTAGES OF FAITH 

"Without faith it is impossible to please God; for he that 
cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a 
rewarder of them that diligently seek Him."— Hebrews 1 1:6. 

PAUL the Apostle is in this text laying down 
a general principle as to what is the Divine 
pleasure. God is not pleased to deal with 
humanity as with the brute beasts. He did 
not make man to live a mere animal existence, 
appreciating only the enjoyment of 
his physical senses. Man was made to 
glorify his Creator and to have a knowledge 
of Him, in order to obtain the fullest happiness 
and blessing from the enjoyment of 
his God-given faculties. 

As man shall in due time come to see his Creator's 
glorious character and the object of his own existence, 
and as he grows in ability to appreciate these, he will be 
most highly blessed. The knowledge gained will bring 
full confidence in God to all who become upright in heart 
and who desire to conform themselves to the grand purpose 
of their Maker in creation. Mankind are now 
bowed down with the weight of the sin and the accumulated 
infirmities of the ages, in bondage to Satan and his 
evil reign. Man has been the spectacle of the Universe. 
He has been the source of astonishment and sorrow to 
all the holy beings in God's infinite domain. His experiences, 
his weaknesses, his degradation, his sufferings 
under sin, have through all the centuries been preaching 
most powerful sermons, and have been giving impressive 
object lessons as to the effects of disobedience to God. 

Throughout the Millennial Age, the great Jehovah 
will do a mighty work through the Messiah. It will be 
a work of opening all the eyes long blinded to the glorious 
light of the goodness of God. It will be a work of unstopping 
all the ears long deaf to the voice of Truth. 
The sons of men shall be washed from their pollution; 
their wounds and putrefying sores shall be anointed, 
bound up and gradually healed by the Great Physician; 
their tattered raiment shall be exchanged for the garments 
of righteousness. By the close of the Golden Age 
of Blessing man shall stand forth clothed and in his right 
mind, a glorious image of his Creator in the flesh. 

When man shall have attained the full likeness of 
God, he will not need any special development of faith; 
for faith will be inherent in him. He will have communion 
with his Maker; he will once more be a son of 



God. He will know his Creator as even Adam in his 
perfection did not know Him. He will have had such 
revelations of the terrible nature and results of sin, of 
the marvelous love of God in his deliverance from sin, 
that he will have an established character, fixed for righteousness, 
and a hatred of sin that will be an all-sufficient 
safeguard throughout eternity. After all this manifestation 
of the contrast between righteousness and iniquity, 
between the glorious sunshine of God's love and 
the horrible darkness and gloom of the pit from which 
they were lifted, any who still love and prefer the bondage 
of corruption will be destroyed in the Second Death. 
When man first fell from his perfect estate, and the 
penalty of death was pronounced, the conditions did not 
manifest Jehovah as a loving God; and man thought he 
would be happier in his alienation and sin if he did not 
know about God at all. God gave, indeed, a hint of a 
coming time of restoration, when the Seed of the woman 
should crush the serpent's head; but the statement was 
vague. So, with very few exceptions, men tried to forget 
God, to give Him no place in their thoughts or their 
affections. Gradually they drifted further and further 
away from Him. 

"WITHOUT GOD, HAVING NO HOPE!" 

St. Paul in commenting upon this fact, declares that 
God gave mankind over to a reprobate mind. As they did 
not wish to retain Him in their knowledge, He left them 
to their evil course, to pursue the lusts of their depraved 
minds, and to learn by sad experience the bitter fruitage 
of sin, and the misery, vanity and woe which it brings. 
Man's perverse heart must be broken, before he can be 
brought to a realization of his condition as declared by 
the Apostle in the words, "Without God, and having no 
hope in the world" ! Humanity has had bitter experiences, 

R5717 :page 197 

and has gone down from one depth of depravity 
to another, until now mankind have become so alienated 
from God by wicked works and self-will that many do 
not know that there is a God. Others conjure up in their 
minds a demon, whom they worship as God. So the poor 
world is today in a sadly confused, benighted condition. 

Many believe that there is some law of Nature, some 
law of development and progression; and thus they speak 
of Nature as God— an impersonal god. They cannot 
worship such a god; for an impersonal god could not 
sympathize with them nor deliver them from their 
troubles. The Bible, however, presents a God of intelligence, 
a God of sympathy, a God who cares for His 
creatures and who has a marvelous Plan for their restoration 
to His own glorious likeness. How glad we are that 
we know this loving, living God! How glad we are that 
He has let us into the secrets of His counsels, that He 



has made known His wonderful Plan to us in advance 
of the inauguration of the great work! How it rejoices 
our hearts, to know not only of our own glorious share 
and place in this great Plan, but to know also of the blessings 
so soon to come to the poor groaning creation! 

BLESSINGS PROPORTIONATE TO FAITH 

In proportion as the people of God come into close 
heart-fellowship with Him, in proportion as they hear 
His voice speaking to them through the Prophets of old, 
through Jesus and His Apostles, and through His daily 
providences, they hear a good Message, a glorious Message, 
one that assures them of His loving sympathy, of 
His great Power and of His purpose to exercise that 

R5717 :page 198 

Power for the deliverance and blessing of all the world. 
As the Scriptures themselves assure us, it is a Message 
of "great joy to all people." Some can believe and receive 
this Message of good more readily than can others, 
and the more fully one receives it the more fully he will 
be blessed. Both knowledge and faith are necessary for 
that blessing. Some have not now the capacity for faith 
and some have not the knowledge. Those who have no 
faith will have to wait over for the next Age. 

Some can look out into the realms of space and by 
modern appliances and mathematical calculations determine 
the distance to the sun, the center of our own solar 
system. With the aid of the telescope they can sweep 
through the vast expanse of the Universe and see something 
of its grandeur and its glory. They can study the 
movements of the planets in their various orbits, and forecast 
their future positions. They can ascertain also that 
there is a vast system of systems in the great material 
Universe. Truly, "The heavens declare the glory of God, 
and the firmament showeth His handiwork. Day unto 
day uttereth speech, and night unto night showeth knowledge. 
There is no speech nor language. (But) their 
melody extendeth through all the earth, and to the end 
of the world their words!"— See Leeser and R.V. 

But these wise men who study these wonderful works 
of the Almighty do not realize nor appreciate the love of 
God as manifested in His Son, our Redeemer. They have 
a certain knowledge of the Power of God, but very few 
of them appreciate His character. As the Apostle Paul 
has truly said: "In the Wisdom of God, the world 
through its wisdom knows not God." (1 Corinthians 1:21. R.V.) 
Jehovah does not purpose that any shall 
know Him save in His own appointed way. The wisdom 
of man cannot find Him out. 

God is now seeking only those who have the true 
wisdom, in that they realize their own insufficiency, their 
need of instruction and guidance, and who can exercise 
the necessary faith when the Message of God is brought 



to them. All others will be able to appreciate the Message 
in the incoming Age of Blessing. Those who are 
now too wise in their own conceits will be brought 
through humiliating experiences to a contrite and humble 
condition of mind. The credulous will be given the true 
knowledge which will lead to a real faith. 

Many noble minds are filled with the wisdom of this 
world. They think of the mighty Universe with its millions 
upon millions of systems of worlds rolling through 
infinite space. They look at the earth, and think of the 
comparatively insignificant size of the little planet on 
which we live. By the power of the microscope, they 
examine the wonderful construction of plant and flower. 
They scrutinize the marvels of the structure of molecules 
and atoms of matter, and of midgets, mites and microbes. 
Then they shake their heads and say: "The idea that a 
God of such infinite Power would concern Himself about 
humanity! He is far too busy to trouble Himself about 
us!" These must wait a further and more favorable 
time for their enlightenment. The Lord can deal as yet 
only with those who have naturally some faith and who 
have gained a sufficient knowledge of Himself and of His 
character to believe in His Love and to be desirous of 
coming into fellowship and communion with Him. 

A SPECIAL CLASS NOW DEALT WITH 

The basis of the Apostle's argument in our text is that 
faith is the essential thing in coming to God. God will 
not receive any one who does not exercise faith. St. 
Paul recounts the faith of the worthies of old, who gained 
such victories through their faith, and who received the 
testimony that they pleased God. Then he declares that 
whoever would come to God now must believe. There 
are some who are drawn to the Lord, who desire to come 
to Him. There are others who desire to get away from 
Him as far as possible and to keep away. These have no 
real knowledge of God, but are grossly blinded by "the 
god of this world."— 2 Corinthians 4:3,4. 

The class referred to in our text as coming to God 
or as willing to come to Him, have a heart-hunger for 
their Creator— a longing for Him that nothing else can 
satisfy. They say to themselves, "There is a God who 
made me. The more I learn respecting the vast Universe 
and of my own anatomy, the more I see the Wisdom and 
the Power of God, and the more I realize my own littleness 
and weakness and need. For this great God my soul 
is crying out, and I have been told that He has made a 
revelation of Himself, that to certain Prophets of old He 
revealed the fact that He takes an interest in His human 
creatures. I mean to study what He has declared through 
these His servants. I am also told that He has revealed 
Himself and His love further through Jesus Christ His 
Son; and that this Son of God came to earth and died 
for sinful man that he might live. If God has really 
given man His Message, I want that Message; I will draw 



near to this God, that I also may receive His blessing." 
The Lord encourages all such through His Word. He 
says, "Draw nigh to Me, and I will draw nigh to you." 
And as these come, seeking to know His will, He becomes 
the Rewarder of their faith. He points them to the one 
who is the Propitiation for the sins of all who come to 
Him. He makes known to them that those who come to 
Him through His appointed Channel may have the Savior 
as their Advocate, upon the terms of faith and consecration 
to lay down their lives in sacrifice with Him. Thus 
step by step they come into the fulness of salvation, and 
enter into the Holiest by the blood of the cross. They 
are accepted in the Beloved. 

CREDULITY NOT FAITH 

Many imagine that they have faith when in reality 
they have only credulity. Their so-called faith is not 
founded upon the Word of God and upon His promises. 
Such credulity will surely fail when the great testing time 
comes. Credulity is the acceptance of a thing without 
good reason, without sure evidence. Faith, on the contrary, 
is the acceptance of a thing because we have indisputable 
evidence of its reality, its truthfulness and its 
reliability. As we exercise faith in God, we come nearer 
and nearer to Him. 

"According to your faith be it unto you," are the 
Master's words. Every exercise of faith is based upon 
something real and tangible to faith. There is a mental 
tangibility for faith and also a physical, or outward, 
tangibility. True wisdom searches out the two grounds 
for faith. "The secret of the Lord is with them that 
reverence Him; and He will show them His Covenant." 

These increase in faith as they go on in the path of 
obedience. Faith and obedience are like our two feet. 
We put one forward, and then the other, and then the 
first one forward; and so we develop in faith by continuing 
in the spirit of obedience, following on wherever 
the Lord points the way. "We walk by faith and not by 
sight." But we have good, tangible evidences all along 
our Heavenward journey. Outside of all other evidences, 
the true Christian has in his own personal experiences 
abundant proof of our Father's love and care. The 
Master said, "Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? 
and not one of them shall fall upon the ground without 
your Father.. ..But ye are of more value than many 

R5717 :page 199 

sparrows." (Matthew 10:29.) As he progresses in the 
narrow way the child of God comes to learn the fulness 
of meaning in these words of our Lord. 

FAITH A REAL SUBSTANCE 

So the Christian who walks closely with the Master 



finds the truth of the Apostle's words that "faith is the 
substance of things hoped for, the evidence [proof, conviction] 
of things not seen." (Hebrews 11:1.) Faith is 
not only a groundwork, or basis, for our hopes (itself 
also having a groundwork in proven facts), but it is a 
real substance— a mental substance, so to speak, which 
stimulates and clarifies the mind. Faith is not a substance 
that we can hold in our hand or walk on with our 
feet. But it becomes a strength to our minds as we 
progress in the knowledge of God and of the things 
which God has to give to those who love Him above all 
else and who seek to render Him loving, devoted service. 
Faith becomes as real and tangible to us as any material 
substance— even more so; for the things upon which our 
faith lays hold are eternal. 



R5718 :page 199 

"THE HOUR OF TEMPTATION" 

"Because thou hast kept the word of My patience, I also will keep 
thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon 
all the world, to try them that dwell 
upon the earth."— Revelation 3:10. 

OUR Lord's words addressed "to the angel of 

the Church in Philadelphia," had their fulfilment, 

we understand, during the period 

which closed somewhere about the time 

when the Harvest of this Age began. We 

are not to think of the different epochs represented 

in the messages to the various 

Churches as being exact periods, as though 

there was a particular instant of beginning 

and a particular instant of closing. Rather 

we are to understand each to be a general period, which 

laps over the one on the other. So this period of faithfulness 

to the Lord's Word of which our text treats 

seems to have been one of some length, just as this 

Laodicean period in which we live has covered a considerable 

time, but is nearly ended now, we think. 

For a long time God's Word was lightly esteemed. The 
transition from a poor understanding to a better understanding 
of it came on gradually. The Two Witnesses of 
God, the Old and New Testaments, long clothed in the 
sackcloth of the dead languages, gradually ascended to 
heaven, the place of honor and power, as the Scriptures 
symbolically represent the matter. (Revelation 11:3-12.) 
Then came the general announcement that the time of 
the Second Advent of Christ had come. This was sometimes 
called the Wolff Movement and sometimes the 
Miller Movement; for one was the leader in one part of 
the world, and the other in the other part. America at 
this time was representative of the advanced thought of 



the world. This proclamation of the Kingdom of Christ 
was a remarkable movement, which we believe is referred 
to by our Lord in the Parable of the Ten Virgins, who 
awoke and trimmed their lamps. But it was a false 
alarm. The Bridegroom did not come. 

DISAPPOINTMENT OF MILLER MOVEMENT A SIFTING 

This disappointment caused a sifting among the professed 
people of God. Some became all the more interested 
in the Bible as the Word of God, and did not doubt, 
while others became haughty and skeptical, and declared 
that the Bible was a foolish old book, that anybody who 
paid any attention to these prophecies must be soft in 
the head, etc. So these did not keep to the Word of 
God, but discarded its declarations. The promises and 
prophecies of the Bible relating to the Master's Second 
Coming, though positive and numerous, were abandoned 
by most of the great teachers. Consequently the people 
knew very little about the Bible. Of course their faith 
could not be much greater than their knowledge. 

As a result the work of the Miller Movement was a 
sort of separation, as between those who kept the Word 
of God with patience and those who lost their faith in 
His Word. This persistent, patient faith of the true 
saints of God is what we think is referred to here by 
keeping "the word of My patience." The general hour 
of temptation, therefore, would not come upon them, but 
upon those who came after them— the Laodicean Church. 
The Philadelphia Church, which had patiently passed 
through so severe a trial of their faith, would not be 
subjected to the later test. 

"The hour of temptation" has come upon us now. 
This hour of temptation has been the Harvest time. In 
many respects it has tested the Lord's people, and has 
proven who are faithful to the Word of God and who 
are not faithful to it. Hence the majority of the professing 
Christians of the world— probably more than three-fourths 
—have lost all faith in the Bible, and have fallen 
into the various false and delusive theories of our day- 
Evolution, Higher Criticism, Christian Science, Theosophy, 
Spiritism, New Thought, etc. They have fallen 
from faith, from loyalty to the Lord's Word. They are 
not able to stand in this "evil day." 

FALL OF FAITH FOR A TIME 

The trials of this "evil Day" do not end with the 
Church, "with the House of God"— though they begin 
there. The hour of temptation was to "come upon all 
the world, to try them that dwell on the earth." The 
temptation, the trial, is going out amongst the people of 
every nation, especially to all parts of Christendom. In 
the severe experiences through which many have passed, 
they have been led to doubt the very existence of God. 
They cannot conceive of a God who would allow such terrible 



calamities as have already come, and who will allow 
the yet greater calamities which the thoughtful see 
are still to come! Not knowing God's great Plan, not 
seeing the glorious outcome of present conditions, the 
golden lining to the dark cloud now settling down upon 
the whole world, people will lose all confidence in a 
Supreme Government. Poor humanity in their ignorance 
and blindness have not been enlightened through the Word 
of God, have not known of the coming Kingdom and the 
method by which it will be inaugurated and the purpose 
and object of its inauguration. 

So the present crisis is surely a time of great trial 
upon the whole world. Many of these have constituted a 
nominal Church; and in this period of testing and shaking 
all church systems will go completely to pieces. 
Babylon will fall; for she is neither able nor worthy to 
stand in this great Trial Day. And great will be her fall! 
It will mean for a little time the general destruction of 
faith— the fall of faith, we think. This seems to be the 
meaning of the prophecy, "For the Lord shall rise up as 
in Mount Perazim, He shall be wroth as in the valley of 
Gibeon; that He may do His work, His strange work; 
and bring to pass His act, His strange act." (Isaiah 28:21.) 

R5718 : page 200 

Those not having understood, not having given 
heed to the Word, will be entirely disconcerted. 

THE PHILADELPHIA CHURCH SPARED 

As to the Philadelphia stage of the Church, and their 
being saved from the hour of temptation, we think possibly 
the Lord meant that some of the Church of that 
epoch would live over into the present period, and that 
they would not be subjected to the special trials of this 
hour. For instance, we think of a very fine old gentleman, 
who was about ninety years of age at the time we 
are about to mention. He was pastor of a Church. He 
seemed to receive Present Truth with a great deal of 
joy and spoke it forth with much zeal. But he was surrounded 
with so much opposition at home, and in the 
church to which he was attached as a minister, that he 
could not seem to trust to his mental judgment. He apparently 
thought to himself, "I am about ninety years of 
age. I cannot trust the reliability of my own judgment. 
Even if I go on the street I need some one to take my 
arm, or I theirs, lest I run into something. If I were 
sure that this is the Lord's will, I would be willing to endure 
any amount of opposition. But I am not sure." 

We have sometimes thought of that old gentleman as 
perhaps a representative of a large class, and we have 
considerable sympathy for him in that he was not able to 
take his stand and come out of Babylon. This Scripture 
which we are considering has rather comforted our mind 
with respect to him and others like him. These seemed 



to prove loyal to the Lord's Word, and faithful to the 
extent of their ability to understand. Probably any of 
these coming over into the Harvest time would not be 
counted in as of the Harvest period. We are not, of 
course, certain of this. We only know that the Lord 
promised those of the Philadelphia period that they should 
be spared the trials now upon the Laodicean phase of the 
Church and upon the world. 



R5718 : page 200 

HIS SERVANTS WE ARE TO WHOM WE RENDER SERVICE 

"For ye were sometimes [once] darkness, but now are ye 
light in the Lord; walk as children of light."— Ephesians 5:8. 

JOHN the beloved Apostle of Jesus wrote, 

"God is light, and in Him is no darkness at 

all." This figure of speech pervades the 

entire Bible. Everywhere light stands for 

Truth, for righteousness; and darkness 

represents error, superstition, sin. Our 

Lord Jesus being in full harmony with the 

Father, was the Light of the world. To 

this end came He into the world. One of 

the titles He assumed was "The light of 

the world." (John 8:12.) Although He was in the 

world, the world knew Him not. They loved darkness 

rather than light, because their deeds were evil. 

The Apostle Paul explains that the darkness on the 
part of the world comes either directly or indirectly from 
the Adversary. He says that "the god of this world hath 
blinded the minds of them that believe not." Then he 
proceeds to tell us why this is so. Satan does this "lest 
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image 
of God, should shine unto them," shine into their hearts. 
In order to keep mankind away from God, Satan has put 
light for darkness and darkness for light. This has been 
largely through good people, whom Satan has more or 
less used, ignorantly on their part, as his tools. As a 
matter of fact, darkness is very gross in the world, and 
light is seen only by the few. Thus the Apostle prays 
for the Church that the eyes of their understanding may 
be enlightened, indicating that the eyes of even the consecrated 
people of God are not fully enlightened, not 
fully opened. He prays for this in order that they may 

R5719 : page 200 

be able to comprehend what is the length, the breadth, 
the height and the depth of the love of God, the love of 
Christ, which passeth all understanding. 

We perceive, then, that to see God— to see the Truth, 
to know the deep things of God— is to have a very 



glorious conception of the Almighty, of His character 

and of His Plan. We see that the Adversary tries to 

keep us in the dark, and that God is permitting this for 

a time— permitting the ignorance, superstition, sin, darkness, 

which envelops mankind. But those who learn of 

the Savior whom God has provided, who put themselves 

into His hands, who study God's Word, and thus struggle 

against the darkness of error, superstition and infirmity, 

get their eyes more widely open. As they do this, they 

become stronger of character. So there is a good purpose 

served in these battles. We are, therefore, to 

maintain a good fight against sin and against selfishness. 

THE TRANSFER FROM DARKNESS TO LIGHT 

A question may be asked as to how we pass from the 
one class to the other, how we were changed from being 
children of darkness to being children of light. We were 
once of the darkness class. We were once in ignorance 
and misunderstanding of God— in unbelief. We were 
confused with the gloom of the Dark Ages. But now we 
are enjoying the light. No one of us as yet has full light, 
but some grow more rapidly than others in grace, in 
knowledge and in love. After our begetting of the Spirit 
we progress in the development of the fruits of the Spirit; 
we are transformed in mind and finally perfected in the 
First Resurrection. 

This transfer from darkness to light, then, is accomplished 
in a more or less gradual way. The first thing 
we needed was knowledge— to have some measure, some 
glimpse of light. So if we were fortunate enough to have, 
as natural men and women, some glimpse of God's goodness, 
some appreciation logically of what is Truth and 
what is falsehood, what is reasonable and what is unreasonable- 
to that extent we were favored in our birth. 
The Lord intimates that not all are called, not all are 
drawn. (John 6:37,44; 1 Corinthians 1:26-29.) To 
have this measure of light before we consecrate ourselves 
to God through Christ indicates that circumstances have 
favored us; either the circumstances of our birth or of 
our lives have been favorable to us. Under these favorable 
influences our eyes have been to some degree 
opened; and we have become more and more ready to 
sacrifice everything to obtain the light. 

But if we are not of the right disposition, when we 
get a little light we prefer to fall back into the darkness 
rather than to walk in the light and to have the difficulties 
and trials which loyalty to the light will bring. In 
order to be worthy of more light we must have the character 
which will follow the light as it is seen. "If any 
man will be My disciple," said the Master, "let him deny 
himself, take up his cross and follow Me"— let him give 
up his own will, deny himself, die to himself, and give 
himself fully into the hands of the Lord. 

"CHILDREN OF LIGHT" TO BE PROVEN 



To those who see but dimly, this is a large contract. 
But those who love righteousness and hate iniquity to the 
extreme will follow the light whatever the cost. The 

R5719 : page 201 

Lord is gracious to these; and when they consecrate themselves 

to Him, on His terms, He gives them the begetting 

of the Holy Spirit. This is the start of a new influx of 

light; for the natural man cannot receive the deep things 

of God, because they are spiritually discerned. Only the 

spiritual can grasp them. (1 Corinthians 2:9-14.) Then 

the Apostle proceeds to say that we, the Church, are able 

to understand these things, yea, the deep things of God, 

because we are begotten of God, begotten as New 

Creatures, to the new nature. We do not understand 

them all from the start, but more and more they are revealed 

to us as we progress in the narrow way. This 

spiritual understanding is a guiding light, an inspiration 

to righteousness; it creates an enthusiasm for righteousness. 

Thus we become children of the light. 

After we have once become children of light, there 
are testings, provings, for us to undergo. The Lord 
Jesus tells us that if we would be faithful to the light we 
must let our light so shine as to show forth the praises 
of our Father in Heaven. He forewarns us that many 
will not appreciate our good works, but will say all manner 
of evil against us falsely, for His name's sake. He 
assures us that the children of darkness hate the children 
of light; but He admonishes that in these experiences we 
should "rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is your 
reward in Heaven." Such is the sentiment of the children 
of the light that they will rejoice even in persecution 
and in tribulation. As they let the light, the Truth, 
shine out, the error will be manifested to those of right 
understanding and of noble heart. The children of the 
darkness, of the error, will be angry with us for showing 
up the error in which they are entrenched, and will 
persecute us as they did the Master. 

THE FINAL TEST OF THE CHURCH 

It is reasonable to expect that the time will yet come 
when all who are faithful to the Lord will be treated in 
like manner as was our Lord. Indeed, it is already 
coming. It behooves us individually to put on the whole 
armor of light, that we may be able to withstand whatever 
persecution comes upon us from the blinded followers 
of the Adversary. It does not necessarily follow 
that the instruments of Satan are murderers and thugs. 
When we look back at our Lord's First Advent, we see 
that those who were most successfully used of the Adversary 
against our Lord Jesus were the chief religionists, 
the Scribes, the Pharisees, the Doctors of the Jewish 
Law— professedly men of God and leaders of His people. 



But "His servants ye are to whom ye render service," 
said the Lord. Those, therefore, who rendered service 
in the way of persecuting the Master, and finally in 
crucifying Him, were the servants of Satan, no matter 
whose servants they thought they were. 

But we are not to think that because of this they will 
be condemned to eternal torture. We are to remember, 
too, that they were servants of Satan partially on account 
of ignorance. As the Apostle Peter said to the Jews on 
the Day of Pentecost, "I wot that through ignorance ye 
did it, as did also your rulers." St. Paul also bears witness 
of this fact, saying, "For if they had known, they 
would not have crucified the Lord of Glory." They did 
these things because they were the blinded servants of 
Satan, though if their hearts had been true and humble, 
they would have been able to see, as did the faithful 
"remnant" of Israel— the "Israelites indeed." The Jews 
who crucified Jesus went into an awful time of trouble 
therefor; but soon now, we believe, they shall "look upon 
Him [with the eye of faith] whom they pierced, and 
shall mourn for Him as one mourneth for His only son"; 
and God "will pour upon them the Spirit of prayer and 
of supplication."— Zechariah 12:9,10. 

And so presumably today there are really good men 
who are servants of Satan and do not know it. If any 
know and yet do such evil works, it would seem that 
they will have a very serious account to settle. God alone 
knows the culpability of each. Their enlightenment too 
is near, and great will be the confusion of face of those 
who, because of unfaithfulness, have been instruments 
of the Adversary to persecute, malign and afflict the true 
children of God, who faithfully proclaimed the Truth as 
it is in Christ Jesus. 



R5720 : page 201 

HOW TO PROCLAIM THE TRUTH 

"Speaking the Truth in love, ...grow up into Him in all 
things, which is the Head, even Christ."— Ephesians 4:15. 

THE Truth is always to be spoken humbly, 

but fearlessly. The Christian is not at liberty 

to speak anything but the Truth. If 

he is a professed minister of the Gospel 

when the Truth reaches him, he is not to 

continue to preach error just because the 

congregation employing him do not want 

the Truth. A worldling in the pulpit would 

have no qualms of conscience. He would 

reason, "I am giving these people the very 

things they want. They are paying my salary, and this 

is purely a business proposition." The worldling calling 

himself a minister of Christ would take this position 



because he had never received the Spirit, the disposition, 
of the Truth— the Holy Spirit of begetting. 

But one who receives the Truth in the love of it, who 
imbibes its spirit, would say, "I now see that many of the 
things I have been preaching for years are injurious, dishonoring 
to God, misrepresenting His character, and to 
some extent, at least, turning people away from the Truth. 
This is the very opposite of what I wish to do. I cannot 
longer dispense error. I am not an ambassador of a 
denomination or a congregation, I am an ambassador for 
God. I am not the servant of this congregation, but the 
servant of the Lord. If I should still preach error when I 
have come to see the Truth, I would be guilty before God." 

THE HONOR OF OUR AMBASSADORSHIP 

Such a faithful servant of God would by his uncompromising 
attitude lose his standing and his honor 
amongst men. But all this is not to be considered; for 
he would gain instead the favor and blessing of the Lord. 
The great Apostle declared that he counted all things but 
loss and dross, that he might win Christ and "be found in 
Him"— that he might gain a place in the everlasting Kingdom 
of Messiah. Those who succeed in so doing will 
win the "pearl of great price." So, then, the speaking of 
the Truth is absolutely essential to the life of the Christian. 
The Truth of God's Word is to be enshrined above 
all else in the heart of the child of God, and he should 
esteem it a blessed privilege to speak it. 

Our power of speech, of communicating our thoughts 
to others, is the greatest power we possess— the most far-reaching 
It is a potent factor for either good or evil, 
for either Truth or error. The opportunity to speak the 
Truth, to confess Christ before men, either publicly or 
privately, is a great privilege. In order to be a servant 
pleasing to the Lord, one who can be effectively used of 

R5720 : page 202 

Him, one must speak the Truth in love. When one has 
just entered the family of God, less might be reasonably 
expected of him than after he had been for some time in 
the family. We, as God's dear children are to grow in 
the likeness of our dear Elder Brother, our Pattern, our 
Head. We are to "grow up into Him in all things." We 
are to recognize that He is the Head of the Church; and 
that if we are to be members of His Body in glory, we 
must be developed. We are to bear the fruitage of the 
Holy Spirit, that we may be qualified to share in the future 
that glorious Kingdom which is to bless the world. 

"EXPRESSION DEEPENS IMPRESSION" 

We are to exercise our function of ambassadorship— 
we are to show forth the praises of Him who hath called 
us out of the darkness into His marvelous light. And in 



telling the Message of His Grace we shall grow spiritually. 
"He that watereth shall himself also be watered." 
As we proclaim the Truth from an honest, earnest, loving 
heart we shall become more and more filled with it ourselves. 
"There is that scattereth and yet increaseth; and 
there is that withholdeth and it tendeth to poverty"— to 
leanness of soul. As we give out to others, our own store 
of blessing is increased. We are to develop day by day 
this quality of love. Why is this? Because it will make 
us like God, and that is the one thing to be desired— the 
one thing necessary. 

Our God has other glorious attributes besides Love, 
but this attribute is the especially predominating, overruling 
quality of His character. God's Justice co-operates 
with His Love. And His Wisdom would not 
attempt to carry out any plans that His Love would not 
approve. So as we grow, this quality of Love should be 
more and more manifest. We are to see that our words 
are loving, kind, gentle. We are to curb any tendency to 
self-glorification or show in telling of God's great Plan 
to others. Let us keep self out of sight, that the beauty 
of the Truth may be seen. Our manner of presenting 
the Message to others has much to do with its effectiveness. 
Speaking the Truth in love, we shall not only be 
accomplishing much more for others, but the Message will 
also be more impressed upon our own mind. 

Whoever appreciates these things of God and then 
speaks forth in love and sincerity will receive a blessing 
in his own heart and mind, and the Truth will become 
clearer and sweeter. In helping others he will be helping 
himself. Thus the various features of the Plan of God 
become more firmly engraved upon his mind. 

NATURAL QUALITIES THAT NEED RESTRAINT 

In the cases of the stronger characters which come 
into Christ, we see a special need for watchfulness in the 
proclamation of the Truth. Those naturally lacking in 
combativeness would not be inclined to bring strong 
pressure to bear upon others in connection with their 
presentation of Truth. If their Message did not seem 
to be favorably received, they would be likely to feel, 
They do not like to hear what I have to say; so I will 
not talk any more on the subject. They might be too 
easily discouraged. But those who have more force, or 
combativeness, are liable to manifest this disposition in 
the way they present the Truth. They are inclined to be 
too forceful— to present the matter as an obligation. 

But we are to remember that this is not a compulsory 
matter now. It is now an invitation, and is designed only 
for the meek, the teachable. By and by force will be 
needed, and used. Those who now have the hearing ear 
need only the word of instruction and counsel. Those 
who require force are not the ones the Lord is now seeking. 
If any of the Lord's ambassadors endeavor to crowd 
the Message upon others, it will arouse antagonism and 



lose its power. Thus our King would not be so well 
served, and hence would not be so well pleased. 

Others of the Lord's people may have great approbativeness. 
They may have pride and may wish to show off 
their ability in language, or their skill in handling the 
Scriptures. They might give out the Message with the idea 
of arousing in others the thought, "See how much he 
knows— he is a master at handling the Bible!" Approbativeness 
seems to present quite a subtle temptation to 
many. This tendency of the flesh must be very carefully 
watched and subdued, or it will ruin the usefulness 
of the Christian and greatly hinder his own growth. 

R5721 : page 202 

Some naturally like to be in the lime-light, while others 
are just as anxious to keep out of it. The one might 
have to force himself in order to speak the Truth in 
public as an ambassador, while the other would need to 
curb himself somewhat. The only way for the latter to 
do is to learn to speak the Truth in love and in humility 
—to speak it out of love to God and love to the brethren. 
The Plan of the Ages is God's Plan. We have nothing 
whereof to boast. Therefore we should present that Plan 
in meekness, gentleness, brotherly-kindness and love. 



R5719 : page 202 

OUR STANDING ONLY IN CHRIST 

"A body hast Thou prepared Me."— Hebrews 10:4. 

MOTHER EVE had no standing with God except 

as a part of the body of Adam, for 

she was taken from his side. We understand 

that this represents that the Church 

has no standing with God of herself, that to 

produce her required the sacrifice of Jesus 

her Lord. In other words, she came from 

His side. The Second Adam is the 

Heavenly Lord— the First-born from the 

dead, the Justifier, the Life-giver to the 

world. During this Gospel Age, God has been selecting 

the Church to be the Bride of Christ, and she has been in 

process of development. As the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, 

she may be considered to be the second Eve; and her 

work is to be during the incoming Age, the mothering, 

or caring for the race of Adam, begotten again by "the 

Lord from Heaven," the Second Adam.— 1 Cor. 15:45-47. 

The whole picture shows us that the responsibility of 
the fall was in Adam. St. Paul points out that Mother 
Eve was the one who was deceived and was first in the 
transgression, but also points out that it was through 
Adam's disobedience that sin entered the world; and thus 



death passed upon all men, "for all have sinned" 
(Romans 5: 12)— showing the effect of Adam's fall upon 
his offspring, through heredity. As "the wages of sin is 
death," and as the sin that brought the death was Adam's 
sin and not Eve's sin, it follows that the Redemption-price 
would be that which corresponds to Adam, and not 
that which corresponds to Eve. 

THE BODY OF SACRIFICE 

When we read, "A body hast Thou prepared Me," as 
a sacrifice, we are not to understand this to mean the 
Church, the Body of Christ, prepared for sacrifice. The 

R5720 : page 203 

body prepared for sacrifice was the human body of Jesus. 
It was prepared in the sense that it was provided Him 
miraculously, and was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners. Jesus alone had such a body prepared for 
Him. The Church has no such body. 

Our Lord Jesus was ordained of God a Priest after 
the Order of Melchizedek; but sacrificially He was the 
antitype of Aaron, and was first to offer up Himself, and 
subsequently to accept His disciples, justify them through 
His sacrifice, and then constitute them members, or parts, 
of His own sacrifice. It is evident that in the type only 
the high priest was ordained to offer up the sin-offering 
of the Day of Atonement. None of the under priests had 
such a right. So none of the antitypical under priests, 
the followers of Christ, are competent to offer up themselves. 
All that we can do is to present ourselves to our 
Redeemer, who justifies us— consecrating our lives unto 
death. He accepts us, imputes His merit to us, and 
counts us members of His fleshly Body; and then by His 
Holy Spirit, through Christ, God operates in us "to will 
and to do His good pleasure," which is to carry out the 
work of self-sacrifice even unto death. But all this while 
the Church is not sacrificed as was the High Priest, nor 
presented to the Father in our own name. The Father's 
dealing is only with our Advocate, and we are accepted 
merely because we are His. 

All this is shown in the Atonement Day type of the 
sin-offering. The high priest offered the bullock first, as 
his own sacrifice— representing himself individually. 
Then the high priest, not the under priests, afterwards 
offered the Lord's goat— one goat, not many goats. This 
goat was offered, not as the sacrifice of the under priests, 
but as the sacrifice of the high priest. So in the antitype. 
Our consecration is acceptable to the Father only because 
of the merit of Jesus imputed to us as His members when 
He adopts us as a part of His own flesh. 

This is in response to a question. We cannot make 
this matter more clear than we have here done, which is 
the same exactly that we have tried to say on this subject 
in the SCRIPTURE STUDIES and in THE WATCH TOWER. We 



exhort to prayer that the mind of the Lord may be understood 
and that you may have a blessing. 



R5721 : page 203 

ISRAEL'S "SEVEN TIMES" OF CHASTISEMENT A BLESSING 

QUESTION. --If the punishment for all the 
righteous blood shed from Abel's day to 
our Lord's day came upon the Jews in the 
year 70 A.D., how can we explain the 
chastisements through which they have been 
passing all down the Gospel Age? 

Answer.— We certainly know that the 
Jews said at the time of our Lord's death 
at their hands, "His blood be upon us and 
upon our children." They not only were 
willing to bear personally the responsibility for Jesus' 
death, but expressed the desire that their posterity also 
should bear it. Doubtless God, with His foreknowledge 
in respect to what this people would do, as well as in 
respect to their general heart condition, had from the 
beginning planned their "Seven Times" of disfavor. This 
He had caused to be recorded by Moses in the book of 
Leviticus (26: 18-45). God had there declared that if 
the Israelites did not repent of their transgressions 
against their Covenant, and if His repeated chastisements 
failed to reform them, He would bring upon them "Seven 
Times" of punishment and discipline. 

In Bible chronology a "Time" is a symbolic year. 
According to Jewish reckoning each year was composed 
of 360 days; hence when used symbolically each year 
would mean 360 years, and seven such symbolic years 
would be a period of 2520 literal years. These Seven 
Times, or seven symbolic years, began in 606 B.C. at 
the destruction of Jerusalem and the carrying away of 
the entire nation into Babylon, at the time when the foretold 
70 years of desolation of the land began (Jer. 25:8-12; 
2 Chron. 36:14-22), and has continued ever since, we 
understand, or until about September 21st last. 

During this long period of affliction upon Israel, the 
Lord has given the Gentile nations an opportunity of 
showing what they could do in the way of world-government. 
God had declared that during these "Times" He 
would deal very differently with His Covenant people 
from His previous dealings. He would walk contrary to 
them and would scatter them among the heathen (Gentiles); 
and they should be under the domination of their 
enemies, etc. It is a matter of history that the Jews have 
indeed ever since been oppressed by the other nations, 
"without a king," in full harmony with what was foretold 
by the Lord. This experience has been favorable to 
Israel as well as unfavorable. It has not been merely a 
chastisement for their sins. It has been an experience 



which the Lord has given them for their good. 

"BEFORE I WAS AFFLICTED I WENT ASTRAY" 

During these "Seven Times," then, the Jews have had 
severe tribulation and discipline. All of God's people, of 
every Age, have needed chastisements for their correction 
and development, some more and some less. God says to 
Spiritual Israel, "For what son is he whom the father 
chasteneth not? If ye be without chastisement, then are 
ye bastards [spurious] and not sons." (Hebrews 12:8.) 
And so it has been with the House of Servants, Natural 
Israel. Because they were God's Covenant people, therefore 
He dealt with them; and He has really given them, 
during these 2520 years, experiences which will prove 
favorable to such of them as will incline to do right. 
Those bitter experiences proved so favorable that when 
Jesus came they, as a people, were the holiest in the 
world; and at that time they had suffered only a small 
portion of these "Seven Times." 

So we find that the preaching of the Gospel by our 
Lord and His Apostles found about five hundred of the 
Jews ready to believe and accept Jesus as Messiah. And 
soon afterwards, just after Pentecost, there were quite a 
number of thousands who believed. These, we are told, 
were Israelites indeed in whom there was no guile. It is 
very remarkable that there was so large a number in 
Israel ready to receive the Messiah. This would not have 
been the case had they not been passing through disciplinary 
experiences. These experiences were all such 
as would tend to keep them separate from the Gentiles, 
keep them from mixing with any of the peoples of earth. 

If the Jews had prospered under the various governments 
—Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece and Rome— they 
might have intermingled with these other peoples and 
have ceased to be Jews altogether. And the same is true 
of their posterity since their national overthrow under 
Titus, A.D. 70. In God's providence the Jews have 
continued to have such tribulations throughout this Gospel 
Age as to have kept them separate from the rest of the 
world; and thus their minds have been kept in that condition 
of humility in which they will be best prepared for 

R5721 : page 204 

the Lord's service when the time of their complete 
restoration to favor shall come. 

Our thought is that when the proper time arrives the 
Israelites will be more ready for the Kingdom than any 
other nation. The afflictions through which they have 
passed, their obedience to the Law, etc., will have prepared 
them for the Kingdom. We are not, therefore, to 
consider this long period of their suffering and affliction 
merely as tribulation, as punishment. For their ultimate 
good the Jews were to be trodden down of the 
Gentiles until the full of Gentile domination. 



ISRAEL'S GREAT REGATHERING 

St. Paul tells us that just as soon as the Gospel Church 
shall be completed, God's favor will return to the Jews- 
return in the full sense. "Blindness in part is happened 
to Israel until the fulness of the Gentiles [the full predestined 
number of the Church to be gathered from the 
Gentile nations] be come in. And so all Israel shall be 
saved. As it is written, There shall come out of Zion 
[the glorified Gospel Church, spiritual Zion] the Deliverer 
[The Christ, Head and Body, Jesus and His Bride], 
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob [Natural 
Israel]; for this is My Covenant unto them when I shall 
take away their sins."— Romans 11:1-33. 

The Lord purposed to take away all sins— the sins of 
Israel, the sins of those who were to constitute the Gospel 
Church, and the sins of the whole world. For this cause 
Christ was manifested, for this cause He died. This cancelation, 
or doing away with the sins of the whole world, 
will progress as each shall recognize the Heavenly gift of 
forgiveness and obey the Government. 

The orthodox Jews, those who still hold to the teachings 
of the Law and the Prophets, and have faith in God, 
will be the first to receive the blessings of the New Age. 
"As concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your 
[the Church's] sakes; but as touching the election [the 
natural election], they are beloved for the father's sakes." 
So, then, this condition of affliction in which the Jews 
have been throughout the Gospel Age, in addition to the 
overthrow of their nation in the year 70 A.D., has really 
been a favor from God. All the tribulation through 
which this people have passed during the entire "Seven 
Times" of chastisement will be finally found to have been 
to their advantage, preparing them for the blessings of 
Messiah's Kingdom. The Church will be first in the 
Kingdom, Natural Israel with the Ancient Worthies at 
their head will be the second. Subsequently all nations 
will come into Divine favor and blessing, becoming members 
of Israel. All will be blessed through our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ. 



"DOOR" PROBABLY NOT YET CLOSED 

Question.— Would there be any prospect for one who 
consecrates at this time to be of the "Bride" class, or 
has the Call now ceased? 

Answer.— We make a distinction between the end of 
the public Call and the shutting of the door. We understand 
that the public Call ended when a sufficient number 
had been invited and had accepted the invitation— in 
1881. But of these invited and accepted ones there was 
still to be a testing. Only those enduring loyally to the 
end will be finally counted in as victors. Others, not 



proving wholly loyal to their Covenant in their daily 
lives, will in time be dropped from the list, which 
would mean that they had not been running faithfully. 
This would continually make vacancies to be filled. But 
such a filling of vacancies would not require a new Call, 
but merely a permission for one to enter as one went out. 

Our thought is that a large number of those who consecrated 
prior to 1881 failed to "make good." It is our 
thought that you are still in time to make your consecration, 
with every reason for hoping that you may make 
your calling and election sure by zealous faithfulness in 
sacrificing earthly interests in favor of the Heavenly. 

In any event, the most reasonable thing for any of 
us to do would be to give ourselves wholly to the Lord, 
just as soon as we realize our imperfection and the 
Lord's sufficiency. We should be glad to have Him as 
our Care-taker, regardless of what reward He would 
give. We should be sure that so great and so generous 
a King as God would give good gifts to all who are His. 
In other words, after the Little Flock is completed, the 
Lord will be glad to bless in some other manner others 
who have the spirit of obedience and sacrifice. 



R5722 : page 204 

QUEEN OF SHEBA VISITS SOLOMON 

-AUGUST 1.--1 KINGS 10:1-10,13.- 

KING SOLOMON'S RENOWN-A DISTINGUISHED VISITOR-SOLOMON'S 
GREAT ENGINEERING AND ARCHITECTURAL FEATS- 
HIS LITERARY ATTAINMENTS-"THE HALF WAS NOT 
TOLD"-"A GREATER THAN SOLOMON IS HERE" 
-RICHES OF DIVINE FAVOR. 

"Wisdom is better than rubies."— Proverbs 8:1 1. 

IN ANSWER to King Solomon's prayer for 
wisdom, God promised him both wisdom 
and riches that would make him world-famous. 
By the middle of his reign King 
Solomon had accomplished marvels for his 
nation. Its fame spread to every land. He 
was known as the wise king, the peaceful 
king, the rich king. 

We may suppose that the visit of the 
Queen of Sheba to King Solomon was 

about the middle of his reign— after he had been manifesting 
his wisdom for twenty years. She came, it is 
supposed, a journey of 1,500 miles, with quite a large 
retinue of servants and camels, and with valuable presents, 
gold and Arabian perfumes. Our lesson gives the 
queen's own statement of her object in coming to see 
King Solomon, and of how she found the facts to be 



more than double all of her anticipations and all the 
stories that had been told respecting King Solomon's 
wisdom and riches and the prosperity of his kingdom. 

THE WONDERS OF SOLOMON 

The Temple of the Lord, the materials of which his 
father David had prepared for him years before, was 
one of the first marvels of King Solomon's reign. Its 
beauty and its cost as a religious edifice were a world 
marvel. Then the king's own palace and the corridor, 
or ascent which led from his house to the Temple, were 
marvelous for that time, and indeed for any time until 
the wonders of engineering and architecture brought forward 
during the past century, which is noted in the Bible 
as the period of God's preparation for Messiah's Kingdom. 
-Nahum 2:3. 

Another great engineering feat of King Solomon was 
called the Pools of Solomon— the system of water supply 

R5722 : page 205 

for his capital, Jerusalem. These pools were connected 

by covered aqueducts, the first known in history. Additionally, 

he built strongholds or fortresses throughout his 

kingdom, for its defense against invaders. Furthermore, 

he extended the boundaries of his kingdom to the full 

limits set by the Lord prophetically long before. (Genesis 15:18.) 

This brought his kingdom down to the seacoast. 

Near Joppa (Jaffa) he had a harbor for ships, which is 

now completely cut off from the sea, and, having gradually 

filled up with earth, has become a beautiful orange grove. 

But his largest port of entry was at the city of Tyre 
—not in his own domain. He did business through the 
king of Tyre; and unitedly their ships traversed the Red 
Sea, the Mediterranean, etc., bringing commerce from all 
parts of the world, and affording good facilities for importing 
goods not produced in Palestine. It was through 
this means that King Solomon became so very rich that 
figuratively it was said that the precious metals became 
as common as stones in Jerusalem. 

A ROYAL VISITOR 

Busied with these enterprises, and at heart loyal to 
God, Solomon's reign, by the time of the Queen of 
Sheba's visit, seems to have been a most wonderful one. 
Later, satisfied with the blessings of the present life, the 
king seems to have been less wise and less a man after 
God's own heart and less thoughtful for his people. It 
is difficult, especially for the poor, to realize how great 
are the temptations of the rich and the danger that even 
a wise man may become foolish through the gratification 
of every desire of his heart. Incidentally, we should not 
forget King Solomon's literary achievements. He wrote 
three thousand proverbs and a thousand songs. Surely 



the Lord did for him to the full all that He had promised. 

It was this great King Solomon that the Queen of 
Sheba visited, with presents of gold and spices, desiring 
to learn to a certainty respecting his wonderful wisdom 
and skill. Her declaration was that the rumors which 
had reached her were less than half of the reality which 
she beheld and heard. She had questions to ask, probably 
respecting God and the future life; for apparently 
she recognized in Solomon more than human wisdom, and 
accredited to him wisdom from on High. She exclaimed, 
"Blessed be Jehovah thy God, which delighteth in thee, 
to set thee on the throne of Israel! Because Jehovah 
loved Israel forever, therefore made He thee king to do 
judgment and justice. Happy are thy men, happy these 
thy servants, which stand continually before thee and 
hear thy wisdom." "And King Solomon gave unto the 
Queen of Sheba all of her desire, whatsoever she asked; 
besides which, he gave her of his royal bounty"— a present. 
So she returned to her own country with her retinue. 

"A GREATER THAN SOLOMON" 

Jesus remarked on the story of our lesson, and marveled 
that there were no more to appreciate Himself and 
the wonderful lessons which He set forth respecting the 
Kingdom of God. (Matthew 12:42.) For people to 
travel a long distance merely to know about the wisdom 
of God such as King Solomon possessed, would imply 
that if it were known that a still wiser One could be 
conferred with, He would be sought; and if it should be 
known that this wiser One was heir to the world, and 
that He was seeking a Bride for His joint-heirship, how 
many might be expected to hasten to Him and to accept 
the generous proposal! 

This is exactly the condition of things. God's Son, 
according to the Divine Program, is selecting a Bride 
class. To be acceptable as a member of this class, we 
must hear of how the Wisdom of God centers in Jesus, 
how He is the Father's Agent and Representative in all 
the work of creation, past, present and future. Additionally, 
we must be so thoroughly impressed with this 
matter that we would leave all to go to Him to prove 
the matter for ourselves, to be convinced. Thus coming 
to Jesus, we are sure to be accepted, not merely that we 
might ask, as the queen did, for certain blessings, but that 
the King would enter into a covenant of espousal. 

The fact that not all are attracted to the Lord is the 
basis for our opportunity; for the Scriptures declare that 
the Bride of the Lamb is foreordained of God. The first 
opportunity to be of this elect company was given to the 
natural seed of Abraham. Had they accepted their privileges, 
the Church would have been completed in Jesus' 
day; but, as the Bible tells us, the Jews knew not the time 
of their visitation— did not appreciate who was with them 
—the Greater than Solomon. (Luke 19:44.) They did 
not inquire for the Kingdom nor for the terms of membership. 



They crucified the Prince of Life, unwittingly. 

Nevertheless, a wonderfully large part of that little 
nation, as "Israelites indeed," accepted Jesus, giving 
themselves wholly to Him— surrendering their wills. 
Then the nation was set aside temporarily while the door 
of this High Calling to membership with Christ was 
thrown open to the Gentiles. The unreadiness of the 
Gentiles to receive the Message of God is indicated by 
the fact that it has required all the eighteen centuries 
since to complete the elect number which, apparently, is 
only 144,000 altogether, "out of every nation, people, 
kindred and tongue." 



R5722 : page 205 

THE WISEST KING MISLED 

-AUGUST 8.-1 KINGS 12:1-24.- 

ISRAEL'S WISEST KING BECAME MOST FOOLISH-DISSATISFACTION 
AMONGST THE PEOPLE-JERUSALEM FAVORED AT THE 
EXPENSE OF THE NATION-KING SOLOMON'S SON AND 
SUCCESSOR-THE REVOLT OF THE TEN TRIBES-THE 
KINGDOMS REUNITED AFTER THE BABYLONIAN CAPTIVITY. 

"Pride goeth before destruction, and a haughty 
spirit before a fall."— Proverbs 16:18. 

GREAT as King Solomon was, the latter part 

of his reign was less wonderful and less 

creditable than the first half. Although no 

rebellion took place during his time, nevertheless 

dissatisfaction was felt. The king 

rested upon the marvels of the early part of 

his reign, became more and more interested 

in foreign affairs, and multiplied the number 

of his wives and of his troubles. The 

wealth of the nation, represented in the 

great public improvements, was really public wealth, in 

which all the people were interested; but the subsequent 

greater attention to personal aggrandizement and to 

favoritism of the court was not in the interest of the 

people as a whole, but merely favorable to certain 

favored classes. 

Although no rebellion was made against King Solomon, 
nor even protests, so far as the records show, nevertheless 
the people concluded that they would have a 
change in the kingdom during the reign of Solomon's 

R5723 : page 206 

successor, his son Rehoboam. This dissatisfaction was 
mainly with the ten tribes. The two tribes, in whose 
territory was the capital city, were satisfied with the great 



improvements which had come to them. King Solomon's 
capital city had been favored out of all proportion to the 
remainder of the country, in its public improvements. 
Israelites of all the other tribes had shared in a general 
conscription of labor at a comparatively small compensation; 
and they felt that justice had not been rendered them. 

THE KINGDOM DIVIDED 

For these reasons, the coming of King Rehoboam to 
the throne was the signal for a protest and for a demand 
that the king guarantee the people against oppression— a 
demand very similar to that of the British public in connection 
with the Magna Charta. The demand of the 
Israelites was made at the time of the king's coronation— 
a time when all the tribes were supposed to participate 
in acknowledging their loyalty to the king. Then came 
the representatives of the ten tribes, with Jeroboam as a 
leader, saying, "Thy father Solomon made our yoke 
grievous; now therefore make thou the grievous service 
of thy father and the heavy yoke which he put upon us 
lighter, and we will serve thee." 

The young king bade them depart for three days and 
then come again. When he conferred with the old men 
of the kingdom, asking what he should do, they replied, "If 
thou wilt be a servant unto this people this day, and will 
serve them, and answer them, and speak good words to 
them, then will they be thy servants forever." But this advice 
was not fully satisfactory to young King Rehoboam; 
so he inquired of his personal friends, younger men of his 
acquaintance. These gave opposite advice, saying, "Thus 
shalt thou speak unto this people: My little finger shall 
be thicker than my father's loins; and now, whereas my 
father did lade you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your 
yoke. My father has chastised you with whips, but I 
will chastise you with scorpions"— whips with metal 
pieces at the end of the lash. 

The thought of the younger men and of King 
Rehoboam, who agreed with them, was that if the king 
would yield, it would be merely the starting of rebellious 
demands which eventually would be unendurable. Their 
thought, therefore, was that the people should be intimidated, 
threatened. But the ten tribes under the leadership 
of Jeroboam were not intimidated. They withdrew, 
refusing to participate in the anointing of Rehoboam as 
their king. Only the representatives of two tribes, Judah 
and Benjamin, remained loyal to the king. 

Thus the kingdom of Israel was divided. Thereafter 
the ten tribes maintained the title Kingdom of Israel, and 
the two tribes were called the Kingdom of Judah, for 
over five hundred years— until the time of the return 
from Babylonian captivity of so many of all Israel as 
had respect to the Divine promises. 

Since the captivity, the name Israel has stood for 
the entire twelve tribes, as at first, being so used by Jesus 
and the Apostles; and the name Jews was similarly used 



for all in covenant relationship with God. The great 
majority never returned, but continued to live in the 
various provinces of Babylon throughout the world. 
Some of them, rejecting circumcision and dropping faith 
in God, were disowned of God and thus became like the 
remainder of the Gentile world. But others of them, remaining 
loyal to the Lord, and going up to Jerusalem 
annually to the feast, as directed by the Lord's Word, 
continued to be known as members of "the twelve tribes 
scattered abroad." Many of these were brought into 
contact with the Truth in the days of the Apostles. 

"PRIDE GOETH BEFORE DESTRUCTION" 

Lessons from the past are valuable today. Pride has 
been a general guide for the world which has accomplished 
much harm. The wealthy and those in power 
have ever feared the poor, so that nearly all the blessings 
of life which the latter have obtained have come to them 
only through strictest demands and threats, and little 
voluntarily. We are not wise enough to say that the 
worldly-wise have always erred in judgment in this matter. 
It is true that the poor and less favored are inclined 
to make unreasonable demands; but who can say that 
greater confidence in them on the part of the wealthy 
would not have worked general benefit? Who can say 
that the world might not have been further advanced had 
more confidence in the masses been displayed, and a 
greater willingness to give them even-handed justice and 
a larger share in the fruits of life? 

The answer of King Rehoboam to the ten tribes reminds 
us of the present attitude of many of the learned 
and wealthy toward the masses. They seem to think that 
others will gain their cause for them; and that a recognition 
of the rights of the people, after the manner of 
the Golden Rule, would be showing the white feather, and 
lead on to disastrous demands wholly unendurable. 

JUSTICE THE GOLDEN RULE 

All will agree that the wise men advised King 
Rehoboam properly, to the effect that a ruler should be 
the servant of his people; and that if he so does faithfully, 
his kingdom would be enduring and his people 
would be blessed. Their advice amounted to an admonition 
that the king should observe the Golden Rule— that 
he should do to his people and for them as he would that 
they should do to him, were their conditions reversed. 
The Golden Rule, laid down by the great Head of Christianity, 
is despised and rejected as impracticable; but we 
hold that it has not been given a trial. Those who have 
had the power have always feared to trust the Golden 
Rule in their dealings with the people. Political parties, 
clamoring for something like the Golden Rule, have time 
and again climbed into power, only to refuse to use the 
rule after gaining the opportunity, contending that the 



conditions made it impossible. 

Soon, however, the Golden Rule will have a world-wide 
test, and will demonstrate that it is the only rule 
by which human happiness can be permanently secured. 
This is the promise of the Bible, which tells us that 
Messiah's Kingdom will give the world compulsory 
education along the lines of the Golden Rule for a 
thousand years. The Lord, through the Prophets, the 
Apostles and Jesus Himself, testifies to the success of the 
Golden Rule— that it will bring in everlasting righteousness, 
peace, joy, blessing; and that God's favor will be 
upon those who thus conform to His Law, giving them 
ultimately deliverance from sin, sickness, pain, death, and 
bringing the whole world of mankind to glorious human 
perfection, utterly destroying those who will refuse to 
be governed by the Golden Rule. 

The result will be the glorious condition which God 
at the first proposed to Father Adam, but which he 
neglected and forfeited by disobedience. The death 
penalty upon Adam and his race, which has brought all 
our sicknesses, travails and death, has been offset by the 
Redeemer's sacrifice of Himself, the Just for the unjust; 
and the glorious Kingdom arrangements already referred 
to are to be the result. 



R5723 : page 207 

HOW TO VIEW DENOMINATIONALISM 

BELOVED WATCH TOWER BRETHREN: - 

By nature I was always weak, timid and fearful, but as 
the Truth of the Lord's Word has entered my mind and heart 
it has given me a courage which is entirely foreign to my 
nature. That is but one of the ways in which the Truth has 
made me free. 

This was recently impressed upon my mind very forcefully 
by a conversation I had on the train with a stranger. 
He was apparently a minister, although he did not say so, nor 
did I ask him. But in the usual ministerial way he made an 
attack upon Brother Russell and the cause for which he stands. 

This led to an extended conversation with him, in the 
course of which he asked me: "What opinion do you people 
have of our great denominations?" I said, "Are you really 
desirous of having that question answered?" "Yes," he said. 

I replied, "Then you shall certainly have your wish. 
But possibly if it were answered very directly you might 
charge that it was influenced by prejudice, so I am going to 
approach the matter from a different standpoint. 

"My home is in Philadelphia, and as you know, the prominent 
evangelist, 'Billy' Sunday, is conducting a long series of 
meetings there. My father is sending me the daily papers 
in which are published reports of his sermons, etc., and I 
have been following the same very carefully. 

"Practically all the Protestant churches in the city are 



behind Mr. Sunday; the papers stating that as many as four 
hundred ministers were sometimes on the platform with him. 
So of all men Mr. Sunday is surely qualified to speak for 
these denominations. Besides which his large experience with 
them should enable him to say with accuracy just what are 
the conditions prevailing in these churches. 

"In some of his sermons I note that he has a very poor 
opinion of the spirituality of these organizations. He scores 
the ministers because they have no faith. He condemns their 
neglect of Bible study. He says the theological seminaries 
are turning out infidels. 

"He refers to the large amount of saloon property that 
belongs to church members. He enumerates all kinds of 
worldly doings which go on in these denominations. He 
would have us believe that the moral standard of thousands 

R5724 : page 207 

high in the churches is so low as to almost stagger reason. 

"Now if what Mr. Sunday says about the denominations 
is true they are not fit places for good, respectable people, to 
say nothing of true Christians. In fact, if they are only half 
as bad as he says, then every faithful child of God ought to 
get out of them as quickly as he can. 

"If they are but one-quarter as bad as Mr. Sunday tells, 
then the only safety on the part of one who wishes to retain 
his faith is to get out of such spiritual pest-holes. And we 
must confess that Mr. Sunday's delineation of the conditions 
in religious organizations is true to fact. 

"This is why we are glad to take a stand independent of 
all denominations, and advise all who are not satisfied with 
the conditions prevailing in these systems to follow our example. 
Of course, there are many who want to know why 
we do not remain in the churches and try to reform them. 
We answer them that if all the able evangelists from Moody 
to Sunday have been able to accomplish so little in that direction 
then the case is hopeless. It is like the Bible puts it, 'We 
would have healed her, but she could not be healed.' The disease 
is incurable. That is why the denominations are DYING." 

The gentleman never attempted to refute my statements, 
but he said, "However, you must admit there has been a great 
revival in the way of Bible study in the past few years. Does 
that not look hopeful for the churches?" 

I replied, "It is true that the past few years have seen 
the inauguration of several movements having for their object 
the encouragement of more Bible study. But do you know 
the real reason for their existence? 

"When Pastor Russell first began to call attention to the 
extent to which the Word of God was being ignored in these 
denominations, his views were treated with the same scant 
courtesy as the Bible; and it was only a question of time until 
the Scriptures would have been altogether neglected. 

"But as the religious leaders began to see the people listening 
to Pastor Russell they trembled for the effect it would 
have on their own prestige, just as I imagine the Pharisees 
must have done when they found the common people listening 



to the words of Jesus. And in their fears the clergy realized 
that they must get up some kind of substitute for Bible-study 
to keep the mass of mankind from listening to the one who is 
unquestionably the religious Reformer of this century." 

The poor man had nothing more to say. He probably knew 
it was all too true. How glad any of us would have been to 
have given him the same comforting light we have, but he 
was not yet ready for it. 

Yours in the Fellowship of the Gospel of Peace, 
B. H. BARTON. 



R5724 : page 207 

FALSE REPORTS INJURIOUS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

For some time it has seemed expedient that I write you re 
some field observations. You may recall that I reported while 
South about a year ago that a rumor was then going the 
rounds of that section that Rockefeller had sent you a check 
for a million dollars. Since reaching the territory which I 
have been in for the past six weeks, I have come up against a 
widely circulated report that you had received another million 
dollars, but this time from Helen Gould. Now this report is 
vouched for as being authentic, for it is said to have come 
from some one engaged in the work, recently at Brooklyn, so 
he knows (they think). If such reports were not so absurd 
they would be laughable. How any one can give credence to 
such reports I cannot understand. 

For about the same period of time I have been hearing 
that Brother Bohnet had passed beyond, and that Brothers 
Toole and Hersee have gone out of the Truth. All these 
things sound to me very much like "vain babbling." At Chicago 
I was told that the reports coming in there from various 
Pilgrims indicate that the friends generally are going to sleep, 
at least resting on beds of ease. 

My observations have been quite the reverse of these 
reports, and you know the territory covered by me during 
the past eighteen months has been quite extensive. The cases 
of drowsiness noted by me have been rare. Generally speaking 
I have found the classes in good spiritual health, the 
friends wide-awake. Probably a more vital matter is a report 
throughout the same territory, just referred to, that your 
present thought is that the Church will not be gathered until 
1925. I was told that a Pilgrim brother, whose name was not 
mentioned, had made some calculations to this effect, but 
before presenting them to the Classes had submitted same to 
you and that you had returned the notes with your approval, 
as the story goes. So often do I find the friends forgetful 
of your oft-repeated statement that if you had any information 
to give them they might expect to find same in THE TOWER. 

It seems to me that all such matters as I am repeating are 
worse than idle— that they are in reality harmful; for when 
the minds of the friends are exercised about such things they 



cannot be exercised about the things that would help them 
into the Kingdom. It seemed to me that you might consider 
these matters of sufficient importance to warn the dear friends 
against them through THE TOWER. 

My heart was made solemn indeed by the article in THE 
WATCH TOWER, "Seventy Sent Forth." The breaking of such 
tender ties is a great test, but we are in the testing time and 
cannot know what awaits us. When one member suffers, all 
suffer— sympathetically. Surely the end is near— all the more 
occasion for rejoicing. Remember me, dear Pastor, in your 
prayers, that I may meet you in the Kingdom, even if not 
before. My love for you expands and grows more tender as 
the days pass. To my mind evidences are being multiplied 
to the effect that the dear Lord is still guiding you in all 
things pertaining to His service. Daily do I thank the Father 
that I am privileged to be a coworker together with you in 
these closing days. With abounding love and confidence, 

Your brother by His kind favor, W. M. WISDOM. 



page 207 

"A FEAST OF FAT THINGS" 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I thank our dear Heavenly Father each day for the wonderful 
provision He has made for the Church at this time 
in furnishing the "meat in due season" for us, through THE 
WATCH TOWER. The articles appearing in them are just soul-satisfying 
and as I read them over again and again, it reminds 
me of the beautiful words we sing— Hymn 264: 

"Sing them over again to me, 

Wonderful words of life! 
Let me more of their beauty see, 

Wonderful words of life!" 

Surely after our day of toil, when we are free from all 
care, what greater joy can we have than in partaking of this 
"Feast of fat things" prepared for us at this time! Surely 
we can say like David in Psalm 116:7, "Return unto thy 
rest, O my soul; the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee." 

I pray the Lord's rich blessings to be upon you each day, 
and that you may be one found worthy to reign with Him! 

Your brother in the one Hope, LEWIS PITTENGER.-Pa. 



page 208 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOIATION 



page 209 

VOL. XXXVI JULY 15 No. 14 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

Love of the Father and the Son our Pattern 21 1 

Why Jesus Loves His Own 21 1 

Hypocrisy the Great Sin 212 

How We May Minister Unto the Lord 213 

We Must Fellowship Whom God Fellowships 214 

The World Waking Up 215 

A Letter of Deep Interest 216 

Question Meeting— Oakland Convention 216 

Sin-Offering Made by High Priest 217 

Proper and Improper Advertising 217 

True Definition of Babylon 218 

Israel's Priests Died Typically 219 

Politicians and False Religion 220 

Were God's Plans Defeated? 220 

King Asa's Reform Work 222 

True Covenanters, All of Us 222 

Interesting Letters 223 

South African Convention 223 

Spent 50 Years Hunting for True Church 223 

page 210 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



THE SPRINGFIELD, MASS., CONVENTION. 

The New England and Middle Atlantic States Railroads 
have joined in a flat rate of 2c a mile in each direction, going 
and returning via same route. Tickets will be on sale July 
23-25 (in New England 24-26), with final return limit August 
3. Confer with your ticket agent some days in advance that 
he may secure the necessary ticket-forms acct. I.B.S.A. 
Convention. 

The following Pilgrim Brethren are on the Convention 
Program for public addresses; namely, R. H. Barber, E. W. 
Brenneisen, J. A. Gillespie, J. F. Rutherford, H. C. Rockwell, 
C. T. Russell, Menta Sturgeon, W. J. Thorn, R. G. Jolly, R. J. 
Martin. 

Other Brethren may be heard also in symposiums. 

One Part of the "Photo-Drama of Creation" is to be 
shown each night of the Convention. 

Board and lodging information is obtainable from the 
I.B.S.A. Class Secretary, H. E. Spear, 48 Scott Street, Springfield, 
Mass. 

Present indications point to quite a considerable attendance 
at this Convention. 



THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 

This very valuable work has been out of stock for some 
months. We thought to discontinue it because the electroplates 
of many of the pages had become much worn and unfit 
to print from again. We have, however, decided that the book 
is almost indispensable to Bible Students and that many who 
are joining the ranks of Bible Students would be much disadvantaged 
if they could not secure this book as an aid in 
Bible study. We have, therefore, corrected the plates and 
made many new ones, preparatory to the printing of a new 
edition which we hope will be ready for mailing about 
September 15th. 

Heretofore we have had two editions, one on heavy paper, 
cloth covers, price $1.50, and the other on India paper, leather 
binding, gilt edge, price $2.50. We have concluded to have 
but one kind hereafter. It will be on thin Bible paper in 



leather binding. The price will be $2.00. We will, however, 
give with each copy one year's subscription to the WATCH 
TOWER— to a new reader— this with a view to bringing the 
WATCH TOWER and the Diaglott to the attention of all Bible 
Students and to making their acquaintance in a practical way. 
If any who are already subscribers to the WATCH TOWER desire 
a Diaglott for their own use they may send the premium 
subscription to some friend, but if the matter be not mentioned 
at the time the book is ordered, it will be too late to 
write us about it afterward. The WATCH TOWER is cheap at 
$1.00 per year, and the Diaglott extremely cheap at $2.00. The 
Fowler and Wells Company, from whom we purchased the 
electroplates of the Diaglott, charge a much higher price for 
it, namely, $4.00 in cloth binding, $5.00 in leather. Our prices 
also include postage. 



"A GREAT BATTLE IN THE ECCLESIASTICAL HEAVENS" 

This pamphlet by Brother Rutherford in defense of 
Brother Russell is not published for profit. Indeed, the 
paper, printing, wrapping and postage costs nearly the small 
price, ten cents. If we take into consideration the copies sent 
free to the newspapers, the result is loss, not gain. For convenience, 
orders may hereafter be sent to the Society. When 
ordering designate it "BATTLE." 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF AUGUST 
Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY IX. 

Week of August 1 Q. 22 to 28 Week of August 15... .Q. 36 to 42 

Week of August 8 Q. 29 to 35 Week of August 22.. ..Q. 43 to 49 

Week of August 29. ...Q. 50 to 56. 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each. 



R5724: page 211 

LOVE OF THE FATHER AND THE SON OUR PATTERN 

(Discourse delivered by Brother Russell 
at the recent Convention at Oakland, Cal.) 

OF THE Master we are assured that at the 
conclusion of His earthly ministry He still 
dearly loved His disciples. We read, "Jesus, 
...having loved His own, He loved them 
unto the end." We are to draw a strict 



line of demarcation between the love of 
God which the Bible points out as applicable 
to all mankind, and the love of God 
which is conferred upon the Church. In 
the large, broad sense of the word, the 
Bible assures us that "God so loved the world that He 
gave His Only Begotten Son, that whosoever believeth 
on Him might not perish, but have everlasting life." 
However, there was nothing in the fallen man that God 
could really love, in the sense of fellowshiping him. 
Really, there was nothing in man to draw out the love of 
God toward him— everything rather to the contrary. 
And this was the reason God sentenced man at the first, 
immediately after his fall, declaring Father Adam not 
worthy of His continued love and favor, and condemned 
him to death.— Genesis 3:17-19. 

We are not to understand that God changed His mind 
meantime and concluded that, after all, He did love Adam 
and wished that He had not condemned him to death. 
Rather, we are to understand that the love of God which 
He exercised toward the world is of the sympathetic 
kind. You and I might have a kind of sympathetic love 
for a poor dog. If he had injured his paw, we would 
like to bind up that paw. We would have the sympathetic 
love. Not that we really loved that dog, but we 
had sympathy for it. So God's attitude toward the 
world is an attitude of sympathy. And He would have 
His people have a kind, generous feeling toward all men, 
and even toward the brute creation. In harmony with 
this the Apostle tells us that we are to do good to all men 
as we have opportunity, but especially unto them who 
are of the Household of Faith.— Galatians 6:10. 

The Lord makes a definite rule. We are not to class 
the Household of Faith in with the world. We are not 
to think of giving the world the same affection or love 
or interest that we give to the Household of Faith. 
Neither does God. 

The love which God has for the world is entirely 
different from that which the Savior mentions when He 
says, "The Father Himself loveth you." This seems to 
me one of the most wonderful texts of the Bible— that 
our great God could have a love for us— so small, so 
unworthy of His love or attention! This same sentiment 

R5725 : page 211 

of the Heavenly Father is reflected in the words of 

our text, "Jesus having loved His own, ...He loved 

them unto the end." No doubt was there. We cannot 

think that those who were especially His own then, those 

who had come to Him and become His followers, were 

the most talented people in Jewry, any more than are 

His disciples today. Were they especially His own because 

they were so well educated? Was it because they 

were so refined? No. Was it because the world appreciated 

them and would take charge of them, or because 



they could be raised to responsible positions in the eyes 
of the world? No. 

WHY JESUS LOVES HIS OWN 

Why did Jesus have this special love for them?— 
"having loved His own, He loved them unto the end." 
There is something important here. You and I wish to 
know whether the Savior loves us. His is not merely 
a random love. There is a principle involved. He loved 
them because they were His own, but not in the selfish 
sense that a man would love his house and his dog and 
his cat, because he possessed them, because he owned 
them. Not in that sense did Jesus call His disciples His 
own. His was an unselfish love. He purposed to do 
something for them. 

What was the reason that Jesus loved and called His 
disciples His own? I think you are agreed with me as 
to the reason. He loved them because they had those 
qualities of heart that would make them lovable from 
His standpoint. I think that those qualities are ones 
that you may have and I may have. You and I in thinking 
along this line, may see and know. I am glad the 
Bible says that Jesus loved His own. I am glad I am 
one of His own and therefore can believe that Jesus 
loves me, not in the merely sympathetic sense that He 
loves the unbelieving world, but in the special sense 
made manifest in our text. 

The quality that made Jesus love them was, I believe, 
first of all, their honesty. It seems to me there is no 
quality more estimable in the sight of God than honesty. 
Should not everybody be honest? I answer, Yes. Is 
everybody honest? Evidently not. The honesty which 
these disciples manifested was that they were ready to 
confess that they were nothing of themselves. They 
could not keep the Law of God. They could not think 
of themselves as anybody. They knew, as all Jews knew, 
or ought to have known, that God had given them the 

R5725 : page 212 

Law as the standard. They could not keep that Law. 
They were honest enough to confess it. Their hearts 
were therefore in the attitude to look for something that 
God had to give that would be better than the Law 
Covenant.— Romans 7; 8:1-4. 

HYPOCRISY THE GREAT SIN 

Notice the great ones, the holy, the religious ones, of 
the Jewish nation— the Scribes and Pharisees and Priests. 
They were claiming that they kept the Law; but they 
were not keeping the Law, as Jesus pointed out. That 
meant that they were deceived. They were professing 
to keep the Law. They made broad their phylacteries. 
They made long prayers to be seen of men. Jesus was 



continually reproving them. Doubtless there were many 
murderers, thieves and vagabonds in Palestine; yet we 
notice that Jesus passed all their criminality by as insignificant 
as compared with hypocrisy. The most serious 
denunciations the Master gave were toward this class. 
The further you and I can get away from being religious 
hypocrites the better. If the whole religious community 
professing Christ could get away from hypocrisy, it 
would make a great stir in the world. There is a great 
deal made of certain names, indicating certain religious 
activities by means of these names, but the names do 
not match the facts in the case. 

The disciples were honest, confessing themselves 
nobodies and confessing that they were not able to do 
right, not able to keep God's Law; and because they thus 
accepted God's Message, speaking peace with God and 
telling them that they might have forgiveness of sins 
through Him— because they had this attitude of mind, 
Jesus received them as His disciples. They were glad 
to believe the Message He had to give— that He was selecting 
the Kingdom Class, to be highly exalted to bless 
mankind. They left all to follow Him. He had taken 
a similar course. He had forsaken all to do the Father's 
will. He had given up the glorious condition which He 
had with the Father before the world was. As a human 
being He had consecrated Himself at the time of His 
baptism, gladly, willingly, that He might do the will of 
the Father. Here were some, these dear disciples of His, 
having noted His purity and having received His Message, 
who were glad to walk in His steps, that they likewise 
might do the will of the Father. Jesus declared 
that each of these was His mother, His sister, His 
brother. There was the secret of it. 

NONE SO PRECIOUS AS THE LORD'S OWN 

Our Lord had received these disciples as being very 
closely related to Himself. They were the most precious 
ones in all the world. They were not His natural 
brothers and natural sisters; but because they had the 
Spirit of the Father, because they had His own Spirit, 
they were greatly beloved. Having loved His own, He 
continued to love them to the end. 

At the conclusion of His earthly career, you remember, 
at the time He was thinking about them, and thinking 
about leaving them, He prayed to the Father about 
them. He said, "I pray not for the world." He was 
about to die for the world; but He did not pray for the 
world, because the salvation of the world was not yet 
due, in God's Plan. He prayed for those that had willingly 
given themselves to be His disciples and to walk 
in His steps. He prayed that they all might be one— not 
that they might all be one person; they would always be 
different persons, but that they might all have one spirit, 
one mind, one heart, one disposition, that they might all 
be true disciples, that they might be one with the Father. 



This was his prayer for them. He said that His 
followers should love one another as He had loved them. 
This is bringing it down to you and to me. It is one 
thing to realize the love of the Lord Jesus for us, and 
it is another to realize that the Father Himself loveth 
us because we have left the world and turned our backs 
upon sin. You may never be able to conquer all these 
weaknesses of yours fully, to your dying day. The Lord 
judges the heart, the will. He knows whether you have 
turned your back upon sin. He knows whether you have 
given up your heart entirely to do His will, to walk 
humbly in the footsteps of Jesus. 

"The Father Himself loveth you" ! What would you 
take, my dear brother, for what that text teaches of the 
Love of God toward us as His children? He has a love 
for the world. As a God, a Creator, He has the supervision 
of all His creatures. God has made provision for 
every creature, even the sparrow. But for all who have 
come into this loyal attitude of mind, He has love- 
sympathy, and more, esteem! 

"KEEP YOURSELVES IN THE LOVE OF GOD" 

If we know that we came into the love of God, then 
let us remember, as the Apostle John says, that we are 
to keep ourselves in the love of God. You say, "Are we 
able to keep ourselves? Did not St. John make a mistake?" 
No, my dear brother, he made no mistake. We 
must keep ourselves in the love of God. "We are not 
able to keep ourselves, are we?" Yes, the keeping is 
with you. God will never force your will. God is not now 
seeking those who need to be compelled. By and by, in 
the next Age, in the Millennium, He will deal with those 
who need to be forced and compelled. He will deal with 
these that they may compare the good and its results with 
the evil and its results. Now the Father seeks such as 
worship Him in spirit, drawing near to Him, loving Him. 

It is not that we first loved Him, but that He first 
loved us— the love we see reflected in His great Plan for 
the uplifting of our race. All this tells us of the great 
God that we have. When we came into His family by 
surrendering our wills to Him, and He begat us of His 
Holy Spirit, we came into a precious relationship. There 
is nothing like it in the Universe. The holy angels indeed 
are in God's love and favor; they never were out of 
it. But we who were once sinners, and who are now 
received back into His family, are begotten of His Spirit 
to the highest of all natures. How wonderful, my dear 
brother! I think, and so do you, that God loves us very, 
very much, or He would never have made such wonderful 
provision in the riches of His grace and in His loving 
kindness toward us who are in Christ Jesus. The 
provisions of God's grace are not only those of the future, 
and it is not that He will ultimately change and transform 
us who are now willing to will and to do His good 
pleasure, but we are actually being transformed today, 



by this love of the Father. 

I believe that daily, weekly, monthly, yearly, as we 
think upon these things, as we consider, study out and 
understand the great love of God as expressed in His 
marvelous Plan, we are getting a wonderful realization 
of how much "the Father Himself loveth" us. But we 
cannot understand it fully. But the very fact that any 
Father would do such wonderful things for any child 
would imply a great deal of love. 

God had love for the angels when he made them. 
He had love for the cherubim and the seraphim when 
He made them. They always will be grand characters 
and therefore worthy of God's love. But here is the 
most wonderful expression of God's love that we by 
faith can believe in— that God should have such love 

R5726 : page 213 

toward us who are in every way disorganized as a race. 
The Father looked down and beheld in this race some 
jewels; and He lifted these jewels up and washed them 
free from sin through the merit of the Savior; and then, 
through their consecration, began the work of polishing 
these jewels and getting them ready for the mounting 
in effulgent glory in the Resurrection Morning, when 
He shall set these jewels in the gold of the Divine nature. 
Surely the Father Himself loveth us! 

"WHAT SHALL I RENDER UNTO THE LORD?" 

As the Father loves us, and as we have also the word 
of assurance that the Savior loves us, what now shall 
we do in return? What shall I render unto the Lord my 
God for all His benefits toward me? This is as little as 
we can say. If you were taken in hand by some very rich 
and influential person, when you were a mere waif upon 
the world, and if he took you into his own home and 
adopted you into his own family, you would say, "What 
a benefactor this is!" If you had a grateful heart, you 
would say, "All my time and influence shall go to this 
benefactor, to show him how much I appreciate his 
kindness toward me." As surely as you had a proper 
heart you would feel that way. 

Now, then, what shall we render unto the Lord for 
all His benefits— His love, His kindness, for the great 
redemption in which we share with the world, and further 
for the High Calling which we have received to 
come out of the world and become joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ. Ours is a Heavenly inheritance, incorruptible 
and undefiled and that fadeth not away— an inheritance 
reserved for us who are kept by the power of God 
through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed at the 
last time. All this is ours. God has fixed it so. There 
is no mistaking the matter. This is a New Creation. 
Until this Gospel Age there has been no sharing of His 
level, so to speak; but we cannot lose our way while we 



follow our Guide. And in proportion as you and I appreciate 
what God has done for us, we surely wish to do 
something for Him. 

What can we do? You look at yourself, and I look 
at myself; and we say truly and honestly, "We are mere 
bundles of imperfection. We have nothing worthy to 
offer to the Lord our God." But you did offer and it 
was accepted. You have given all you had and the Lord 
has received you; otherwise you would not belong to 
this class at all. The Father thus loves only those who 
have made this consecration. They are the only ones 
that are in the Church whose names are written in 
Heaven. You had your will to give. You gave your 
little all. The Father accepted you and begat you of His 
Spirit; and that is the reason why you are of God's 
Elect, and that is the reason why you can realize more 
fully, "The Father Himself loveth you." 

What shall we render? The things that you are to 
render and I am to render are the things we consecrated 
to God— the very same. That was your little all and my 
little all. But how shall we render our all? In everything, 
especially in our wills, we should seek to know the 
Father's will. Whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever 
we do, we should do all to the glory of God. In other 
words, my dear brethren, in coming into God's family 
and making this Covenant with the Lord, we have bound 
ourselves down. He did not bind us. We bound ourselves 
down, that we would have no will of our own in 
any matter, that we would do only His will. 

BOND SLAVES OF CHRIST, YET FREE MEN 

We cannot have what we please to wear. We are 
not even to eat what we please. We are not even to go 
where we please. We are not even permitted to think 
what we please. "Well," says one, "I never heard the 
like of such a bondage!" That is true, my dear Brother. 
We are bond slaves of the Lord Jesus Christ. "And shall 
we never get rid of this slavery?" You can stop it any 
minute. All who are slaves of the Lord Jesus are 
voluntary slaves. You came in voluntarily; and you can 
just as quickly renounce it all if you please. Do you 
wish to do so? Oh, no! It is the most blessed bondage 
you were ever in! Every time you have found you had 
to give up your own will you found you had a greater 
blessing in return, more than compensating. You found 
all things working together for good, because you were 
renouncing your own will and walking in the footsteps 
of Jesus. Precious bondage! You found how many 
mistakes you made when you tried to do your own will 
—about your clothing, your food, and everything else. 
You are glad to have some general direction from One 
who is so wise. Because of this direction, the Apostle 
says of this class that they have "the spirit of a sound 
mind."— 2 Timothy 1:7. 

Our minds are all imperfect and unsound. When we 



are guided not by our own wills but by the Lord's will, 
as expressed to us in His Word, then we come to have 
the spirit of a sound mind. And much, much blessing 
has it brought us! I am sure I speak the sentiments of 
every one here present who is a consecrated child of God. 

Gradually we come to love the Lord's way. We grow 
in grace and in knowledge and in the love of God, so 
that eventually we come to hate the things we once loved 
and to love the things we once despised. Thus as the 
Apostle describes it, We are transformed by the renewing 
of our minds.— Romans 12:2. 

This bondage is freedom in a very important respect. 
(1 Corinthians 7:22.) We are getting a victory over the 
bondage of sin; we are more victorious daily over the 
bondage of the weaknesses of our flesh. But this bondage 
to the will of the Lord is bringing us daily blessings; 
and ultimately it will bring us the First, the Chief Resurrection, 
of which Jesus says, "Blessed and holy is he who 
hath part in the First Resurrection;. ..they shall be 
priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with Him a 
thousand years." (Revelation 20:6.) All this will come 
to you and me, if we are faithful in doing the Lord's 
will to the extent of our ability. God never expects 
anybody to do beyond his ability. We are to have the 
glorious standard of the Lord before us, and to live as 
fully up to that standard as we are able. The Lord Jesus 
could not do more than all He was able. Being perfect 
He was able to do perfectly. Being imperfect we cannot 
do perfectly; and therefore the blood of Jesus cleanseth 
us, makes us clean, while we seek to walk, not after the 
flesh, but after the Spirit. 

HOW WE MAY MINISTER TO THE LORD 

Here we come to another point. The Lord knew that 
you and I could not do anything for Him. He gave us a 
suggestion how we might indirectly do for Him. You 
know to what I refer. He says that we should love one 
another, and that in loving one another we would be expressing 
the love which we have for Him. So the 
Apostle John in speaking of this same matter, from this 
same standpoint, says that as Christ laid down His life 
for us, so we ought also to lay down our lives for the 
brethren. He does not say that we should lay down our 
lives for everybody— for the heathen or for the world in 
general. No, no. We ought to lay down our lives for 
the brethren. That is the way it reads. The Lord knew 
how to have it written. We are to lay down our lives 
for the ones whom Jesus loved. 

I have found some very dear children of God who 

R5726 : page 214 

seemingly found it much easier to do something for the 
world than for the Church. That is not the proper sentiment. 
It is God First, the Lord Jesus next, the brethren 



next; and after that, all men as we have opportunity; 
and after that, the brute creation as we have opportunity. 
Brutes are to be neglected in favor of men, and 
the world are to be neglected in favor of the Church. If 
we have His Spirit we will love His own. 

When I speak in this way, do not understand me as 
meaning to countenance a partiality amongst Christians. 
There is something very broadening in the Bible, and I 
believe the members of the INTERNATIONAL BIBLE 
STUDENTS ASSOCIATION are more and more attaining this 
love which the Lord Jesus wished us to attain. It is not 
whether, if they are Presbyterians, we should love them 
as Presbyterians, or if Methodists, we should love them 
as Methodists, or if Lutherans, we should love them as 
Lutherans. The Presbyterians love the Presbyterians; 
the Methodists love the Methodists; the Lutherans love 
the Lutherans; the Mormons love the Mormons; the 
Spiritualists love the Spiritualists; the Masons love the 
Masons; and the Odd Fellows love the Odd Fellows. 
But in the Church of Christ there are no such lines of 
distinction. It is not whether a man is a Mason or not 
a Mason, a Methodist or not a Methodist; it is whether 
he is the Lord's child. We are to love those who belong 
to God. If the Father loves him and the Savior loves 
him, then we too should love him. If I do not love him 
there is something wrong in my attitude. I am to love 
what the Father loves, to love what the Savior loves. 

"HE THAT LOVETH GOD, LOVETH HIS BROTHER ALSO" 

"Brother Russell, if you love all the brethren, you 
are going to love some pretty rude characters, you are 
going to love some very ignorant ones, you are going to 
love some that are not well esteemed amongst men." I 
cannot help it. I am going to love all who love God. 
You remember that the Twelve Apostles, except St. 
Paul, were all very ordinary men. You remember that 
when St. Peter and St. John, two of the very brightest 
of the Twelve, were preaching in the Temple the people 
perceived they were unlearned and ignorant men. Think 
of that! The "common people" could see it. Are these 
the ones Jesus loved? Yes. I suppose they cracked 
and broke the classic Hebrew at times. This does not 
mean that we should love more than others those who 
break the English language into pieces, but we should 
not allow ignorance to stand between any brother or 
sister and our love. We should see to it that we love all 
who are in fellowship with our Lord. 

This is the reason they are commended to our love— 
because they have His spirit, regardless of whether they 
are from the highest or the lowest ranks of society. If 
the Father Himself has accepted them into His family, 
and the Father loves them, that is reason enough for 

R5727 : page 214 



you and me that we should love them. We ought to love 
the brethren. How much? It is a very long step the 
Apostle sets before us— we ought to be willing to lay 
down our lives for the brethren. Our commission is not 
to preach to the world, but merely to such as have "an 
ear to hear" and a desire to find God. In addressing 
the public we shall be sure in nearly every case to 
find some who are the Lord's children, and who need 
assistance in the good way, or some who are feeling 
after God and desire to become His children. Merely to 
have a harangue to interest the world is no part of our 
mission whatever. Our commission is the gathering out 
of the Church, the Bride of Christ. 

Suppose some of those who profess to be consecrated 
to God are very, very weak indeed every way? Very 
well, my dear brother, perhaps the Lord sees you are 
weak and that you get into trouble too. Do you not 
know that He has many things to overlook in you? We 
are to be of as little trouble to others as possible, but we 
are to bear with the infirmities of the weak brethren and 
not merely to please ourselves. Let me repeat. We are 
to bear with their weaknesses and infirmities, and not to 
please ourselves. How much that means! I trust we 
are learning this. I am merely pointing out what you 
all know, that the love of God is the fulfilling of the 
Divine requirement, and that this love is to manifest itself 
toward those whom He acknowledges as His children 
and receives into His family. If I see that any man 
has God's fellowship, I dare not deny my fellowship. 

WE MUST FELLOWSHIP WHOM GOD FELLOWSHIPS 

I think of a story told about a New York banker, that 
might illustrate the point. He was an upright man. This 
banker had a friend living at a distance, who, wishing to 
give his son a start in life, gave him a letter of introduction 
to the banker. He wrote, "If you can introduce my 
son into the business world, it will be quite a favor to 
me." This wealthy man of Wall Street had very great 
confidence in his friend; and he perceived, when he 
looked at the young man, that he was a noble character. 
Then he thought about what he could do to get him established 
in business. Without comment, he said, "Come, 
let us take a little walk"; and they walked arm in arm 
down Wall street and Bond street and New street and 
back again to the office. The young man waited a while 
in nervous expectancy. Then, noticing that the banker 
was apparently not expecting to do anything more, he 
said, "Is there anything you can do to introduce me?" 
And the banker replied, "It is not necessary. The fact 
that I had you on my arm and led you down these streets 
will be a sufficient introduction to the business men of 
this vicinity." And the young man found it so. 

So when God takes hold of a man, and we see him 
in God's company, we know God is willing to introduce 
him, and it gives him a standing with you and me. He 



is one of the brethren, because "the Father Himself 
loveth" him; the Father Himself recognizes him as one 
of His family. Then you and I should be willing to do 
anything for him that we are able. It is the Father's 
will that we should cooperate with Him in assisting the 
brethren in every way possible. There are various trials 
and difficulties for these brethren that you and I know 
about. All the soldiers of the cross have a narrow way, 
a battle with the world and with the flesh and with the 
Adversary. You and I have battles due to the fallen 
condition of our own flesh. What sympathy it should 
give us with all other soldiers in the battle! There are 
the two Captains. All who are on the Lord's side or 
who are seeking to walk in the footsteps of Jesus belong 
to our army. Whether learned or ignorant, black or 
white, rich or poor, it is our privilege to love our brethren. 

HAST THOU LOVE? THEN SHOW IT NOW 

I believe this is as good a thought as we can have 
as we close this Convention. The Master said, "Lo, I 
am with you alway, even unto the end of the Age." 
(Matthew 28:20.) We are now down at the end of the 
Age, "Only waiting till the dawning is a little brighter 
grown," only waiting till we pass beyond the veil, till we 
are joined to the Savior on the other side the veil. "Then 
shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom 
of their Father." No opportunity after that of helping 
the brethren! All the brethren will have been helped. 
They will all have passed then where they will need 

R5727 : page 215 

no help. The time when we can encourage one another, 
and give a helpful look, or a warm clasp of the hand, 
and can show our fellowship in the sufferings of the 
present time, is now. 

I hope we are all learning more and more this lesson 
of love; and I hope our hearts are opening more and 
more widely, as we come to see the glorious character 
of our Father and of our Savior, and come to receive of 
the Master's image, reflected in us more and more. The 
Apostle says that by looking on Jesus we are changed, we 
are transformed from glory to glory, in the present life. 
As we thus go on from one stage of heart development to 
another, from one step of glory to another, on this side 
of the veil, we are making the necessary progress, and 
we will be ready for the great final step, the final stage, 
when we shall see Him as He is and share His glory. 

My dear brethren, do we not believe that all these 
things are nigh, even at the door? The Master said, 
"When ye see these things begin to come to pass, then 
look up and lift up your heads and rejoice; for your 
deliverance draweth nigh." Are we rejoicing properly? 
Are we lifting up our heads and rejoicing to tell the 
world the sweet old story of the Savior's love and of 



God's love? Do not tell them too much of the coming 
trouble. Tell them about the silver lining of the cloud. 
"Ye, brethren, are not in darkness that that Day should 
overtake you as a thief." 

THE WORLD WAKING UP 

The most wonderful inquiries are coming in that we 
have ever known. People everywhere are saying, "What 
do these things mean? These are the things you Bible 
Students have been talking about for years." They begin 
to "take knowledge." They may not all give their hearts 
to the Lord now. The right thought to leave with the 
inquirer is that he should enter into a covenant with the 
Lord, before he can have any favors present or future. 
The point of every discussion and every argument, to 
one who is not already consecrated, is that the time is 
limited, and that the only proper course for anybody to 
take is, as the Apostle suggests, to present his body a 
living sacrifice, his reasonable service. 

I feel that we do well to keep this always in mind. 
You can never get people to understand all about the 
doctrines. The Lord never meant anybody to understand 
all these things except the brethren. "To you it is given 
to know the mysteries of the Kingdom." They were 
meant for such— for you, who have come into the 
family of God. These things are for you to understand. 
When you find that people are interested, press the point 
about their getting into the Ark of Safety, getting into 
the family of God, getting to be members of the Body 
of Christ, heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus. 

PARTING WORDS 

As we leave here today, we do so with the thought 
that we may meet again as a Convention, or perhaps we 
may not meet again. It is not for you or for me to be 
dictatorial. The Bible indicates that the Gentile Times 
have ended. Their kings have had their day. They have 
made a good showing, in many respects. Many of these 
governments have done wonderfully. Take the government 
of Germany. It seems to me that the present 
Emperor of Germany has done wonderful things for his 
nation, which forty years ago was a very stupid people. 
Today they have become very bright, very intelligent, 
very well educated people, amongst the brightest in the 
whole world. This came partly in connection with their 
militarism. They were getting lessons in reading and 
writing and arithmetic while learning military discipline. 
Much might be said in favor of all these Gentile governments, 
as well as against them all. Yet when they have 
done their best, they have done little. Have the nations 
been able to lift up mankind to full perfection? No. 
Have the doctors been able to lift up mankind? No. 
Would the United States ever be able to do so? No. On 
the contrary, with all the increasing intelligence, we see 



the cataclysm of dissolution and anarchy coming. But 
all the trouble will be as nothing in comparison with the 
blessings that shall come when the Sun of Righteousness 
is revealed. But the portal of trouble must first be 
passed. And it will be a very helpful experience to all 
the world, as they shall be brought down to the place 
where they will look to the Lord as their Helper. Man's 
extremity will become God's opportunity. 

Then, my brethren, let us be faithful to the light God 
has given us. Let us live the Truth every day, "showing 
forth the praises of Him who hath called us out of darkness 
into His marvelous light." I hear of many who 
have received a blessing from the daily reading of the 
Vow; others through reading the Morning Resolve. I 
believe we cannot too fully surround ourselves with helpful 
influences. We need to fortify. We need to get ourselves 
strengthened by the Divine might in the inner 
man, that we may be able to resist those things that are 
contrary to us as New Creatures. Let us then suggest 
the keeping of these resolves, and thus living near to God. 

A good many also have written in about the article 
that appeared in THE WATCH TOWER lately on Love. A 
brother wrote, "Since reading that article I have been 
trying to be more gentle, more kind, more considerate 
of others, and to practise these things; and I am finding 
a great blessing as I endeavor to put these principles into 
practise. I find it easier to be meek and kind and gentle 
in word and action." I believe the Lord today would 
have His people do as much polishing up of their characters 
as possible, so that it may not be necessary for 

R5728 : page 215 

Him to give us, through disciplinary providences in our 
lives, the polishing we need. If we would polish ourselves, 
we would not need to be polished by the Lord. 

Those who are putting on the graces of the Spirit, 
are all receiving God's special assistance, and are working 
together with God (2 Corinthians 6:1); for this is 
God's work. As the Bible says, "Ye are God's workmanship. 
If He works in us to will and to do, it is to 
do what He has given us in His Word as His will. His 
present purpose is the taking out from amongst mankind 
of a saintly class that are to share the nature of Christ 
and share with Him the Kingdom of the future, through 
which the world will be blessed. 

We have in our Office stock some Vow cards— bookmarks. 
Many of you have them, no doubt. The Vow is 
on one side and a beautiful little poem on the other. 
Those who have taken this Vow form the most wonderful 
prayer circle the Church has ever known. Think of 
it, that approximately 15,000 have sent in their names to 
that effect! And we have reasons for believing that the 
number of those who have taken it is double this. However, 
at least 15,000 are praying daily for one another. 
You will find them in whatever part of the world you go 



—whether in China, or Japan, or Korea, or Colombia, or 
the Isthmus of Panama, or Scandinavia, or Finland, or 
Russia. Everywhere you will find those who have taken 
this Vow, and who read it daily, and who remember one 
another in their prayers. I think that is one of the most 
wonderful things in the world in all the Church's history. 
Never before were so many of God's children 
praying for each other. 

R5728 : page 216 

A LETTER OF DEEP INTEREST 

I have something to read to you. It is a translation 
of a letter. It was written in Hungarian, to a Slav 
brother in the United States, and was forwarded to us. 
A portion of the letter follows: 

"A Hungarian soldier, injured on the battlefield, was 
returned home wounded. He was there met by some of 
our brethren, and later was led to diligent and earnest 
study of the Scriptures, and finally made his consecration 
to the Lord. This he symbolized last January, at the 
hands of our dear Brother Szabo. A few days later he 
was obliged to return to the front and to the trench, in 
Galicia. A cannon shot burned the cap from his head; 
earth caved in upon him. He was dug out by his comrades, 
and again sent to the hospital. This brought the 
dear brother into our midst again, but for a short time 
only. Presently he had to return to the firing line again. 

"This time they came within 800 feet of the Russian 
line, and they received the command, A bayonet charge!' 
The Hungarian brother was at the end of the left wing. 
He sought only to protect himself from the enemy, hence 
endeavored merely to knock the bayonet from the hand 
of the Russian with whom he was confronted. Just then 
he observed that the Russian was endeavoring to do 
likewise; and instead of using his opportunity to pierce 
his opponent, the Russian let his bayonet fall to the 
ground; he was weeping. Our brother then looked at 
his 'enemy' closer— and he recognized a 'Cross and 
Crown' pin on his coat! The Russian, too, was a brother 
in the Lord! The Hungarian brother also wore a 'Cross 
and Crown' emblem— on his cap. 

"The two brethren quickly clasped hands and stepped 
aside. Their joy was overflowing, that our Heavenly 
Father had permitted them to meet even on the field of 
the enemy! They could not understand one another's 
speech, but by signs they conversed, taking out their 
Bibles-and the Russian had the SCRIPTURE STUDIES in 
his pocket with a song book, all bound in one volume, 
and a photo of Brother Russell. The Brother then took 
the bayonet of the Russian brother, and gave him over 
as a prisoner of war; and he still remains as such in 
Hungary, while the Hungarian brother has now been 
sent to the hospital for the third time." 

While there are not many rich or noble amongst the 



Lord's brethren, yet when it comes to telling the Truth, 
they manage it very well! 

In Germany, Great Britain, and all over Europe, our 
people have been conscious for years that this war was 
coming on. They have been writing to me and continually 
inquiring how they should proceed if they were 
drafted or went into the army. In Volume Six of 
SCRIPTURE STUDIES, the friends are instructed to avoid 
taking life. If they were ever drafted into the army 
they should go. If they could be sent to the Quartermaster's 
Department to take care of the food, that would 
be desirable, or into the hospital work. They should 
endeavor to get such positions. They could not be expected 
to do service in the way of killing. If they were 
obliged to go on the firing line, they could shoot over the 
enemy's head, if they wished. 

And that is the way these brethren did; each had this 
same thought in mind. This letter shows the love of the 
brethren even on the field of battle, and in the enemy's 
land, with carnal weapons. It made no difference that 
one was a Hungarian and the other a Russian! 

How different in the nominal Churches! In this 
war Presbyterians and Methodists, Anglicans, Romanists 
and others, all fight. In Great Britain they have placed 
a kind of premium upon marriage, saying that those who 
marry and bring up children, ready for future wars will 
be helping along their country— "God's Kingdom." They 
have a different brand of Christianity from the Bible 
brand. The Archbishop of Canterbury, the one who is 
giving this advice, may think he is doing his duty, but 
there is something confusing his mind. 

OUR TIMES IN GOD'S HANDS 

We do not know whether we who are here today shall 
meet again in the flesh or not. What matters it? We 
are fully content, either to live or to die— whatever His 
providence may direct in respect to us. "My times are 
in Thy hands; my God, I wish them there"— that expresses 
it beautifully, does it not? We wish to have the 
Lord's will done in respect to the time of our change, 
and in respect to all we enjoy together daily— it is all 
committed to Him. Our wills are entirely dead. His 
will is to rule in your body and in mine, and in all of 
us. I hope, dear brethren, that a great blessing has 
come to the Classes of Oakland, San Francisco, Alameda 
and surrounding Classes, from this Convention. I hope 
that as they go to their homes with their hearts overflowing 
with the comfort of the Truth, they will carry blessings 
on to others; and that, like the widow's cruse of oil, 
the more they give away, the more they will have left 
for themselves. 

Let us all here who have been enjoying the favors of 
the Lord go forth filled with the Spirit, filled with love 
and loyalty and fidelity to the Lord, that we may carry 
blessings to others. I shall be going on my way shortly, 



up along the Coast, as far as British Columbia, then eastward, 

and finally back to Brooklyn, and July 4th shall 

be at the New York City Temple. Let our great Prayer 

circle draw us each nearer to the other, that thus we 

may be sanctified with the Truth and "made meet for 

the inheritance of the saints in light." 



R5728 : page 216 

QUESTION MEETING -OAKLAND CONVENTION 

(Conducted by Brother Russell) 

QUESTION.— Do we, the Church, receive our full 
share in the anointing instantly or gradually? 
Answer.— The expression, "anointing of the 
Spirit," is slightly different from the expression, 
"begetting of the Spirit." The thought connected 
with the word "begetting" is that of an 
instantaneous work, while the thought connected 
with "anointing" is a more gradual 
work. We are under the process of anointing 
from the time we enter the Lord's family, from 
the time we are recognized as members of the 
family of Christ, and receive a place in the 
glorious company of Royal Priests. We know that some fail to 
get their full anointing. Some of those who have been properly 
received, and begotten of the Holy Spirit, will fail to be fully 
anointed, and therefore will fail to be of the Royal Priesthood 
Class. They will be of the Great Company Class instead. We 
therefore think that the expression, "anointing of the Spirit," 
must include that mollifying and mellowing development 
which comes as we grow in grace and in knowledge, and not 
merely the time when we were anointed (begotten) to come 
into the family of God. 



CHANGE OF FEET -MEMBERS ONE BY ONE 

Question.— Is there any Scripture which shows that the 
Feet-members of Christ will all be changed at one time? 

Answer.— We believe to the contrary— that instead of all 
the Feet-members being changed at one time, it will be a 
gradual work. One may be changed tonight, another tomorrow, 
etc.; and yet their change may be said to be all at one 
time in the sense that it is all in the Harvest time, all in the 
end of the Age. The change of some will be in the close of 

R5728 : page 217 

the Harvest period. As an individual matter, it will be one 
person after another. The Apostle says, "We shall not all 
sleep, but we shall all be changed"; for "flesh and blood 



cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." Our change will be 
"in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye." It will not be a 
gradual change to the individual, but an instantaneous 
change. Instead of sleeping, as the saints of the past have 
done, when our time comes to die, ours will be an instantaneous 
change. The Psalmist prophetically says, "I have said, 
ye are gods, and all of you children of the Most High. But 
ye shall die like men"; and this Scripture we understand to 

R5729 : page 217 

refer to the dying process that comes to all of the Church, 
the same as to mankind in general. We are New Creatures, 
and hence the expression that we shall "die like men." As 
men die, so we will die. Men do not generally die in 
bunches; so we would think it strange if many of us should 
die at one time. The world will not discern any difference 
between our death and the death of other men. 



SIN-OFFERING MADE BY HIGH PRIEST 

Question.— For what sins do the Church suffer? 

Answer.— The members of the Church suffer for any sins 
of the flesh they do not properly repent of and properly 
make amends for. The Apostle says that if we would judge 
ourselves, if we would punish ourselves, correct ourselves, 
we would not be judged of the Lord. If we would thoroughly 
attend to these matters ourselves, we would not need to be 
chastened by the Lord. When He finds it necessary to deal 
with us, it is that we may not be condemned with the world. 

The whole world is in a condemned condition. God is 
choosing some who will be justified to life everlasting on the 
spirit plane. If we are faithful it will not be necessary for 
the Lord to punish us, but rather to encourage and help us. 
This would not mean that we shall not have trials and difficulties, 
but it does mean that if we chasten ourselves we 
shall not be punished by the Lord for our sins, for the 
weaknesses of our flesh which we might have avoided, and 
for which we are to some extent responsible. 

We are not to suppose that a New Creature would sin 
wilfully. If he thus sinned, he would be no longer a New 
Creature. He would have gone back, like the sow that was 
washed to her wallowing in the mire. The sins that the 
New Creature would suffer for would be those sins of the 
flesh which he might have avoided, and which he failed to 
correct. These sufferings would give him a sharper appreciation 
of his duties; they would be disciplining for his good. 

But this may not be the thought of the questioner. He 
may mean, "What has the Church to do with the Sin-offering?" 
The Church has nothing to do with the Sin-offering, 
as a Church. It is the Lord Jesus who is the responsible 
One in the whole matter. In the type it was not the under 
priests that did the offering, but the high priest. So it was 
the Lord Jesus that offered up Himself. He offers us up as 



His members, but He does not do this contrary to our 
wills. We desire that He will offer us up as parts of Himself, 
that we may thus have a share in "the sufferings of 
Christ and the glory that shall follow." It is His merit 
alone that gives virtue to our sacrifice. 

The whole responsibility, therefore, is in the hands of the 
great High Priest, our Lord. We share with Him in the 
world's Sin-offering, as His members. We participate in 
the sufferings which are counted as His sufferings. You and 
I could not atone for sins by our sufferings— either for our 
own sins or for those of others. That is all in the Lord's hands. 



CHRISTIANS' SUFFERINGS DIVINELY SUPERVISED 

Question.— Do the sufferings that we experienced before 
coming into Present Truth benefit us as Christians? 

Answer.— I do not know what the questioner had in mind. 
The question seems to imply that he refers to a class already 
Christians. If that is his thought, and he refers to the sufferings 
we have as Christians before we receive the light of 
Present Truth, I would say, "Yes." All the sufferings of a 
Christian are under Divine supervision, and many of us, I 
believe, before coming into Present Truth, had certain experiences 
of trials and difficulties that worked out for us a 
great blessing, and prepared us to receive the Truth. I have 
known many who have given me their experiences along this 
line. They were so engrossed in business that they would 
not have taken the time to study the Truth. 

I knew a gentleman in the grocery business, for instance. 
He was a Christian, and had purchased the six volumes of 
the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. But he could not take time 
to study them. He did not realize that the greatest business 
in the world is the Lord's business. The grocery business 
was his greatest business for the time being. The Lord very 
graciously let him break his leg. He had to remain quiet 
until the bones were knit. He told me afterwards that his 
enforced vacation was the best time in his life; for he read 
the six volumes. Before that he had never had time; after 
that he always had time. 

It was the same with a certain sister. This sister said to 
me one day, "I wondered at one time very much why the 
Lord let my hands get all crippled up with rheumatism. I 
had always been very active up to that time, knitting or 
sewing or doing something else. Then my hands became all 
knotted up with rheumatism, as you see them. I could not 
sew or knit or do anything else; my hands were useless. 
Finally, I found that, by trying, I could manage to turn 
over the leaves of a book; and I began to read. After reading 
awhile, the thought came to me, God let your hands 
twist up like that so you could read." 

These are some of the ways in which various ones of the 
Lord's people were blessed and helped to come into Present 
Truth. God has a way of dealing with His children. If we 
are His, then the next thing is to be fully submissive to His 



will and to be glad to follow His providences. 



Question.— Is it manifesting the spirit of Babylon to have 
the Photo-Drama of Creation exhibited in a theater after 
the theater manager has just shown his regular production? 

Answer.— It would not seem that way to me. If so it 
would be wrong to talk to a man about the Truth after he 
had been hearing some bad talk. This would seem like 
reasoning in a circle. Each one has a right, however, to 
use his own judgment. If any of you are in the Photo-Drama 
work, do not do anything to hurt your conscience. 
As for me, I would be glad to show the Drama to 5,000 after 
they had attended a regular theater, if I had the opportunity. 



PROPER AND IMPROPER ADVERTISING 

Question.— Is it showing the spirit of Babylon to solicit 
advertising contracts from merchants for space on Photo-Drama 
announcements? 

Answer.— It would not be proper to say to a merchant, 
"Advertise with us and thus contribute something to a good 
cause." That would not do. It would be begging for the 
Lord's cause, a thing we are not authorized to do. But if I 
were a merchant and had an opportunity to put an advertisement 
into a Photo-Drama announcement, I would think it 
would be one of the best chances of advertising I ever had. 
I would think I was receiving a benefit. If for $1 or $2 I 
could have my business card circulated all over the neighborhood, 
I would say, "These little leaflets showing about the 
Drama will interest the people; and while reading the notes 
about the pictures, they will also read about my business." 
I would think I had good value for my money. If any man 
thought that he was not getting good value he ought not to 
put his advertisement in. It is a purely business transaction. 

In soliciting the advertisement, one should not mention the 
religious feature. We do not do this at all. It is purely business, 
so far as the merchants are concerned; and I would let 
them advertise all that they choose. The fact that we do not 
permit advertisements in THE WATCH TOWER does not signify 
that to do so would be wrong. I see nothing wrong in a 
merchant's advertising his wares. If I were publishing a 
daily newspaper, I would expect to sell advertising space. 

A brother who owns a newspaper consulted me a little 
about his advertising. He said that the merchants in his 
vicinity were accustomed to advertise, and that some of the 
best advertisers were dealers in liquor and tobacco. I told 
him that I would not put any liquor advertisements in. I 
would put in advertisements of shoes or clothing or groceries 
or hardware, and would solicit such advertising, if I were 
running a newspaper. I see nothing wrong in advertisements 
or in newspapers. I would see nothing wrong in putting 
six or eight pages of advertisements into THE WATCH 



TOWER, if the articles advertised were staples that every one 
wanted to buy. But since THE WATCH TOWER goes into the 
home and represents me in a special way, I like to have all 
the space used for religious matter— not, however, because 
the advertisements would be wrong. 

Once we put into THE WATCH TOWER a notice about 
Miracle Wheat. Many of you saw it. We believe we did 
right in putting that notice in. We also put in a notice about 
some kind of beans and one about some special cotton. Some 
of the friends were benefited by each of these notices. We 
also put in a notice recently about a cure for cancer. We 

R5729 : page 218 

have had hundreds of letters come in from Truth friends, and 
hundreds from others; and a great many have reported good 
results. To some extent this has helped forward the Truth. 
People saw that we were not trying to get their money, saw 
that we were trying to do them good, and became interested. 



Question.— Is it showing the spirit of Babylon to cooperate 
in methods promulgated from I.B.S.A. headquarters, 
Brooklyn, without closely scrutinizing those methods? 

Answer.— I would think that each one would have to use 
his own judgment about this matter. If anybody had been 
very badly "stung," he should be very much on his guard. 
If he had not been "stung," he would properly not be so much 
on his guard. It is quite right to use your own judgment 
about the matter. So far as the headquarters at Brooklyn 
is concerned, and my own identification with the work there, 
let me say: everything is under my supervision. Nothing 
emanates from there contrary to my conscience. But you 
must use your consciences. While there are many wise and 
capable Brethren at the Brooklyn office, yet by present arrangement 
they are my assistants under my general supervision 
as long as I live. That was the arrangement made 
when I turned my property over to the Society, years ago. 

R5730 : page 218 

This applies also to the Society's work in foreign lands. 



TRUE DEFINITION OF BABYLON 

Question.— If the I.B.S.A. headquarters should promulgate 
methods not understood or approved by us are we to 
apply Rev. 18:4, "Come out of her, My people," and if so, how? 

Answer.— I think if the I.B.S.A. can be shown to be a 
section of Babylon, we all ought to get out of it. If we all 
get out on the same side, where shall we be then? I think we 
shall be pretty close together if all get out on the same side. 

The word "Babylon" signifies, "confusion," and in Revelation 18:4, 



it is used in reference to mixing the things of 
God and of men. There was a time when, throughout 
Europe, the kingdoms came very much under the influence of 
the Roman Catholic Church. To some extent those kingdoms 
came under the influence of Christianity— to the extent 
that there was Christianity in the Roman Catholic Church. 

It is well to emphasize that there was a time when the 
Roman Catholic Church was the only Church in the world, 
and when people knew no better than to be in it and of it. 
Where would they have been, otherwise? Then there came 
a time when the Church officials, those who were high in 
the Church management, succeeded in coming into affiliation 
with the Roman Empire; and the Roman Church became its 
successor. Then the Church of Rome began to sway the 
nations and to tell the people of this or that principality, 
"Your king is not in harmony with us. You can select another 
one." Then there would be a revolution. The Pope 
and the Catholic Church were back of these changes. That 
is the way it began. There is where the illicit marriage of 
the nominal Church and the world took place. 

In many European nations this has now been gradually 
changed. In some the Church and the state are completely 
separated. But this change has not been made in Austro-Hungary. 
The people are strictly under the control of the 
Roman Catholic Church. The Church has to do with everything. 
In Great Britain, the representatives of the Church 
of England sit in Parliament, as part of the Government. 
The Church bishops are members of the House of Lords. 
In Germany and Sweden, it is very much the same. Their 
government and God's Government are linked together in the 
minds of the people. 

This state of things God calls Babylon— the professed 
Church of Christ being married to worldly governments. 
These have been called Christian governments by mistake. 
They are not Christian. Look at present conditions in 
Europe. The governments at war are not manifesting the 
Spirit of Christ. There are Christians in all these governments, 
but the governments themselves are not Christian. 
The nominal Church has been responsible for this state of 
things. The situation has so warped men's minds that they 
think their present course the right one. They think that 
Christ is now reigning. In their minds the reigning king 
and the parliament represent God on earth. The Lord would 
have us separate from all this. 

There is another way in which the spirit of Babylon manifests 
itself; as, for instance, in the Protestant churches- 
Methodist, Baptist, Presbyterian, etc. They pander to the 
worldly spirit. They take note of the rich, trying to work in 
with the rich and get the rich into positions in the Church. 
Thus they recognize money above spirituality. In many 
cases money runs the church. That is not the basis under 
which the true Church operates. There is a system in connection 
with all of them, even in the Baptist Church, the 
most liberal of all. 

The Baptists will say, "We are in no bondage; we have 
no ecclesiastical control at all." They do not realize that the 



spirit of Babylon has gotten into the church. Suppose we 
have here a congregation of Baptists. As a congregation 
they call their own minister and attend to their own affairs. 
A certain minister, then, Brother A., is called to serve them. 
But he must be ordained as pastor of this congregation. So 
they send for some other Baptist ministers— say Brother B., 
Brother C, and Brother D. to ordain him. But Brother A. 
does not stand in very well with the ministers called to do 
the ordaining. So they say, "We will not ordain Brother 
A.; he is irregular." And the congregation ask, "You cannot 
ordain him?" Then they reply, "We have nothing at all 
against Brother A., but we will not ordain him." So you 
see the preachers have the rule, and the people do not know it. 

The Baptists will tell you that the preachers have no authority 
at all. But the Baptists cannot do a thing without 
the consent of the preachers; this they do not seem to know. 
The preachers hold a power that God did not repose there. 
God never authorized any men to go and ordain another 
man to preach the Gospel. God does the ordaining; and 
it is for the Church to decide, according to its best judgment, 
whom the Lord ordains or calls as a pastor. All this ordination 
by men is Babylonish, a species of machinery to manage 
the people. It is all worked just like politics. 

Nevertheless the Baptists are the nearest free, of all so-called 
"orthodox" sects. The people in the Methodist 
Church have almost no liberty, except the privilege of giving 
money. That is the principal liberty they enjoy. The 
bishops rule in co-operation with the presiding elders. At 
each annual conference the presiding elder and the bishop 
have it fixed what minister is to go here and what one there. 
The minister that does not stand by the presiding elder will 
go to the country place which pays only $400; while the one 
who does stand by him, though no more capable, will be sent 
to a place that pays $1,000 or more. I have had several 
Methodist ministers tell me this. They complain about it, but 
do not want to get out of a job altogether. That is not the 
liberty wherewith Christ makes free. I realize that this is a 
system. Let me show you what a system it is. The bishops 
control the presiding elders, and under them the presiding 
elders control the preachers; and so it is all the way down to 
the class leaders. They have their head or chief amongst 
them. They have a human head. The General Conference 
is the highest authority. 

So the Presbyterian Church has a head in the way of a 
General Assembly which has the deciding of matters. All 
this is according to the course of this world. The simplicity 
of Christ is not generally observed, except amongst the 
friends of the International Bible Students Association. 
There it is very general, and the Word of God is observed. 
They learn to take notice when things are going wrong. The 
simplicity of the matter is evident to all. 

On one occasion I was called upon by a minister of the 
Reformed Church. He wanted to know how I managed my 

church. I said to him, "Brother I have no church." 

He said, "You know what I mean." I answered, "I want 
you to know what I mean too. We claim that there is only 



one Church. If you belong to that Church, you belong to our 
Church." He looked at me in surprise. Then he said, "You 
have an organization; how many members are there?" I 
replied, "I cannot tell; we do not keep any membership 
rolls." "You do not keep any list of the membership?" "No. 
We do not keep any list; their names are written in Heaven." 
He asked, "How do you have your election?" I said, "We 
announce an election; and any or all of God's people, who 
are consecrated and are accustomed to meet with this company, 
or congregation, may have the privilege of expressing 
their judgment of who would be the Lord's preference for 
elders and deacons of the congregation." "Well," he said, 
"that is simplicity itself." I then added, "We pay no salaries; 
there is nothing to make people quarrel. We never take up a 
collection." "How do you get the money?" he asked. I 

replied, "Now, Dr. , if I tell you what is the simplest 

truth you will hardly be able to believe it. When people get 

interested in this way, they find no basket placed under their 

nose. But they see there are expenses. They say to themselves, 

This hall costs something, and I see that free lunch 

is served between meetings, for those living at some distance. 

How can I get a little money into this thing, anyway?" 

He looked at me as if he thought, "What do you take me for 

—a greenhorn?" I said, "Now, Dr. , I am telling you 

the plain truth. They do ask me this very question, 'How can 

R5730 : page 219 

I get a little money into this cause?' When one gets a 
blessing and has any means, he wants to use it for the Lord. 
If he has no means, why should we prod him for it?" 

There would be nothing to come out of, as an organization, 
if one is an International Bible Student. You cannot 
get out of anything you have not gone into. If any one can 
tell me how he got into Babylon by getting interested in the 
affairs of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, let 
him show me how he will jump out, and I will jump with him. 



ISRAEL'S PRIESTS DIED TYPICALLY 

Question.— Please explain Hebrews 9:27: "It is appointed 
unto men once to die, but after this the judgment." 

Answer.— This is explained better, perhaps, in the STUDIES 
IN THE SCRIPTURES than I can take time to explain it here. It 
is difficult to explain a matter like this in three to five 
minutes, because the whole thought has gotten into people's 
heads upside down and back end first. They all think it refers 
to the time when people die. The Apostle Paul, in 
that statement in Hebrews, is giving a lesson on type and 
antitype. He is comparing the work of the Jewish priests 
every year with the work of Christ, and telling how these 
earthly priests went into the Holy, and afterwards into the 
Most Holy. The priest took with him the blood of a 
bullock, then of a goat. He went into the Holy; and, after 



the cloud of incense had passed through the second veil and 
covered the Mercy-Seat, he went into the Most Holy, representing 
Heaven itself. 
The antitype is that our Lord Jesus offered up Himself as 

R5731 : page 219 

the bullock. The bullock represented Jesus as a man; the 
goat represented the human nature of the Church. As High 
Priest, Jesus slew the bullock; at baptism He offered the 
sacrifice of His humanity. The typical priest took His two 
hands full of incense and crumbled it in the fire on the incense 
altar— that represented the three and one-half years of 
our Lord's ministry. This picture of the incense falling upon 
the fire represented the glorious qualities of Jesus as He came 
in contact with the trials of life. In every case His faithfulness 
yielded a sweet perfume. 

When Satan came to Him with temptations, His loyalty 
was an offering of sweet odor to God. When He had the 
suggestion come to Him to avoid giving what He had agreed 
to give, He put the temptation away and would have nothing 
to do with it. "The cup that My Father hath poured for Me 
shall I not drink it?" was ever His sentiment. The sweet 
incense went before Him and appeared in the presence of 
God before He finished His course at Calvary. His death 
upon the cross was the last crumb of incense falling into the 
fire, in the antitype. Then our High Priest went under the 
veil— into death. He was parts of three days under the veil, 
arising on the other side of the veil on the third day. This 
was the resurrection of Jesus. He arose on the spirit side of 
the veil, a spirit being. Then, forty days later, He sprinkled 
upon the Mercy-Seat in the Most Holy, in Heaven, the blood 
of Atonement on behalf of the Church. 

The Apostle here is trying to get the Church to see that 
the Jewish high priest did something of this kind in type. 
The Jewish high priest went into the Most Holy of the 
Tabernacle, not without blood. That blood, in every case, 
represented the blood of the high priest— his life. Every high 
priest, when he passed under that veil on the Day of Atonement, 
was in danger of being stricken dead. If he had not 
done perfectly, according to the requirements of the Lord, 
he would have died as he attempted to pass that veil, under 
that curtain. And so it would have been death to Jesus if He 
had not done perfectly the will of the Father. 

Then the Apostle declares, "It is appointed unto men 
[men-priests— get the thought] once to die [typically, in passing 
under the veil] and after that the judgment," or decision. 
They typified their death in the sacrifice of the bullock, and 
carrying its blood under the veil. If the priest had not done 
it perfectly, he died. The bullock represented the priest. 
After he had sacrificed it he passed with its blood under the 
second veil. "After death the judgment." There is no reference 
here to the death of mankind, but merely to these 
priests offering their sacrifice. Jesus died, passed the second 
veil, and was raised on the third day. After the high priest 
in the type had made his offering, and had passed beyond the 



second veil, and sprinkled the blood upon the Mercy-Seat, he 
came out and blessed the people. 

Our Lord Jesus, the great High Priest, has not yet come 
out to bless the people. The antitype is a very large thing. 
Jesus went under the veil into the Heavenly Holy over 
eighteen hundred years ago. He has not yet appeared for 
the blessing of the world. But "To those that look for Him, 
He shall appear a second time, not as a Sin-Offering, but 
unto salvation." This is the best I can do on this question 
in the limited time I can give here. 



Question.— Does not the attainment of the Divine nature 
mean attainment to the image of God in which man in the 
beginning was created? Does not the word nature here have 
the significance of disposition, character? 

Answer.— It does not! Man never had the Divine nature. 
The Apostle Paul points out, in discussing this subject of 
natures, in connection with the resurrection, that there is 
one flesh of fish, another of beasts, another of birds, and another 
of men. The fish does not have the same kind of flesh 
the bird has. We all know the difference. The flesh of fish, 
and of birds, and of beasts, is all different. 

Then comes man, the highest of all the earthly beings. 
The Apostle also calls our attention to higher forms of existence; 
he calls attention to another plane of life. He shows 
that man, the highest of the earthly creatures, is lower than 
the lowest of the spiritual beings. He tells us about angels, 
principalities, powers, and the Divine nature, the highest of 
all. The perfect human being is God manifest in the flesh. 
It is as close to the Divine nature as the flesh could come. 
It represents the Divine nature as nearly as is possible for a 
human being. The angels are also in God's image or likeness; 
the cherubim and seraphim as well, though on a higher 
scale than man. The highest of all is the Divine nature. 
That nature only God had originally. And that kind of 
spirit nature which God has He gave to Jesus at His resurrection, 
as a reward for His faithfulness. Jesus did not have 
it before He became a man; but as the Father has inherent 
life, i.e. life in Himself, not a life derived from food and 
water, "So hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself." 
We cannot understand that kind of life. I cannot 
imagine how God could give a life that has no need of anything 
to sustain it. You never had any experience along 
that line. I never had. We would have been as great as 
God is to fully comprehend Him. 

We see the difference between apprehending and comprehending 
To comprehend is to take in fully. To apprehend 
is to touch, or lay hold upon. You and I can apprehend, 
or lay hold of God, but not very clearly, because we 
are so little and He is so great. We cannot comprehend 
God. We can simply touch Him, or apprehend Him. 

The Apostle dwelt upon this matter; he was apprehending, 
or touching God, as God had apprehended or touched him. 
God has laid hold of us, come in touch with us. We do not 



come in touch with God and say, "We will have Him for our 
God." He laid hold upon us and told us about His arrangement 
for us. We were responsive to it; we thought how 
wonderful that He would thus take notice of us. So we are 
seeking to apprehend that for which we are apprehended of 
God. Man was not created in God's image in the sense that 
he is of the Divine nature, which is far above cherubim and 
seraphim, while man is a little lower than even angels. 



Question.— Cannot Revelation 7:9-17 be applied to the 
saved world of mankind, rather than to a Great Company 
class? Is there not a very serious danger in teaching that 
there is to be a Great Company on the spirit plane, and that 
those who lack a thorough appreciation of the High Calling, 
and a consecration thereto, will be saved notwithstanding? 

Answer.— It would be very dangerous for any person who 
does not see a thing to presume to teach it. The questioner 
evidently does not understand this subject, and that cuts the 
answer short. When we leave a subject as the Lord puts it, 
we have it right. "The prophet that hath a dream, let him 
tell a dream; and he that hath My Word, let him speak My 
Word faithfully." "We speak that we do know." This is 
the privilege that we intend to have until we die. Is it not? 



"IT WILL SURELY COME-IT WILL NOT TARRY" 

Question.— What does Habakkuk 2:3 mean? "For the 
vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall 
speak and not lie. Though it tarry, wait for it; for it will 
surely come; it will not tarry." 

Answer.— This is explained on the first page of every issue 
of THE WATCH TOWER. God has provided in His Word a 
great vision, a great revelation. It is a picture, so to speak. 
He has given this picture of His Plan more or less clearly 
through the Prophets and through the Law. The Jubilees 
prefigured Restitution to all the world. Other features of 
the Law, such as the Atonement Day sacrifices, etc., pictured 
other features of God's Plan. The Passover represented 
still other parts. These pictures were all harmonized into 

R5731 : page 220 

one great picture, or view— God's great Plan to bless the 
world. "In thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed," God declared to Abraham. All this went to make 
up the great vision, or picture, that God purposed to give 
His people. 

In proportion as we come to have the mind of God, we 
can understand more and more clearly what these things 
mean. The most important part of the picture was that 
Messiah would come, and that He would set up His Kingdom. 
All of these promises would be parts of that great 



view, or vision. Its fulfilment would seem to tarry long. Does 
it seem as though God had forgotten that promise to 
Abraham? the Prophet seems to query. It has sometimes 
seemed as though God had forgotten it. "But," declares the 
Prophet, "it will surely come; it will not tarry." It does not 
really tarry. There might be various times when we would 
expect to see more than we do see. We may have expected 
to see more of the trouble upon the world before this. The 
year 1915 is now more than half gone, and I think it very 
doubtful whether we shall see all we had expected in this 
year. It looks as though we were trying to hasten the fulfilment 
of the vision. 

But the vision is still for an appointed time; and we are 
not to give it up. We trust ourselves to God's arrangement. 
It was not the Lord's way to have everything go off in 
October, 1914. I do not know how much may yet happen 
between now and October, 1915. If I were to give a guess, I 
would not be able to see how our expectations could all be 
realized between now and October, 1915. I hope they will. 
I shall wait longer than October, if necessary. The vision is 
sure. All these blessed things are positively certain to come; 
it is simply a matter of His time and of our understanding of 
His time. When you and I have fully grasped the main feature 
of all this matter, we are surely close to it. It was a 
very close hit that this great Time of Trouble began near 
October, 1914; and it is going on now at high speed. None 
of the prayers that it may stop are being answered. If the 
time of the world war had been merely a guess, it would 
certainly have been a great hit. It would have been a 

R5732 : page 220 

miracle. We have come very close to it, if not exactly. 

Question.— Pastor Russell says, "The children of Israel's 
journey through the wilderness toward the land of Canaan 
was typical of the Christian's journey through this world of 
sin toward the Heavenly Canaan." Typical Israel did all 
their fighting after they got into the land of Canaan. Where 
is the antitypical Canaan, and what are the antitypical 
Canaanites, and how are they fought by antitypical Israel? 

Answer.— The Apostle Paul intimates that this whole matter 
of Israel's history was typical of the experience of Christians. 
(1 Corinthians 10:11, margin.) But we need to be 
very cautious; for in some instances we are leaning, in a certain 
degree, to our own judgment. But my thought would 
be that this traveling toward Canaan typifies the attempt to 
enter into a proper relationship with God. Israel did not 
enter into Canaan as quickly as they might have done. If 
they had had proper faith they might have entered in very 
soon. They might at once have gone from Mount Sinai 
into the land of Canaan, and had God's blessing with them. 
They did not go in because of unbelief. So any of us who 
wandered through a wilderness state before coming into the 
family of God did so, not because it was necessary, but because 
we did not exercise sufficient faith. We did not need to 
wait forty years, or any period of time, but could have come 



quickly; by consecration we could have entered in at once. 

But the majority were delayed. Like the Jews they did 
not enter in quickly. Instead of promptly entering into the 
blessings they might have had through the exercise of more 
faith, many wandered around many years. Joshua there represented 
Jesus, in type. The sooner the Jews would recognize 
Joshua and his leadership, the sooner would he cross 
Jordan and enter the land of Canaan. So the sooner we 
recognized that the Law could accomplish nothing for us, the 
sooner we ourselves, under Joshua (Jesus) got into Canaan. 
When the Israelites entered the Promised Land, then began 
the wars with the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Amorites, 
the Hittites, the Girgashites, the Hivites and the Jebusites. 
These represent the weaknesses of our human nature that we 
are to battle against and overcome, that we may take possession 
of the whole Land of Promise, the privileges we have as 
the children of God. 



R5732 : page 220 

POLITICIANS AND FALSE RELIGION 

--AUGUST 15.-1 KINGS 12:25-33.- 

THE RELATIONSHIP OF POLITICS AND RELIGION-THE REVOLT 
OF THE TEN TRIBES A GREAT MISTAKE-JEROBOAM'S POLITICAL 
WISDOM-GOD'S DEALINGS WITH TYPICAL ISRAEL - 
THE JEWISH REMNANT IN THE EARLY CHRISTIAN CHURCH 
-THE DIVINE PLAN DID NOT FAIL-SPECIAL THOUGHTS FOR THE PEOPLE TODAY. 

"Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image."— Exodus 20:4,5. 

JEROBOAM was not a bad man in the sense 

of sympathizing with viciousness and crime, 

nor in the sense of wishing to bring his 

people into slavery. On the contrary, he 

was a man of courage and love of liberty, 

who desired to deliver his people from what 

he considered to be oppression in connection 

with the new king Rehoboam, Solomon's 

successor. Under his leadership, the 

ten tribes of Israel revolted from the House 

of David and established themselves as a separate kingdom, 

with the avowed object of being free from the 

oppressions of the kings. 

In many respects this would seem to have been a 
noble procedure; but it was a great mistake, as is every 
move which ignores God and His arrangements. The 
Divine arrangement for the nation was that its affairs 
were all to be under God's care as God's kingdom, with 
the family of David as God's representatives. Under 
these conditions the religious interests had gradually 
gathered more and more about the vicinity of the Temple 
at Jerusalem. The more religious of the people liked to 



be near it, especially as it was obligatory under the Law 
that they should go up there to worship at least once or 
twice a year. 

Whatever were the good thoughts of Jeroboam respecting 
the preservation of the rights and liberties of 
the people, he quickly manifested the spirit of a politician. 
He reasoned that the going of the people to 
Jerusalem to worship yearly would mean that sooner or 
later they would again be drawn back to the kings of 
the line of David; and that in order to preserve his own 
power he must break off the religious connections with 
Jerusalem by establishing a new religious cult. 

Two golden calves were prepared, the one located in 
the northern part of the territory, and the other towards 
the southern part, that thus the people might have the 
general thought that worship and sacrifice could be performed 
at one place as well as at another. Moreover, 
he arranged for religious festivals, at times different by 
about a month from the times of celebrations at Jerusalem. 
This was skilful political wisdom of the kind 
which would appeal to the majority of rulers not deeply 
imbued with faith in God. Alas, it seems too true that 
much of the religion of the masses is but a form of 
godliness anyway! That King Jeroboam was not very 
different from the people whom he ruled is manifest by 
the fact that they readily fell in with his plan, and that 
it was successful. 

WERE GOD'S PLANS DEFEATED? 

Many might be inclined to say that God's plans were 
thus defeated by an ordinary man; but the Scriptures 
show us that the very opposite was the case— that God's 
plans were forwarded by this opposition of Jeroboam. 
Let us see what God's Plan is. 

God accepted Israel as the typical people of His favor. 
He had made the Promise to Abraham that through his 
posterity ultimately all the world should be blessed, which 

R5732: page 221 

implied great exaltation to Abraham's posterity of the 
line of Isaac. Four hundred years elapsed before any 
movement was made in this direction. By that time 
Israel was numerous and in bondage in Egypt, and God 
sent word to them through Moses that if they were so 
minded He was ready to fulfil to them the Promise made 
to Abraham. 

They rejoiced greatly and followed Moses to Mount 
Sinai, where the Lord entered into a covenant with them, 
that if they would keep His Law perfectly He would 
give them everlasting life and qualify them to be the 
Seed of Abraham who would inherit the promise of 
qualification for blessing the world. They entered the 
covenant, but like all imperfect men were unable to keep 
the Law— unworthy therefore of everlasting life, and of 



being the favored Seed of Abraham to bless others. 

Later on, when they were discouraged, God promised 
to send them Messiah, whose Kingdom would bless them 
and afford them an opportunity of sharing in the Promise 
made to Abraham. God's dealings with Israel, therefore, 
were of a typical character. Their Atonement Day, their 
Law, their mediator, their sacrifices, all typified better 
sacrifices, etc., under a better Mediator, Christ. The 
entire dealing of God with Israel was with a view to 
raising them up out of their fallen condition to as high 
a standard as possible for them, that thus they might be 
prepared, when Messiah would come, to be associated with 
Him in His Kingdom, as His Bride class. Let us see 
how this fits in with God's dealings in this lesson: 

The deflection of Jeroboam and the majority of the 
nation had the effect of separating from the ten tribes, 
and of driving into the territory of the two tribes, the 
most faithful and loyal of the Israelites. To these the 
idolatries established by Jeroboam were properly repulsive. 
They were willing to forsake their earthly interests. 
They refused the opportunities of the politician, 
remained loyal to God and His institutions, and were 
thus at a disadvantage. This continued for years, until 
in God's providence the ten tribes went into captivity to 
Babylon, at which time more and more of the people 
gravitated towards the territory of Judah and Benjamin, 
known as the kingdom of Judah. Later on, God overthrew 
the kingdom of Judah, and allowed those people 
also to go into Babylonian captivity; but they preserved 
in large measure their religious sentiments and interests 
while in the land of Babylon. 

THE RETURN FROM BABYLON 

Later, when the Lord delivered the people from 
Babylon through the instrumentality of King Cyrus, matters 
had so changed that there were only a few who 
considered it advantageous to return to Palestine. The 
great mass of the ten-tribe kingdom had become thoroughly 
incorporated with the Gentiles, and no longer 
professed the religion of their fathers or had faith in the 
Promise made to Abraham. Many of the Judean captivity 
similarly lost faith and became Gentiles. As a 
matter of fact, only about 50,000 altogether returned to 
Palestine; and they represented the faithful, who trusted 
in God and sacrificed all Babylonian advantages and 
privileges, coming back to a desolate land and the city 
of Jerusalem. 

These became the nucleus of a new people, who, in 
the days of Jesus, were in wonderful readiness for Him, 
as compared with the remainder of mankind. In a very 
few years approximately 25,000 accepted Christ, with a 
full consecration unto death, as His footstep followers. 
The remainder of the nation being then cast off from 
special favor, the door was opened to the Gentiles, that 
they might hear the Gospel Message and become fellow-heirs 



of the same Body, or company, with these 25,000 
consecrated of Israel, representatives of all the tribes. 
If we lacked evidence of the value of the Divine dealing 

R5733 : page 221 

with the nation of Israel in preparing them to accept 
Messiah, we see it in the fact that so many were ready 
to receive Him in so comparatively short a time; whereas 
it has required 1 ,800 years to gather from all the other 
nations of the world the remainder of the elect company, 
the total of which, according to the Scriptures, is 144,000. 

Our lesson, thus seen, indicates no failure on God's 
part, but wisdom, in permitting the rebellion of Jeroboam 
and the ten tribes of Israel. Surely it will eventually be 
seen, as the Bible declares, that all of God's good purposes 
will be accomplished; and that the word which has gone 
forth out of His mouth shall not return unto Him void, 
but shall accomplish that which He pleases and shall 
prosper in the thing whereunto He sent it. (Isaiah 55:10,11.) 
Soon the elect Church, the spiritual Seed of Abraham, 
will be completed; and then God's Promise to Abraham 
will begin to be fulfilled. (Galatians 3:8,16,29.) 
All the families of the earth will be blessed by the 
Kingdom of Christ and His Church. 

"WAIT UPON THE LORD" 

Modern Jeroboams may be found all along the paths 
of history— men who, under guise of respect for religion, 
are really politicians, seeking their own advantage, and 
willing to sell the people to any religious system which 
would work to their benefit. Every one familiar with 
history must realize that religion has been made a cloak 
for all kinds of political intrigue, and always, as in the 
case of Jeroboam, under pretense of giving the people 
greater liberties. 

The special thought for the people today is the one 
which would have been the safe one for the ten tribes 
of old; namely, to wait for the Lord to overrule their 
affairs and to deliver them from the bondage of kings in 
His own way. This is the Lord's message to us now. 
God's people are forewarned not to use carnal weapons, 
and not to trust in such weapons in the hands of others. 
The trust of God's people is to be in God. They are to 
realize His faithfulness and the truth of His promises, 
which assure them that all things are working together 
for good to them that love God, to the called according 
to His purpose.— Romans 8:28. 

To these God is now saying, as in olden times, "Wait 
ye upon Me, until the time that I rise up to the prey; for 
My determination is to gather the nations, that I may 
assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them Mine indignation, 
even all My fierce anger; for all the earth shall be 
devoured with the fire of My jealousy." This will not be 
literal fire devouring the literal earth, but a symbolic fire 



of trouble devouring the political, financial, social and 
religious structure of the world, and preparing them for 
the great blessings of Messiah's Kingdom. These are 
referred to in the next verse, in which the Lord declares, 
"Then [following the fire of trouble and national distress] 
I will turn to the people a pure Message, that they may 
all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve Him with 
one consent."— Zephaniah 3:8,9. 

That pure Message is what the Bible elsewhere speaks 
of as the still small voice of God, which will be heard 
amongst the people during the thousand years of Messiah's 
Reign and which will effect their full deliverance 
from ignorance, superstition and sin back to harmony 
with God. And the Scriptures declare that whosoever of 
all mankind will not obey that voice of God through the 
great Messiah will be utterly destroyed from amongst the 
people-Acts 3:19-23. 



R5733 : page 222 

KING ASA'S REFORM WORK 
-AUGUST 22.-2 CHRONICLES 15:1-15.- 

KING SOLOMON'S GREAT-GRANDSON-ADVERSE INFLUENCE OF 
THE TEN-TRIBE KINGDOM-KING ASA'S OVERTHROW OF 
IDOLATRY-EGYPTIAN INVASION REPULSED-A GREAT 

NATIONAL REVIVAL-IDOLS OF BRONZE, WOOD, STONE, PEN 
AND INK-THE GOD OF THE CREEDS-NEED OF AN ASA 

TODAY-NEED OF ANOTHER SOLEMN LEAGUE AND COVENANT 
-HELP COMING THROUGH THE MESSIANIC KINGDOM. 

"Draw nigh to God, and He will draw nigh to you."— James 4:8. 

ASA, king of Judah, was the great-grandson 

of King Solomon. The spirit of worldliness 

which occupied the latter part of Solomon's 

reign, and which led to the split-off of the 

ten tribes under Rehoboam his son, met with 

some measure of check during King Asa's 

reign. When the ten-tribe kingdom, called 

Israel, revolted and went into idolatry, the 

influence affected the kingdom of Judah to 

some extent. It became partially idolatrous. 

Images of Baal and groves for the practise of the 

licentious orgies of his worship grew in numbers in 

Judah, until King Asa's time. As a reformer, he set 

about the overthrow of all the idolatrous worship and the 

substitution of the true religion of the God of Israel, 

inaugurated by Moses and the Law Covenant. We know 

not the influence operating upon King Asa to take a 

course so different from that of his father and his grandfather, 

but perhaps he was learning lessons from the experiences 

of his people. 



His first endeavors to obliterate idolatry seem to have 
been only partially effective. He next turned his attention 
to the fortifying of his own country. Then came a great 
war with the Egyptian invader, Zerah, with an immense 
host, one million strong, with three hundred iron chariots. 
They came upon the kingdom of Judah from the south, 
and their numbers and reputed strength made them a 
terror. They sought for spoils. 

Under these circumstances the Lord's message to 
King Asa, through Azariah the Prophet, was especially 
welcome. The Prophet pointed out the adversities of the 
ten tribes as being because they were without the true 
God, without the Law, without the teaching priests. They 
had gotten into an anarchous condition, with no peace to 
anybody; and yet the Lord had helped even them, in 
proportion as they at any time had turned to Him. God 
had always shown His willingness to let those who so 
desired be in harmony with Him, and to bless them. 
King Asa had manifested such a disposition; and now 
he had the encouraging message, "Be strong and let not 
your hands be weak; for your work shall be rewarded." 

This message encouraged the king to put away further 
the idolatries and to renew the altar of the Lord's House. 
As a consequence, he had the support of the most godly 
people of his own land; and, furthermore, there came to 
his support many from the ten-tribe kingdom who still 
respected God and His promises. They were glad to get 
away to a place where the great God was worshiped. 

God blessed King Asa and his people in their repulse 
of the invasion of Zerah and his hosts. The spirit of 
reverence for God was greatly increased. The people 
were in a religious mood, and a great national awakening 
along religious lines followed. They entered into a 
covenant with the Lord that all opposed to God should 
be put to death. "And all Judah rejoiced at the oath: 
for they had sworn with all their heart and had sought 
Him with their whole desire; and He was found of 
them: and the Lord gave them rest round about." 

THE LESSON'S IMPORT TO US 

We have a double interest in this lesson. First, it is 
a scrap of ancient history which reveals to us God's care 
over His people and His willingness to be found of them 
when they sought Him, even though they and their forefathers 
had for a time been disloyal. Second, applying the 
lesson to our day, we see the people everywhere in idolatry 
—not only the heathen, who worship before idols of 
bronze and wood and stone, but also the more civilized, 
who have set up creed idols. These latter, printed with 
ink upon paper, describe the character of God in terms 
equally repulsive with the idols of the heathen. The true 
God is little known, the God of love, "the God of all 
grace, the Father of all mercies," "from whom cometh 
down every good and every perfect gift." 

Our creed idols represent God as a great monster, a 



demon. They picture God as sitting down before the 
creation of the world and deliberately planning for the 
creation of our race, with foreknowledge and intention 
that nearly all should spend eternity in horrible torture at 
the hands of fire-proof devils. They picture the Church 
as the elect class, taken to Heaven, to look over the 
battlements of Heaven and witness the horrible sufferings 
of all the heathen and all the Jews, because they rejected 
Christ, and the sufferings also of nearly all of Christian 
lands, because they did not become saintly under the 
preaching of the Gospel. 

These horrible idols are no longer respected by the 
more intelligent; but they are still recognized, bowed 
down to and worshiped by the masses. The true God is 
still proportionately rejected and unknown to the people. 
They are indeed told that He is a God of love, at the 
same time that they are told that He is roasting thousands 
of millions, and knew about their present sufferings and 
premeditated the same from before the foundation of the 
world. All talk about His Justice and His Love is thus 
discounted in advance; and the people, bound by ignorance 
and superstition to these idols, which are centuries old, 
are suffering from their ignorance. 

We need today an Asa to arise and, encouraged by 
the promises of God, to break in pieces the great creed 
idols of Christendom and to liberate the people from 
bondage to them. He should have the support of all the 

R5734 : page 222 

God-fearing people, as King Asa had. In proportion as 
the idols and their worship would cease, the repair of 
the true altar of God would progress, and many would 
rejoice to present their bodies living sacrifices, holy and 
acceptable to God, in His service. (Romans 12:1,2.) 
Not by physical force, nor by cruelty, nor by literal axes, 
would these great creed idols be destroyed, but by the 
presentation of the Word of the living God. In proportion 
as the Bible comes to be rightly understood, the 
follies of the creeds and their unscripturalness will more 
and more be appreciated. 

TRUE COVENANTERS, ALL OF US 

The account of how the people of Judah and Benjamin, 
the most religious people of that time, bound themselves 
with an oath, or covenant, to God is very interesting. It 
reminds us of a similar religious movement in Scotland, 
in which some of God's people swore allegiance to Him 
to the best of their knowledge, and signed the covenant 
with their own blood. 

The day has come for other covenanters to come forward 
and to enter into a covenant with God that they will 
be loyal to Him and to His Word, and that they will put 
away the creed idols. We have greater knowledge today 



R5734 : page 223 

than had the covenanters of Scotland; but Christian people 

need to have their spirit of full consecration, full devotion 

to God. We have much more knowledge than had 

the people of Judah, but we need to have their spirit for 

destroying the idols and entering into a covenant with 

the Lord to be faithful to Him. Such a company of consecrated 

ones, covenanters in the highest sense, enlightened 

as we have the privilege of being enlightened today, 

would be a mighty force, a mighty power. 

Many look sympathetically at such a statement, yet 
have not the courage of their convictions. They are timid, 
fearful and— shall we say it?— hypocritical. Many forget 
that, in joining any church, its creed is endorsed 
publicly; and that a private denial of it does not annul 
their obligations. Many forget the Master's words, "His 
servants ye are to whom ye render service." 

Many say, "We do not believe the creeds; but they 
are popular, and we will support them." They do this 
because to take any other position would be to come into 
conflict with some of the wise and great and rich, who, 
although they do not believe the creeds themselves, seem 
interested in maintaining them as shackles upon the 
masses of the people. Under these conditions we are 
not to expect any general reform nor to think that those 
faithful to the Lord will be approved before men. We 
are, however, to expect that when Messiah's Kingdom 
shall be fully established the faithful ones will be His 
associates in the Kingdom, which will then take full control 
and fully overthrow the entire system of error which 
has bound the world of mankind with shackles of ignorance 
and superstition lo, these many years, and which 
has kept the people from God, in that they cannot love or 
from the heart obey the One who is represented to them 
as a merciless God and an all-powerful Adversary. 



R5734 : page 223 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
SOUTH AFRICA CONVENTION 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Lord has been pleased to grant us much of His fellowship 
and blessing these latter days, and our hearts are 
full of gratitude accordingly. The Memorial season was a 
time of much refreshing to all the Lord's people in South 
Africa. Our hearts were deeply and joyfully moved with 
the thought that in all probability this celebration would be 
the last on this side of the veil, and that ere long we would 
drink of the fruit of the vine NEW with our dear Master in 
the Father's Kingdom. 

At Durban forty-seven partook of the symbols of our 



Lord's death and our dying with Him, renewing our covenant 
of consecration and seeking grace to "run with patience the 
race set before us." Next on the list was the Zulu class at 
Ndwedwe, who at the Memorial numbered thirty-eight. Fifteen 
memorialized at Johannesburg, eight at Capetown, six 
at Douglas and two at Balfour. Reports are not yet to hand 
from Pretoria, where there is also a Class, and the disturbed 
state of affairs beyond the Zambezi, due to the war, will I 
fear make reports from Central Africa impossible. All alike 
testify, however, to the great blessing received. 

During the Easter holidays we had a glorious Convention 
at Durban— truly "the best yet" ! For four days we were on 
the Mountain-top with the Lord and as one brother expressed 
it, "We would fain build tabernacles and dwell there." Excellent 
addresses were given by Brothers Ancketill, Moller 
and Stubbs, and in this feature I had the privilege to share. 

Two Symposiums, one on "The Three Graces" (1 Corinthians 13:13) 
and the other on "The Panoply of God" 
(Ephesians 6:14-17), discovered much latent talent among 
the brethren that gives promise of large service, and was a 
source of much edification to the Convention. 

The praise and testimony meetings gave opportunity for 
grateful praise and thanksgiving to God, a feature so much 
appreciated that it prolonged the program. 

On Easter Sunday a baptismal service furnished opportunity 
for seven Sisters and six Brothers to symbolize their 
consecration, while at a dedication service two children were 
presented as a thank-offering to the Lord. When, on Monday 
evening, we came to the final meeting and farewell address, 
we all felt that our cup was running over; and as we 
sang the old, familiar strain, "God be with you till we meet 
again," we felt that surely we would not have a more blessed 
experience "Till we meet at Jesus' feet" ! Loth to part, some 
of the brethren who had gathered from a distance tarried 
with us, and we had Convention-Echo and Re-echo meetings 
in the week that followed. 

We realized that you were with us in spirit, dear Brother, 
and that we had your prayers. By a unanimous rising vote 
I was instructed to convey to you the loving greeting of the 
assembled brethren and the Ecclesias in Africa which they 
represented, and to assure you of our deep gratitude to God 
and to you for your faithful ministry, by which we have all 
so largely profited. I have the greatest pleasure in passing 
on this message. May our Heavenly Father give you grace 
for every trial, strength for every duty, much of the joy of 
His fellowship here below, and at last an abundant entrance 
into His Kingdom! 

We feel, dear Brother, that we have all been greatly 
strengthened by this time of refreshing for the last lap of the 
Race, and that by God's assisting grace we are going to be 
faithful unto the end, and gain the crown of life. 

The hope of the PHOTO-DRAMA coming to Africa is a 
great stimulus to the brethren and we are confidently expecting 
much blessing to accrue from it when it arrives. 

With much love in the Lord to yourself and to all the 
brethren at the Tabernacle, I am 



Your brother and colaborer, 

WM. W. JOHNSTON.-Africa. 



SPENT FIFTY YEARS SEARCHING FOR TRUE CHURCH 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

Please excuse me for taking up your precious time in 
reading this poorly written letter, but I feel I must write you 
a few lines to testify to what the Truth has done for me. 

I am 78 years old. I spent fifty years of my life searching 
for the true Church, but did not find what I was seeking until 
five years ago. My eyes were opened by reading the Russell-White 
Debate published in the Cincinnati Enquirer, distributed 
by Sister Croul and Sister Green. After carefully reading 
that debate I exchanged the yoke of bondage for Christ's 
yoke, and since then I have been learning of Him. I find 
His yoke easy, His burden light, as I strive to follow faithfully 
in His footsteps. 

Then I read, studied, re-read the SCRIPTURE STUDIES until 
I proved beyond a doubt that they are the true Keys to the 
Bible, unlocking the doors of our Heavenly Father's inexhaustible 
source of love and mercy which He has in store for 
the dead and dying race. These precious truths have been 
the "Pearl of great price" to me, for they have led me out of 
darkness into light; out of fear and doubt into faith and 
hope; out of error into Truth; out of sorrow and despair 
into the oil of gladness. They have taken my weary feet 
from the sandy foundation of the creeds of men and the 
"doctrines of devils" and placed them on the Rock of Ages— 
that Mighty Rock whose towering form reaches above the 
coming storm; and from the springs that from it burst we 
now can drink and quench our thirst. 

Your weekly sermons and THE WATCH TOWER are beacon 
lights that guide and comfort me on my way when the 
shadows are deep and the waiting-time seems so long. The 
Bible is my daily bread, and since I have consecrated my all 
to the Lord its sacred pages are illumined, and I can read it 
with an understanding mind and my whole being is filled 
with that peace and joy which is unspeakable and full of 
glory— which the world cannot give, and, praise the Lord, 
neither can it take away! 

My lessons in the School of Christ have mostly been 
learned through the printed page; but I am so thankful that 
I have the privilege of feasting at the Lord's table in any 

R5735 : page 223 

way that He provides. And I always have a prayer and a 
blessing in my heart for you, that faithful Servant, who, 
despite the opposition of all the agents of the Adversary, is 
still spreading this feast for the hungry, thirsty Truth-seekers 
to feast upon; and may the Lord still guide and bless you in 
this Harvest work until the race is run and the victory won, 
is the prayer of your isolated sister in the Truth, love and 



fellowship of our Lord and Master, and all of His consecrated 
children. MRS. LOVINA PHILLIPS.-Ind. 



page 224 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 225 

VOL. XXXVI AUGUST 1 No. 15 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

"The Beginning of Sorrows" 227 

What the Watchers Now See 227 

Is My Heart "Good Ground"? 228 

Four Hundred Million Tares 229 

Our Cleansing— Inward and Outward 230 

Saints Not Naturally All Noble 230 

God's Beloved Disesteemed 230 

Our Gradual Transformation 232 

The Perfecting of Holiness 233 

Faithfulness in Little Things 234 

Little Tests of Character 234 

Elijah a Great Prophet 235 

Responsibility of the Spirit-Begotten 237 

New Creature Does Not Practise Sin 237 

A Word of Pastoral Counsel 238 

Interesting Letters 238 

Re the Spirit of Division 238 

Some Eureka Y Drama Items 239 

A Most Satisfying Portion 239 

Awakened by Creation's Photo-Drama 239 

page 226 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, NY., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



PORTLAND, ME., CONVENTION- AUG. 12-15 



The Maine Central Railroad has announced reduced round-trip 
rate of fare and three-fifths, tickets on sale August 
12-15, with final return limit August 17. Friends, however, 
should make inquiry in advance of their ticket agents to 
make sure that the agents receive from their headquarters 
the authorization to sell these special-rate I.B.S.A. tickets. 

Requests for accommodations at Portland should be addressed 
to I. I. Margeson, Westwood, Mass. 



page 226 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 



SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the Divine 
Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 



dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Battle of Armageddon," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 688 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 640 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 750 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (2s. 6d.) 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: German and Swedish, 
six vols.; Dano-Norwegian, five vols.; Greek, four vols.; Finnish, three 
vols.; French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, Italian, Hungarian, 
Polish, Arabic, Roumanian, Chinese, Japanese, one vol. each; bound in 
cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the same. 

For the Blind in American Braille, English Braille and New York Point. 



R5744 : page 226 

GREEK AND POLISH "WATCH TOWERS" 



Greek Brethren full of zeal for the Lord and the Truth 
have started the publication of THE WATCH TOWER in the 
Greek language. It is not set in type, but mimeographed. 

Additionally, every other week they issue a translation of 
a portion of the Sixth volume of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
in the same manner. 

The number of Greeks interested is not very large, but 
they are showing a very commendable zeal. Any Greek 
Brethren desiring to obtain the above-mentioned Greek translations 
will please address THE WATCH TOWER Office. 

Our Polish friends, too, are preparing for themselves regular 
issues of THE WATCH TOWER in Polish-translations 
from the English edition. Sample copies on application. 

page 226 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR SEPTEMBER 



After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
September follow: (1) 7; (2) 303; (3) 240; (4) 60; (5) 12; (6) 
149; (7) 8; (8) 14; (9) 37; (10) 160; (11) 12; (12) 107; (13) 
281; (14) 25; (15) 307; (16) 105; (17) 51; (18) 44; (19) 213; 
(20) 78; (21) 50; (22) 179; (23) 16; (24) 43; (25) Vow; (26) 
329; (27) 195; (28) 204; (29) 188; (30) 176. 



R5735 : page 227 

"THE BEGINNING OF SORROWS" 

"Seeing that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner 
of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness. 
-2 Peter 3:11. 

MANY in the past have misunderstood St. 

Peter's prophecy concerning the destruction 

of the present heavens and earth. They 

have inferred that he meant the burning up 

of the literal earth and heavens in a great 

conflagration. This thought seems to be 

embodied in all the creeds, Protestant and 

Catholic. Apparently there has been a 

serious mistake here. The Apostle is using 

these words in a figurative sense, just as 

we might say that a man would move heaven and earth 

to accomplish his designs. Throughout the prophecies of 

the Bible the heavens mean the ecclesiastical powers and 

the earth means organized society, including the financial 

and the political powers. 

The things of the Present Order are soon to pass 
away— its banking institutions, its monetary affairs, its 
stocks and bonds, its politics, its great religious systems, 
indeed, the entire social fabric. The whole arrangement 
is now about to be melted down. An entirely New Order 
is about to come in. This melting down will begin in the 
overthrow of the religious institutions. To the whole 
world it will be an unexpected and overwhelming catastrophe; 
but to the true Church, watching as the Lord 
bade them to do, it will not be a surprise; for these are 
"children of the light," and this Day of the Lord shall 
not overtake them as a thief. 

The Lord's faithful, watching people, guided by the 
Word of Truth, will have an understanding of temporal 
affairs. As St. Paul has assured us, though this Day 
shall come as a thief and a snare upon the whole world, 
it shall not so come upon God's children who are living 
up to their privileges. "When these things begin to come 
to pass, then look up and lift up your heads; for your 
deliverance draweth nigh"; "When ye see these things, 
...know that the Kingdom of God is nigh at hand." 



(Luke 21:28,31-) The Master does not say, When ye 
see all these things, but When ye see the beginning of 
them, then we are to lift up our heads and rejoice— not 
rejoicing in the trouble, nor in the sufferings of others, 
but in the fact that these things are the foretold signs 
that the Present Order is about to be succeeded by a 
New Order, which will be far better, and more advantageous 
and desirable for all. 

The Church herself will be the "new heavens," and 
will come into great glory, power and privilege. The 
thought in the early Church, evidently, was that these 
dispensational changes would very shortly come to pass. 
They were living in constant expectation of the coming 
of the Lord, the establishment of His Kingdom and the 
glorification of the Church. Some of them even felt too 
confident of the matter. The Apostle Paul writes to the 
Church of Thessalonica saying that some of them had 
made a mistake in thinking that the Day of the Lord 
might have already come. He tells them that that Day 
could not come until the Man of Sin should be revealed. 
Thus in the days of the Apostles the Church was ever 
on the qui vive; and throughout this entire Age the 
Lord's people have been left in uncertainty as to the time 
of the Master's Second Coming, watching, preparing, for 
the things of the Kingdom, knowing that the Day of 
Christ would come as a "thief in the night" at the appointed 
time.— 2 Thessalonians 2:3. 

WHAT THE WATCHERS NOW SEE 

Now we who are living in this Day see the beginning 
of these foretold events. We see the prelude to the great 
Battle of Armageddon. Our thought is that the Armageddon 
itself will be the mighty "Earthquake" spoken of 
in Revelation. (Revelation 16:16-18.) In this great 
revolution and in the succeeding anarchy all earthly institutions 
will be swept away. The result of the anger, 
hatred and strife, if permitted to continue indefinitely, 
would be so terrible that it would bring about the destruction 
of the race; but for the Elect's sake, that they 
may begin their glorious reign, God will cut short the 
carnage, and will set up His own Kingdom under Christ 
and His elect Church. Christ and His Bride will take 
over the kingdoms of this world, and thus will hinder the 
strife of men from going to the extreme that it would 
otherwise go. But it will not be stopped until the Present 
Order shall have been wholly dissolved. 

A vivid description of this awful Time of Trouble is 
given by the Prophets. For the benefit of our new readers, 
we give a few citations of such prophecies, which 
repay investigation. (Isaiah 24:17-22; 28:21,22; 33:7-14; 
34:1-8; Psalm 18:7-19.) See STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Vol. 4, pp. 15-20. Along this same line, read 
also Isaiah 13:1-13; Jeremiah 25:8-38; Revelation 18; 
16:12-21. We believe that the present strife in Europe 
is very forcefully depicted in some of the prophecies cited 



above, and that this is only the beginning of the great 
trouble and overthrow, the breaking in pieces of the 

R5735 : page 228 

nations as a potter's vessel. In our own land we see the 
portents of the coming trouble, in strikes, labor riots, 
I.W.W. demonstrations, etc. The Scriptures cited 
above declare in unmistakable language that the whole 
Present Order will go up in a mighty conflagration. The 
troubles not long since in the Colorado mines, the more 
recent strikes in London, Chicago, Bridgeport and Bayonne, 
are only premonitory rumblings which, with many 
other disturbances of like nature, presage the coming 
storm. 

Selfishness is the great motive power of the world— 
if this thing is done or that thing is accomplished, something 
very advantageous to themselves will result. Because 
people want their own names to be great, they 
strain every nerve to accomplish that result. They do 
this also in political lines— trying to "feather their nests" 
for the future. In Europe they do the same along 
monarchical lines. Various Houses in power seek to 
have and to hold the honor of the people. The whole 
world are setting their hearts and minds on the things 
which will bring no real satisfaction in the end, and not 
upon the things of the Lord. 

The Apostle points out that all these things that 
occupy men's minds and absorb their energies are to 
pass away. None of them are to be permanent. We 
realize this to be so. We see that their passing away is 
just at hand in this our day. Others do not perceive it, 
although many thoughtful minds see that present conditions 
are unprecedented, that some great change must be 
impending; and their hearts are failing them for fear. 

Surely the knowledge of these things, of the transitoriness, 
the trifling value of the most alluring of earth's 
gifts, should cause us to turn from them and to set our 
affections and hopes upon the Heavenly things, which 
are infinite in value and which shall never pass away. 
We should lay up treasure in Heaven, where the institutions 
will be permanent, and where armies and revolutions 
will not destroy the Government. All those who 
believe in the great changes just before us should be 
living for the future and not for the present. The more 
we discern, then, the teachings of the Bible, the more we 
imbibe its spirit, the more shall we live for and prepare 
for the great blessings promised for the future to those 
who love God. "Be ye holy, for I am holy," is the injunction 
of our Father in Heaven. 

HOLY ATMOSPHERE, NOT MIASMA, FOR NEW CREATURES 

These directions are not to the world, and they are 
not to the flesh of the children of God, but are for us as 
New Creatures in Christ. The old creature being imperfect 



has no standing with God; but there is nothing 

unholy in the New Creature, and the imperfections of 

his flesh being covered by the Robe of Christ's righteousness 

he has a standing with God. The difficulty which 

the New Creature encounters is the weakness of the flesh 

in which he must tabernacle for the present, and the 

danger of being misled, enticed away, from the things 

that are holy. Day by day he seeks to control the flesh 

and to bring it wholly into subjection. 

The New Creature begotten from above, wishes to be 
holy and to keep his tabernacle holy. He breathes by 
nature a holy atmosphere; anything contrary is poisonous 
to this Heavenly germ which must be fostered and 
nourished with the greatest care. That it may properly 
develop it is necessary that it be fed upon "the finest of 
the wheat"; it is necessary, too, that the very thoughts of 

R5736 : page 228 

the brain and the meditations of the heart should be conformed 
as nearly as possible to God's perfect standard for 
these New Creatures. To this end rich supply is furnished 
by the Heavenly Father, who begat us to this new nature. 

The child of God who is slovenly or careless in the 
management of his earthly body is not living in accord 
with true holiness, is not properly developing this 
Heavenly "seed" begotten within him. These New Creatures, 
so far as possible, should fellowship with one 
another. They are to seek to build one another up in 
the most holy faith. They are to remember that they are 
not to pull each other down, but are to endeavor to assist 
each other as far as they may be able. Whoever thinks 
to himself, "Sometime the Kingdom is coming, sometime 
the Time of Trouble will overtake the present order of 
things; but meantime we will enjoy the things of this 
world," will not be living up to his privileges, and will 
be very likely to be taken unawares as by "a thief in the 
night"; for he is not living in proper relationship with 
the Lord, and he will be likely to find when too late that 
he has lost the "prize." 

"Seeing, then, that all these things shall be dissolved, 
what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation 
and godliness"! 

"My Father! my Father! this heart would be Thine! 

Oh, keep it from wanderings! 
Oh, visit and nourish Thy wilderness vine, 

Though it be from the bitter springs! 
Till the time of my trial and pruning is o'er, 
And Thy child is safe on eternity's shore!" 



R5736 : page 228 

IS MY HEART "GOOD GROUND"? 



"That on the good ground are they which in an honest and 
good heart, having heard the Word, keep it, and bring forth 
fruit with patience."— Luke 8:15. 

WE RECOGNIZE these words as a portion of 
our Lord's parable of The Sower. A man 
went out to sow his field. As he scattered 
his seed, some fell on one kind of soil and 
some on another— some on thorny ground, 
some on stony ground, some on the hard, 
beaten pathway, and some on good ground. 
The good ground brought forth— some 
thirty-fold, some sixty-fold and some one 
hundred-fold. 

According to the Master's interpretation of this 
parable, the good seed represents the Message of the 
Kingdom, which as it falls here and there appeals to 
some hearts differently from what it does to others. That 
seed falling upon the beaten pathway represented the 
Message as heard by persons into whose hearts it did not 
enter at all. They simply heard with the outer ear and 
forgot. It made no impression. The Lord said that the 
reason for this was that the Adversary came and caught 
the seed away. It had not penetrated even the surface 
of the hard ground. The conditions were not favorable 
for its entrance into the heart and the hearers soon 
forgot all that they had heard. The wiles of the Adversary 
would always, if possible, prevent the seed from 
entering the heart and taking root. 

WHAT CONSTITUTES A SHALLOW HEART 

Amongst those who do receive the Truth are the 
stony-ground class. These are at first very much enthused, 
but they lack depth of character. They are not 
the kind the Lord is now seeking. They will not bring 
forth the fruitage, for they have not sufficient depth for 
rooting. They are shallow. They desire to trim their 
sails in harmony with the favorable winds of this life. 
As soon as they find out that the Truth is not popular, 

R5736 : page 229 

they foresee persecution or social ostracism; then their 
ardor cools and their interest in the Harvest Message 
wanes and gradually dies out. Thus they are like wheat 
planted in shallow soil, which comes up and flourishes a 
little while; but when the hot sun comes out it withers 
away, not having much root. 

The heart that is like the thorny ground is favorable 
as to soil. It is good ground, with fine prospects for 
developing the fruits of the Holy Spirit. But it is infested 
with thorns, which are not removed, but are permitted 
to remain and so choke the wheat. These thorns 
are not the frivolous pleasures of life— theaters, cards, 



dancing, etc.; but, as the Lord explains in the parable, 

they are the cares of life, the ambitions of life, the deceitfulness 

of riches— perhaps the feeling that if they can 

accumulate wealth they can serve the Lord's Cause the 

better. This tendency to go out after other things allows 

a condition to obtain that is unfavorable to the wheat 

class. These may be good business men, fine politicians, 

or they may be immersed in some kind of study. Others 

of them may be fine housekeepers and have a pride as to 

how well things are kept, or they may be leaders in 

society or in works of reform, etc. All these are the 

thorns of the parable. A heart of this kind does not 

bring forth fruit, because the ground, while good, is 

otherwise occupied, and the Message of the Kingdom 

and its work are crowded out to a large degree, so that 

no fruit is brought to perfection. 

HONESTY A BASIC QUALITY 

Then we come to the "good ground" class of this 
parable, ground where the soil is not only good, but 
cleared of all noxious weeds which would prevent the 
proper growth of the wheat seed. This condition represents 
entire consecration to God. Everything which 
would hinder has been cast out. The cares of this life 
are not permitted to enter this heart and choke the Word. 
Such a one has made a bona-fide contract with the Lord 
and knows when he is keeping it; and he will keep it. 
He has the proper quality or depth of character and more 
or less of ability. And there is the special trait of thorough 
honesty, loyalty. 

Amongst those of the class who are styled the "good 
ground," we find different conditions in life— not many 
noble, but some noble; not many great, but some great; 
not many learned, but some learned; not many wise, but 
some wise. But they must all be good of heart, and they 
must be honest, else they could not bring forth the necessary 
fruitage— honesty being the most important feature 
of all, with a degree of intelligence and appreciation 
of the Truth. We see, then, how this class might bring 
forth varying amounts of fruitage, according to circumstances, 
conditions and ability. But they are in the right 
heart condition to bring forth their very best— some 
thirty-fold, some sixty-fold and some a hundred-fold. 

In the picture we see that the Truth is represented by 
the seed, and we see that the individuals are also represented 
by the seed. The thought is that a grain of 
Truth is planted, and that in an honest heart it produces 
a character which is in harmony with the Truth. That 
seed of Truth is the Message of the Kingdom, the Word 
of the Kingdom— not a truth about the philosophies of 
men or some scientific truth, but a particular truth— not 
something that ignores God's Plan and purports to be a 
better plan than that which God has arranged, but the 
one particular thing— the Word of the Kingdom. 



FOUR HUNDRED MILLION TARES 

It seems remarkable that with so many that are called 
Christian people— numbering now four hundred millions— 
they know so little about the Kingdom! The vast majority 
have learned but very little of it, if anything. This is 
manifest when we look over in Europe and see millions 
fighting to the death, when we realize that other millions 
are ready to fight here in the United States also. This 
is because they have not become New Creatures. As the 
natural seed enters the ground, sprouts and brings forth 
something that is fostered and developed by the soil, so 
the good seed of the Truth in the proper heart brings 
forth good fruit. The Message of the Kingdom brings 
forth results in harmony with its nature. It reaches the 
proper class and brings them to an attitude where God 
accepts them as New Creatures. These New Creatures 
are the children of the Kingdom; and these children of 
the Kingdom are the wheat that will be garnered. "Then 
shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom." 

Our Lord in another parable shows us a different kind 
of seed— tare seed. This tare-seed looks a little like 
wheat. It is not the true seed— not the seed of the 
Kingdom. It may be a seed, or message, of morality or 
purity of life or total abstinence from intoxicating 
liquors, etc. No matter; it will not produce the Kingdom 
class. The only seed which will produce this class 
is the good seed, the true Kingdom Message. 

As we look about in the world we see that the great 
Enemy oversowed this wheat-field of the Kingdom with 
false seed, the darnel, the tare-seed, as represented by 
these various messages that have gone forth throughout 
the world. This seed does not necessarily bring forth 
bad people. They are people who are workers for various 
things, some of them more or less good, but they are not 
children of the Kingdom. At the present time these 
tares are, many of them, influential. And the whole four 
hundred millions of them represent, not the true wheat-field, 
but merely an imitation, usurping the place really 
belonging to the true wheat class. 

TIME REQUIRED TO DEVELOP FRUIT 

In this Harvest time, now about ended, a separation 
has been taking place between the true wheat and the 
tares. The true wheat are being gathered into the 
garner, while the tares are being bound in bundles to be 

R5737 : page 229 

burned— not literally burned, but destroyed as tares, as 
imitation wheat. They will soon cease to call themselves 
Christians. They will recognize themselves as what they 
have always been— parts of the world. Many of these 
are Church members, but are purely of the world and its 
spirit. They discount the true wheat, and consider them 



a little queer, fanatics. 

Many of these tares do not know what they are. But 
those who have received the Message of the Kingdom 
into good and honest hearts will bring forth fruitage in 
harmony therewith. It requires time to develop the right 
fruit. This class grow daily in knowledge, in love, and are 
building one another up in the most holy faith. They 
also do good unto all as they have opportunity. This is 
the whole work which God is expecting of them. These 
are the ones who will ere long be gathered into the 
Heavenly Kingdom beyond the veil. 

After the fire of this "Day of Wrath" shall have 
burned up this "present evil world," and burned out all 
the roots of pride, then will come the great time of blessing 
for the world of mankind. The great plowshare of 
trouble will prepare humanity for the great seed-sowing 
of the near future. It will take a thousand years to bring 
forth the glorious crop of the Millennium. Those gathered 
then will not be wheat, but the Restitution class; 
wheat being used in the parables of our Lord to represent 
the spiritual class, the saints of the Gospel Age. 



R5737 : page 230 

OUR CLEANSING-INWARD AND OUTWARD 

"Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse 
ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting 
holiness in the fear of God."— 2 Corinthians 7:1. 

AGAIN we call attention to the fact that the 
Bible was not addressed to the world, but 
to the Church; not to unbelievers, but to 
believers; not to sinners, but to those who 
have already turned away from sin. Many 
overlook this fact, and the result is a confusion 
of their minds. 

But some may, perhaps, be inclined to 
say that the words of our text are applicable 
to sinners as well as saints— sinners especially 
—even though the Epistle itself is addressed "unto 
the Church of God which is at Corinth, with all the 
saints, who are in the whole of Achaia." We answer, 
No! our text cannot appropriately be applied to sinners 
in general, who have not yet come to God, who have not 
yet repented of their sins and been forgiven. God makes 
no appeals to such; He merely denounces them as sinners 
and refuses them all recognition, all fellowship, and tells 
them that there is no other name given under Heaven 
amongst men whereby they can be saved from their sins 
than that of Jesus— through faith in His blood. In other 
words, God refuses to have any dealings whatsoever with 
those who cannot or will not accept of the great Sin-Offering 
which He has provided. As Jesus expressed 



the matter, "No man cometh unto the Father but by 
Me. "--John 14:6. 

The reasonableness of the Divine position is evident 
upon reflection. God in the present Age is gathering 
out of the world a Little Flock, whose peculiar trait of 
character is faith in Him and a desire to please Him. 
In the Age to come, the Millennial Age, God purposes 
to deal with the remainder of mankind, and then all His 
requirements will be made so plain that the wayfaring 
man, though a simpleton, shall not err therein. (Isaiah 35:8.) 
The Sun of Righteousness shall shine forth in 
that glorious Millennial Day, and clearly manifest right 
from wrong, and show forth the Divine character and 
attributes, so that every creature may see— yea, all the 
blind eyes shall be opened and all the deaf ears be unstopped, 
as is clearly stated by the Prophet.— Isaiah 35:5. 

But now, in the present Age, there is a test of faith 
for this special Little Flock whom the Lord is selecting 
and whom He designates as His Church. Any who 
cannot exercise the faith cannot be of this elect Church, 
but must wait for their blessing at the hands of the 
Church during the reign of Christ, for which we still 
pray, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth, 
as it is in Heaven." 

SAINTS NOT NATURALLY ALL NOBLE 

Not only has God made faith a necessary element of 
acceptance in the present time, but additionally, love of 
righteousness is made a part of the test. It is not enough 
that we should have the eye of faith which would recognize 
Christ's death as the Redemption-price for the sins 
of the world, we must additionally have hearts that love 
righteousness in order to come under Divine favor. The 
heart that loves righteousness discerns the weakness of 
its own flesh, its downward tendencies. The moment 
that heart recognizes Jesus as the Redeemer it flees to 
Him, not only to be covered with His merit as respects 
the sins that are past, but also to have the imputed covering 
of His righteousness as respects the unwilling 
blemishes and imperfections of the present and the future 
—imperfections that are contrary to the will and are the 
result of weaknesses inherited. 

This class, not in harmony with the sin of the world 
nor with their own weaknesses, is referred to by our 
Lord in His message, "Come unto Me, all ye that labor 
and are heavy laden [under the yoke of sin and appreciating 
its penalty, death], and I will give you rest. Take 
My yoke upon you, and learn of Me." These learners- 
disciples, pupils in the School of Christ— are the class to 
whom the words of our text are addressed. It would be 
useless to exhort the world in general to cleanse themselves 
of all filthiness of the flesh and spirit. The world 
is in sympathy with this very filthiness and has no desire 
to cleanse itself, has no just appreciation of how filthy 
it is in the sight of God and those who have His Spirit 



of Holiness. The Lord describes the condition of the 
world as one in which anger, malice, envy and various 
lusts [desires] are the usual and normal conditions by 
turns. Lust, selfishness— which often amounts to brutality 
in its seeking of wealth, or pleasure or power- 
seeks to fill the natural mind, so that if it were taken 
away, with nothing substituted, life would lose all of its 
charms. Where would be the propriety in exhorting 
such to put away filthiness of the flesh and spirit when 
they have nothing as a substitute? 

Some may, perhaps, urge that there are as many 
noble-minded people not believers as are found amongst 
believers. We answer, Yes! the Scriptures agree to this, 
assuring us that amongst believers are not many great 
or wise or noble according to the course of this world. 
The Message of God's grace often lays hold upon the 
lower, meaner and more degraded members of the human 
family rather than upon the noble, who feel less keenly 
their own depravity and less necessity for the Savior and 
His assistance. If, then, amongst the world are to be 
found some who are noble-minded, and if believers are 
generally of a lower stratum, how comes it that God has 
a more particular interest in these than in unbelievers? 
By what kind of rule does the Lord accept as children 
some who naturally are less noble and reject some who 
naturally are more noble? 

We answer that the rule or standard of Divine acceptance 
is faith and obedience of heart. Those who 
with their hearts, their minds, their wills, turn away 
from sin and by faith accept the Divine arrangement, the 
Lord is pleased to accept according to their wills, their 
intentions, and not according to their flesh and its 
blemishes. Their unwilling defects according to the 
flesh are veiled from His sight by the Robe of Christ's 
righteousness covering them, to the extent of the inability 
of their new minds, which despise sin and seek to 
war a good warfare against it in their flesh and everywhere. 
Such is the class addressed by the Apostle in 
our text, saying, "Dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves 
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit." 

GOD'S BELOVED DISESTEEMED 

As the mouthpiece of the Lord the Apostle addresses 
all believers who have fled away from sin and who are 
striving to be pleasing and acceptable to God, as "dearly 
beloved." The Apostle, a noble-minded man himself, 
appreciated the fact that many of these dearly beloved 
brethren had weaknesses and imperfections of the flesh. 
He did not love them on account of these blemishes, but 
in spite of them— because at heart they were loyal to the 
principles of righteousness and striving to overcome sin 
and its inclinations in their own mortal flesh, and— so 
far as their influence would go— in the world. But the 
world does not love these whom the Father loves, whom 
Jesus loves, whom the Apostle loves. Our Master's 



R5737 : page 231 

words are, "If the world hate you, ye know that it 
hated Me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, 
the world would love its own; but because ye are not of 
the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore 
the world hateth you. Ye have not chosen Me, but 
I have chosen you and have ordained you, that ye 
should go and bring forth fruit, that your fruit should be 
permanent."— John 15:16,18,19. 

The world does not like these chosen ones because, 
confessing their own weaknesses and striving against 
them, they call them by their proper names— sins, meannesses, 
filthinesses of the flesh and spirit. Every effort 
made by these to cleanse themselves is a reproof to 
others who are not striving to cleanse themselves, and 
who hate to be reminded that the things in which they 

R5738 : page 231 

take their greatest pleasure are greed, selfishness, inordinate 

affections, strifes, pride, vainglory. Whoever is 

fully satisfactory to the world may be sure that he is not 

satisfactory to the Lord. Whoever is satisfactory to the 

Lord need not expect to be satisfactory to the world; 

for the fellowship of this world is enmity to God, and, 

therefore, the world is not subject to the Divine standard, 

neither indeed can be, as the Apostle explains. 

(James 4:4; Romans 8:7.) Its heart is in the other 

direction. 

The law of the New Creation— love for God with all 
our hearts and for our neighbor as ourselves— is to the 
world unreasonable, unthinkable, undesirable every way, 
and every reminder of it, even by the presence of those 
who at heart are on the side of righteousness, causes displeasure 
and discomfort. To these the Lord and His 
footstep followers have always been unwelcome— intruders. 
They prefer to be let alone, to have no suggestion 
offered to the effect that they are wrong. True, some 
of them have a pleasurable pride in generosity, a love 
of a good name, and a reputation for honesty and virtue. 
But they wish to be considered as standards and exemplars, 
and resent any intrusion, any measurements of 
their thoughts, words or deeds by the Divine standards. 
Therefore those who continually recognize and honor 
the Divine standards are disesteemed by them. 

THE NECESSITY FOR CLEANSING 

But why should the Apostle suggest that the Church 
should do a cleansing work in their hearts and in their 
flesh when we find that God has wholly covered these 
blemishes from His sight? If the blemishes are covered, 
why trouble about them further? Ah, there are the best 
of reasons! Those who at heart are loyal to the Lord 



and His righteousness are distressed by their blemishes, 
their sins, the weaknesses of their flesh, even though they 
are aware that the Lord has graciously covered all these, 
and is not imputing their guilt because at heart they are 
opposed to them. The desire of this class is to build, to 
establish, character by faithfulness to principles of 
righteousness. They wish that their minds may become 
more and more established in faithfulness to the Lord 
and His Golden Rule of love; and that, so far as possible, 
the new mind shall control the fallen, imperfect 
flesh and bring it into subjection, into accord, with the 
Divine Law of Love. 

Whoever, after having experienced the Lord's blessing 
in the forgiveness of sins, has no desire to war a warfare 
against them, and to bring into subjection to his 
new mind the powers and talents of his mortal body, has 
not the true spirit of sonship. He would thereby be 
giving evidence that he does not truly love righteousness, 
and that he does not truly hate iniquity. He would 
thus be testifying that he is not of the class whom the 
Lord desires as His sons on the spirit plane— as members 
of the Little Flock, the Bride, the Lamb's Wife. 

We see, then, good reason why the brethren should 
be appealed to by the Apostle in our text. We see a good 
reason why all begotten by the same Spirit of holiness 
should give heed to his words and make the cleansing of 
the flesh and of the spirit the principal work of the remainder 
of life. We see that unless they do this, they 
will belie their pretensions of love for righteousness and 
hatred of iniquity. We see that by such a warfare 
against the weaknesses of the flesh and of the spirit, the 
Lord designs that they should establish a crystallized 
character. Thus as the Scriptures express it, they shall 
be "made meet for the inheritance of the saints in light" 
—fit in heart for the Divine service. Such as are thus fit 
in heart for the service of the Millennial Kingdom will, 
we are assured, be granted new bodies, free from all 
blemishes, in the First Resurrection. Thus, having perfected 
their minds and established character in their 
hearts in the present life by controlling the flesh so far 
as possible, they demonstrate that at heart they have the 
character-likeness of their Lord and Redeemer. Only 
those who do thus develop into copies of God's dear Son 
will constitute the Very Elect, the Kingdom Class, the 
Seed of Abraham, through whom the world will shortly 
receive its blessing. 

"LET US CLEANSE OURSELVES" 

The words, "Let us cleanse ourselves," do not have 
reference to our getting rid of Adamic condemnation. 
Such cleansing from original sin is impossible on our 
part, as the Apostle elsewhere explains. We cannot have 
it unless we receive it as a free gift from God. In what 
sense, then, do we cleanse ourselves? We answer that 
having been reckonedly cleansed by the Lord, and brought 



under the influence of His Holy Spirit and the enlightening 
understanding of His Word, we are now invited to 
show our zeal for righteousness and to cooperate with 
Him in the work. While all the condemnation is reckoned 
as having passed from us, we still have the opportunity 
of showing the Lord what our spirit, our intention, would 
be, by striving against sin in our minds and in our flesh. 
The incentive to this cleansing is of the Lord, but the 
cleansing itself is something for us to do— "Let us cleanse 
ourselves." The cleansing work is a tedious one; for at 
first we did not discern how deeply defiled we were, how 
nearly all the suggestions of the mind were selfish. We 
did not even recognize selfishness as being sin. 

As the eyes of our understanding opened more and 
more widely we got proper views of the Lord and His 
righteousness, our own conditions, the need of His covering 
Robe, etc. Day by day, as we have since striven to 
put away sin, selfishness— yea, every element of ungodliness 
and unloveliness— we have become more painfully 
conscious of how deep was the stain which we at first, 
perhaps, thought was merely superficial. Many of the 
Lord's people, after years of labor in seeking to cleanse 
themselves from the filth of the flesh and of the spirit, 
now, alas, see more of their own blemishes than they discerned 
at first, even though they have gotten rid of 
much of this natural filthiness, selfishness, etc. This 
would make the work of cleansing a very discouraging 
one if it were not for the assurance of the Lord's Word 
that He regards us, not according to the flesh, but according 
to our intentions, our desires, our endeavors. He 
reckons us as overcomers because of our good warfare 
against the natural blemishes, whatever may be the measure 
of our success. 

The distinction which the Apostle draws between the 

R5738 : page 232 

filthiness of the flesh and that of the spirit should be 
noticed. After we have accepted the Lord, we take our 
stand with Him as the Captain of our Salvation, to be 
soldiers of the Cross and to fight a good fight against sin 
and all the works of the flesh and of the Devil. Soon we 
find ourselves in company with others of the same class, 
and naturally and properly begin to cleanse the flesh, to 
put away evil practises, outward wrongdoing of every 
kind. This is well. What fellowship could there be between 
children of the light and any works of darkness? 
Before long, in the case of many, a considerable outward 
change is manifested— careless language is avoided, passions 
are restrained, selfishness is curbed, at least in its 
outward manifestations. Neighbors and friends may see 
a considerable change. This is good, but not sufficient. 
We must also cleanse our spirits, our minds. It is not 
sufficient that we avoid outward wrongdoing. Our 
minds must be cleansed. We must learn to hate sin, to 
repel its first advances. We must learn that our minds 



and our bodies are the temples of the Lord and that 
everything contrary to Him and His Law of Righteousness 
and Love must be barred. 

Others are witnesses to some extent of our trials 
and triumphs of an outward kind. But the most important 
battles of the New Creation are those which are 
known only to ourselves and to our Captain— the battle 
of the new mind or will against the influences of the old, 
natural disposition. The true soldier of the cross will 
find this battle-ground quite sufficient to engage all of 
his combativeness and destructiveness and to keep him 
fully occupied. Such as are on the alert to develop the 
new character have much less time than others to criticize 
their neighbors, friends and brethren. They find 
enough in themselves requiring vigilance and restraint. 
And as they progress in this direction, they become more 
sympathetic toward others who have the same or other 
weaknesses and inclinations contrary to the Divine standards. 
They sympathize especially with the brethren of 
the New Creation, who similarly have given their all to 
the Lord and are battling against the world, the flesh 
and the Adversary, in their bodies and in their spirits. 

OUR GRADUAL TRANSFORMATION 

Those who have already come into relationship to 
the Father as children should remember that God's promises 
are that we shall be more and more received into 
His fellowship, have more and more of His blessing, in 
proportion as we are loyal to these principles with which 
we started out. If we have turned away from the world 
and from sin, and find that we have certain contaminations 
of the flesh, we should put all these away— even 
the taints of sin we should seek to put away. The more 
we energize ourselves in this direction, the more of 
God's favor shall we have, the more shall we be pleasing 
and acceptable to Him. 

The Apostle in pointing out that there is filthiness of 
the flesh and the spirit, does not mean that the New 
Creature is filthy. The New Creature, as we are elsewhere 
told, is undefiled. The New Creature is holy. 
The word spirit is frequently used to represent mind. 
The will must be thoroughly changed before one can become 
a New Creature at all. And for the will ever to 
draw back would mean a drawing back unto perdition. 
To have a will for sin would mean that we had lost the 
Holy Spirit; that we are in the Second Death. 

But the Lord's children have this new will, this new 

R5739 : page 232 

treasure, in an earthen vessel. We have a natural disposition 
toward sin. Additionally, we have minds that, 
even though they are putting away the things of sin, 
have more or less recollection of the things of sin, the 
impurities of sin. So while we draw ourselves away 



from that which is sinful, we are to strive also to have 
our minds pure. We are to cast out everything in us 
that is sympathetic with sin. We are not to think of 
those things, we are not to permit ourselves to ruminate 
on what is sinful. We are to set our affection on things 
above.— Colossians 3:2. 

As we fill our minds with God's promises, the whole 
character, the whole life, becomes more transformed. 
The Apostle says, "Be ye transformed by the renewing 
of your minds." Our minds which were in accord with 
the earthly things, the earthly nature, are not only to be 
lifted from obedience to sin, but are to be turned in a 
new direction. Our minds are to be filled with holy 
thoughts— thoughts of the Lord and His service. When 
the mind is in a right attitude toward God, it is comparatively 
easy to serve the Law of God. The Apostle 
exhorts us to perfect holiness. We had the holiness 
started in us when we became the Lord's people. We 
gave ourselves wholly to Him— He never accepts a part. 
Our consecration is to do God's will wholly. We present 
our bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, 
which is our reasonable service. We started out saints; 
and the Lord recognizes none others than saints. Therefore 
we are to seek to live up to the Divine standard in 
all the conduct of life— our words, deeds, thoughts. 

OUR CLEANSING AND THE LORD'S CLEANSING 

But this perfecting of holiness goes on, this cleansing 
of ourselves, noticing to see where there is anything in 
us that is impure, and putting all that away from our 
conduct— and, more than that, putting it away from our 
minds. As we do this, holiness spreads through all 
the avenues of life. And so a Christian ought to have 
a very beautiful character. If any Christian has not a 
beautiful character, it shows that he has not been properly 
attending to the matter of his cleansing, daily giving attention 
to his purification in his outward relationship to 
mankind, and inwardly in his relationship toward God. 

We are to do all this in the fear of the Lord, the 
reverence of the Lord. There is a difference between the 
fear that is reverential and the fear that is slavish. The 
reverential fear is a profitable fear. We are not to fear 
our Heavenly Father as if He were a devil, who would 
turn on us and treat us with cruelty; but we are to have 
a godly fear, which will delight to do those things 
pleasing and acceptable in His sight. So all this cleansing 
of ourselves, all this perfecting of ourselves in holiness, 
is with a view to being perfected in the fear of the 
Lord. Having begotten us of His Holy Spirit, having 
given us these precious promises, God will expect us 
not to put our talents into a napkin and make no progress, 
but to bring forth fruit— some thirty-fold, some 
sixty-fold, some a hundred-fold. And as we do this, we 
shall be rewarded in proportion. 

There is another Scripture which speaks of the Lord 



as doing this cleansing work. "Cleanse Thou me from 
secret faults." (Psalm 19:12-14.) These words of the 
Prophet David are the sentiment of all the Lord's true 
people. By these words the Prophet showed his recognition 
of the fact that he was not capable of cleansing 
himself. He recognized that he might have secret faults 
that he did not appreciate himself— that he did not see 
himself. Perhaps he did not see some faults that others 
would see. He desired God to cleanse him from these. 
This indicated that he desired to get away from everything 
that was not in harmony with God. 
This would be the proper sentiment for all Christians. 

R5739 : page 233 

We should pray to the Lord that He would show us 
whatever in our lives is not fully pleasing and acceptable 
to Him, that He would help us to see ourselves as others 
see us, and especially to see ourselves as He sees us. We 
believe that many of the Lord's people have been shown 
their imperfections and weaknesses (in the Lord's providence) 
by a very severe jolt. We ask the Lord also, as 
did the Psalmist, to keep us back from presumptuous 
sins, to cleanse us wholly from these. 

"THE PERFECTING OF HOLINESS" 

Our text declares that such a purification of flesh and 
spirit, body and mind, constitutes a perfecting of holiness. 
The thought here is that holiness cannot be attained 
in a moment, but that it must be gradually effected, 
perfected. A right view of this matter will 
hinder us from falling into certain dangerous errors. 
Holiness is not a charm which we may put in our 
pockets; it is not a garment which may be worn occasionally. 
Holiness resembles more the tempering of a 
piece of metal; it enters into the entire fiber, changing 
its general characteristics; it is transforming in its influence. 
True, there is a holiness reckoned to the Lord's 
people in the Robe of Christ's righteousness, which is 
granted to us when first we turn from sin, accept the 
Redeemer, and consecrate ourselves to God. But this is 
not sufficient. We must work into our characters that 
which we have willed— or, as the Apostle expresses it, 
we must allow the Lord to work in us the holy will, and 
the holy conduct which must necessarily accompany the 
holy will, as opportunity and conditions will permit. 

But how is this holiness perfected in us? How does 
God work in us to will and then to do His good pleasure? 
Our text answers this portion of the question, too, assuring 
us that it is God's part to give us the promises; and 
that these promises constitute the incentives to those who 
are in the right attitude of mind. Without these Divine 
promises of the present and the future blessings, who 
would battle against his own weaknesses? Who would 
strenuously resist the attacks of the world and of the 



Adversary? Moreover, who would willingly sacrifice his 
life and all his natural rights to serve the Lord and His 
cause, if there were no exceeding great and precious 
promises to quicken and energize him to the service of 
the King, in battling against sin, in assisting all who are 
on the side of righteousness? Surely there would be 
few, if any at all. And so our text intimates, saying, 
"Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us 
cleanse ourselves," etc. The promises are indeed the 
power of God unto our cleansing— our salvation— as 
pointed out by St. Paul.— Romans 1:16. 

"GREAT AND PRECIOUS PROMISES" 

Looking into the context to see to what promises the 
Apostle refers, we find in the preceding verses the declaration, 
"Come out from among them and be ye separate, 
saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I 
will receive you and will be a Father unto you, and ye 
shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord 
Almighty." (2 Corinthians 6:17,18.) What a promise! 
What a suggestion!— that we, by nature defiled and imperfect, 
should not only have the notice of our sovereign 
Creator, but should be invited to become His children and 
be given the assurance of His parental affection for us 
—that "like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord 
pitieth them that reverence Him." How wonderful it 
seems! And then, as the Apostle elsewhere declares, 
this is not the end of the matter, but merely the beginning, 
for he says, "If children, then heirs, heirs of God, 
and joint-heirs with Christ, if so be that we suffer with 
Him, that we may be also glorified together."— Rom. 8:17. 

Yes, it is this thought of what is implied in the term 
children of God, sons of God. The blessings and riches 
of the Father are to be extended through our Lord 
Jesus, especially to the Little Flock, which is now being 
selected from amongst men to be His Bride and associates 
in the Kingdom. These are not accepted into the Kingdom 
at once, but as it were on probation; as the Apostle 
says, "Now are we the sons of God; but it doth not yet 
appear what we shall be"— if we are faithful. As sons 
of God in the present life we have the joy of knowing 
of our Father's character through His Word, which we 
are permitted to understand, but which the world does 
not understand. We are assured of Divine supervision; 
so that not the slightest thing can happen to these sons 
except as their Father sees would be to their advantage. 
But they must show their love, their devotion, their oneness 
of spirit with the Father and the Redeemer ere they 
can be counted in as His Bride in the full, absolute and 
complete sense, and be granted a share in His glories. 

It is to demonstrate their possession of these graces 
that these consecrated ones are left for a time in the 
midst of evil and unfavorable surroundings— to prove 
their love of righteousness, their opposition to iniquity, 
their love to God and their faithfulness to Him, their 



love to all who are in sympathy with the Divine arrangement. 

If they stand these tests fully, it will mean that 

they will endure considerable opposition from the world, 

the flesh and the Adversary; and that they will be correspondingly 

strengthened by these experiences. It is 

this class to whom the Apostle refers saying, "If so be 

that we suffer [with Him], we shall also reign with 

Him." We are to suffer as He did for right doing, and 

because our neighbors and friends are blind as to what 

is the right, the proper course. We are to suffer gladly 

and joyfully whatever cup the Father may pour for us, 

knowing that He is too good to be unkind, too wise to err. 

"Let us then, dearly beloved, cleanse ourselves from 
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness 
in the fear of the Lord." As the Apostle Peter declares, 
"If we do these things, we shall never fall; for so an 
entrance shall be ministered unto us abundantly into 
the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ. "--2 Peter 1:10,11. 



R5742 : page 233 

THE PILGRIM'S WANTS 

"I want that adorning Divine, 

Thou, only, my God, canst bestow; 
I want in those beautiful garments to shine, 

Which distinguish Thy household below. 

"I want, oh, I want to attain 

Some likeness, my Savior, to Thee! 
That longed-for resemblance once more to regain, 

Thy comeliness put upon me. 

"I want to be marked for Thine own; 

Thy seal on my forehead to wear; 
To receive that "new name" on the mystic white stone, 

Which only Thyself canst declare. 

"I want so in Thee to abide, 

As to bring forth some fruit to Thy praise; 
The branch that Thou prunest, though feeble and dried, 

May languish, but never decays. 

"I want Thine own hand to unbind 

Each tie to terrestrial things, 
Too tenderly cherished, too closely entwined, 

Where my heart too tenaciously clings. 

"I want, by mine aspect serene, 

Mine actions and words, to declare 
That my treasure is placed in a Country unseen, 

That my heart and affections are there." 



R5740 : page 234 

FAITHFULNESS IN LITTLE THINGS 

"He that is faithful in that which is least 
is faithful also in much."— Luke 16:10. 

WE HAVE in our text the statement of a 
great principle, one which could almost 
universally be acknowledged. Life's experiences 
have taught us that whoever can be 
trusted in little things can be trusted also 
in great matters. A man who is cautious 
in respect to small affairs is cautious also 
in important undertakings. One who is 
gentle in the little acts of every day life 
will be gentle on great occasions. 

Our Lord applies this principle to His followers in a 
general way; and we believe it to be one of the most 
important lessons which the Christian can learn. There 
are many who are exceedingly careful about handling a 
large sum of money, but who are very careless in handling 
a small amount. There are those who are scrupulously 
exact as to large sums committed to their care, 
but who think nothing about the trifling amounts. But 
whoever cultivates a habit of carelessness about small 
things will be likely to become careless about large matters. 
On the other hand, whoever is careful of every 
dollar, every dime, who is careful to pay promptly every 
small debt, will be still more careful in respect to large 
amounts, large debts. 

So it would appear to be a general principle in life 
that those who are careless in small things and careful 
in large matters will in due time or under great stress 
prove unreliable and unfaithful in everything, if such 
faithfulness should conflict with their own selfish interests. 
In other words, the trifles of life have an important 
bearing upon our character-building. Whoever learns to 
be conscientious about everything is being properly exercised 
by the lessons of life. We see this in our own 
individual experiences. Some are quite careless in regard 
to the rights of others; for instance, they would take 
without permission an umbrella belonging to another saying, 
"I want it only for an hour or so, and I will bring it 
back." Such a person is not properly conscientious about 
small things. One who would take an umbrella for even 
an hour has not sufficient principle to be trusted in larger 
things. Others will borrow articles, and forget or neglect 
to return them promptly, thus putting the owner to great 
inconvenience and annoyance. At best the habit of 
borrowing is deplorable. 

The Scriptures tell us that our Lord is selecting a 
company to be with Him as under priests, under judges, 
under kings, to have control of the affairs of earth during 



the thousand years of His Reign; and that whoever is 
chosen for this work must have special fitness, special 
character. Those who fully yield themselves to Him will 
be prepared for this important position; those who do 
not so yield themselves will not be prepared. Therefore 
our Lord gives us to understand that present opportunities 
are to be prized as opportunities for indicating what 
is our real attitude of heart. He makes it a condition 
that we cannot be His disciples unless we make a full 
surrender of ourselves to Him as our great Instructor, to 
be guided in all of our affairs in harmony with His will. 

The Master tells us that no matter how small the 
affairs of life, we are to understand that the Father 
knows what are our needs; and that just as surely as He 
provides for the sparrows and the lilies of the field, so 
surely will He provide for those who are His children. 
Our Lord says to us, "Are ye not of more value than 
many sparrows?" Even while we were slaves of sin, the 
Father made provision for our return to His favor and 
to everlasting life, on condition that we obey Him and respond 
to His clearly specified terms. How much more will 
He care for us now that we have become His children! 

HUMILITY ESSENTIAL TO SERVICE 

Even in the smallest affairs of life we are to look for 
the Lord's will. The right attitude for us to maintain is 
this: I serve the Lord Christ; and whether it is a great 
work or a small one does not matter. "Therefore 
whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to 
the glory of God." (1 Corinthians 10:31.) The humblest 
kind of service is acceptable to the Lord if prompted 
by love. We recall the case of our Lord Jesus. When 
opportunity was afforded Him to talk with a poor 
Samaritan woman at Jacob's well, He did not say, "I 
came to preach the Gospel; and since this woman is only 
a Samaritan, I will not bother with her." When the disciples 
returned, they could not understand why the Master 
should be speaking with this woman instead of to a crowd. 
But Jesus, having the opportunity to preach, even if it 
were only to a Samaritan woman, improved His opportunity. 
He knew that through her the Truth might go 
to others; that what she would learn she would tell to 
her neighbors, and that when the due time would come 
the Samaritans might hear and be all the more ready 
to benefit by the opportunity. 

Wherever we find the opportunity to present the 
Truth, we should appreciate the privilege. Of course we 
are not to annoy any one with whom we come in contact; 
but if there seems to be an opportunity to serve, it 
is for us to be about our Father's business, and to improve 
the opportunity— whether it is to speak the Truth 
or merely to give a kind word, etc. "The Spirit of the 
Lord God is upon me; for He hath anointed me to preach 
Good Tidings to the meek." God is seeking those who 
are kind and sympathetic, desirous of helping others. 



It is our privilege to give a cheerful word at all times. 
As a rule people have sad experiences. Often there is a 
worm at the core, the heart. It has been noted that those 
who have committed suicide have sometimes laughed and 
joked a little while before taking their lives. The world 
would be in a terrible condition if everybody told all his 
troubles and carried his heart on his sleeve. It is better 
that they hide their troubles and that we cover ours from 
sight. It is better to cultivate the spirit which sings: 

"Content whatever lot I see, 
Since 'tis my God that leadeth me." 

LITTLE TESTS OF CHARACTER 

We should esteem it a privilege to address wrappers 
for tracts, or whatever the opportunity of the hour may 
be in the Lord's service. Should some one say, "I would 
rather preach," we reply, If the Lord opens up the way 
and gives you an opportunity to preach, do so. And if 
you have several opportunities to preach in one day, 
whether to one person, or to ten persons, or to a thousand, 
make use of them. But if you do not have any opportunity 
to preach, you may have the privilege of addressing 
wrappers. In this way you are instrumental in 
helping to place reading matter in the hands of others, 
even if the postman is the one who takes it to the house 
where it will be read. Or if our work is in the kitchen 
or any other part of the home, it is service of the Lord 
if we do all as unto Him. But He kindly gives us opportunity 
to do something for the brethren. 

So whatever we do, we are doing it for the Lord, we 
are doing it as unto Him, doing it as He would have it 
done. There is a way of looking at things that makes 
us feel happy. It is a good thing to ask ourselves occasionally, 
What am I seeking? What is my motive in 
doing this? For whom am I working? 

R5740 : page 235 

As we thus work for the Lord and strive to please 
Him, and cultivate the spirit of thankfulness for service 
in the little things, we shall be proving our worthiness 
for the great things. Our desire to render faithful service 
to the Lord will manifest itself in economy in the 
home and in consideration for others around us. Whoever 
will strike too many matches, or who will strike 
matches on the walls of the house, is thus manifesting 
that he is not fully trustworthy. Whoever whistles 
around the house to disturb others, or who gets up at a 
very early hour and makes so much noise that others 
cannot rest, or who comes in late at night and goes 
noisily to his room, demonstrates that he has not learned 
to observe the Golden Rule, has not learned to respect 
the rights of others. 

The very beginning of all our conduct as members 



of the Body of Christ should be the observance of the 
principles of justice. We should think as to what are 
the rights of others and as to whether we are impinging 
on those rights. If we find that we are so doing, we 
may know that we are violating the law of justice. In 
every circumstance of life, justice must come first, and 
afterwards we may be as kind and generous as possible. 

"LORD, IS IT I?" 

In respect to spiritual matters the principle is the 
same. Little rifts in the lute spoil the music. God is 
seeking a very special class for the Kingdom. He desires 
those who will be absolutely loyal to Him, loyal to 
His Word, faithful not only in some great thing, but 
also in the smallest affairs of life— faithful in thought, 
word and deed. Whoever is thus faithful, whoever exercises 
care in all these respects, will be fitting and preparing 
himself for the Kingdom. Whoever is careless 
and inattentive to little things is not fit for the great 
honor the Lord has in store for the wholly faithful. He 
is watching us closely, but with a kindly eye. He wishes 
us to succeed. He gives us the necessary instruction and 
guidance. When we practise carefulness in little things, 
we are thereby developing our characters along right 
lines. If we fail to do this, we shall never become fit to 
be entrusted with important matters. Let us each make 
this a personal question: What kind of character am I 
developing as the days go by? 

But the Christian who makes a mistake, and who sees 
his mistake and makes what amends are possible, will 
find his experience beneficial to him— perhaps throughout 
the remainder of his life. Through the castigation 
which he imposes upon himself he will learn greater 
carefulness. Care and watchfulness are necessary, and 

R5741 : page 235 

we should see to it that they extend to every affair of 
life— to the use of our time, our talents, our money, etc. 
Whatever we have of these is from the Lord and belongs 
to Him. We should therefore carefully consider 
what we shall do with these opportunities and be very 
conscientious in the use of them— how much we shall 
use for ourselves and how we shall use the remainder. 
Our course in these matters will show to the Lord 
whether or not we are fitted for a place in glory. 

Our use or abuse of all the talents, great or small, 
entrusted to us by the Master will demonstrate how 
careful we are to note His will and to do that will in 
respect to this feature of our stewardship. By and by 
He purposes to give to the faithful those things which 
will be of far more value than dimes and dollars; affairs 
of great responsibility will be committed to them. If any 
have not been faithful— if any one has thought of the 
time, the dimes, the dollars, etc., as being his own, and has 



so used them, that one will not be of the class the Lord 
is seeking. He is viewing us according to the Covenant 
of Sacrifice which we have made with Him. (Psalm 50:5.) 
If we had a million dollars, it would be only a small 
thing in His sight. It is the manner in which we use the 
things of this life that manifests our loyalty to the Lord 
and that demonstrates how we would use the Divine 
power during the thousand years of Messiah's Kingdom, 
for the blessing of all the families of the earth. 

Our grandest opportunities for service are comparatively 
insignificant. But we are to appreciate even the 
least service which we may be able to render. We are 
to esteem that our service here is not to be compared 
with the things which the Lord has in reservation for 
those who love Him. For a thousand years they are to 
reign with their Lord; and then will follow the ages to 
come during which He will show the exceeding riches 
of His grace in His kindness toward them through 
Christ Jesus their Lord. (Ephesians 2:7.) In view of 
this future inheritance of the saints in light, is it any 
wonder that our Lord wishes us to have kind, just, generous 
hearts? Our opportunity of being in the Little 
Flock will depend largely upon our appreciation of our 
opportunities for serving the Lord in the little things of 
the present life. 



R5741 : page 235 

ELIJAH A GREAT PROPHET 

--AUGUST 29.-1 KINGS 17:1-16.- 

A FAITHFUL SERVANT OF THE TRUE GOD-ELIJAH A TYPE OF 
THE CHURCH-THE ANTITYPICAL ELIJAH-THE ANTITYPICAL 
JEZEBEL AND AHAB-THE ANTITYPICAL 1260 
DAYS OF SPIRITUAL FAMINE-REFORMATION BY SECTS- 
THE LATEST REFORM MOVEMENT. 

"Casting all your care upon Him; 
for He careth for you."— 1 Peter 5:7. 

ELIJAH was a great Prophet. This fact is 

evidenced not only by the account of the 

Old Testament, from which our lesson is 

taken, but also by the words of Jesus respecting 

him, and the words of the Apostle 

James. (James 5:16-18.) He comes to our 

attention as the Lord's mouthpiece to King 

Ahab, of the ten-tribe kingdom of Israel. 

He brought the king a threat of famine, 

assuring him that there would be no rain 

nor dew upon the land of Israel until Elijah would pray 

God for it. This meant drouth, famine, trouble. Elijah 

was not making this declaration on any authority of his 



own, but because it was the Divine Program and he had 
been so directed of the Lord. True prophets of God are 
not boastful, and never take honors or powers themselves. 
They speak merely as Divine mouthpieces. 

The reason for such a trouble, chastisement, coming 
upon King Ahab and the nation of Israel was that it was 
intended to be corrective, and additionally, as we shall 
see, it was prophetic or typical. The Israelites had gone 
into idolatry, and King Ahab had cooperated and had been 
a leader. The prophets of God had been persecuted, and 
the prophets of Baal had been honored. A great national 
chastisement might do them good. Accordingly, as 
stated in the first verse of our lesson, the issue was plainly 
declared to the king by Elijah, who then was directed to 
go to the brook Cherith. 

This brook is in the mountainside, on the roadway 
leading from Jerusalem down to the Dead Sea, near the 

R5741 : page 236 

place where the Jordan enters it. It was a lonely spot, 
and is now marked by an ancient convent. There, for 
three and a half years, the Prophet made his home, away 
from the public, and was fed by ravens, which brought 
him bread and flesh morning and evening. The water of 
the brook slaked his thirst. As the drouth continued, the 
brook finally dried up; and the Prophet was directed to 
the home of a widow of the town of Zarephath— beyond 
Israel's border, in the land of Zidon. 

Jesus referred to this incident, remarking that the 
woman was a Gentile, and that the sending of Elijah to 
her implied that she was more worthy of the blessings 
he accorded than were any of the widows of the land of 
Israel. (Luke 4:25,26.) The poor widow had but a 
remnant of meal whereby to make a few cakes to sustain 
herself and her son; but at the Prophet's suggestion she 
had faith enough to share her little remnant with him. 
The result was a miracle. The remnant continued, as the 
Prophet had declared, throughout the famine. "The barrel 
of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil fail, according 
to the word of the Lord which He spake by Elijah." 

ELIJAH'S ANTITYPICAL PROPHECY 

As already suggested, Elijah's prophecy was larger 
than on the surface appeared; for he and all of his 
doings were a type on a small scale of greater things 
which came afterwards. Elijah was a type of the Church 
in the flesh— the Church of which Jesus is the Head, and 
all of His saintly followers are the members. It was of 
this antitypical Elijah that God declared, "Behold, I will 
send you Elijah the Prophet before the coming of the 
great and dreadful Day of the Lord; and he shall turn 
the heart of the children to the fathers, and the heart of 
the fathers to the children; otherwise I will come and 
smite the earth with a curse."— Malachi 4:5,6. 



Jesus and His Apostles, and all of His followers, as 
the members of this greater Elijah, actuated by the Spirit 
of God, have been delivering a Message to the world. 
They have been reproving sin, and making known to the 
world the righteousness of God. If the world had heeded 
the Message, the Kingdom of Messiah on the spirit plane 
would eventually have been ushered in, as the desire of all 
nations, without any great Time of Trouble, or "Day of 
Wrath," being necessary. But the world has not heeded 
the Message of Jesus and His followers; and hence the 
smiting of the earth with a curse, the blow of the great 
Time of Trouble now beginning, is the only way by 
which Messiah's Kingdom can be ushered in. 

The nations, having accepted a form of godliness 
merely, and without the power and spirit of it, are 
Christian nations merely in name, not in fact, as the 
present great war for commercial supremacy of the world 
abundantly demonstrates. By this war and by the great 
revolution which the Bible declares will follow it, and 
by the world-wide anarchy which will result from the 
revolution, all the kingdoms of the world will be overthrown 
and all the present systems and institutions will 
be ground to powder, that the way for Messiah's Kingdom, 
and its place, may be prepared. What did not 
come through obedience to the Truth will come through 
the overthrow of those who heard but neglected, perverted 
and distorted the Divine Message of "Peace on 
earth, good will to men." 

FULFILMENT OF THAT PROPHECY 

That God meant Elijah to be a type of the Church is 
confirmed to us by certain statements in the Revelation. 
The matter is there covertly presented, a great religious 
system being figuratively described as Jezebel, and the 
worldly system to which this professed Church of Christ 
is united being represented by Ahab, the king of Israel. 
In this figure, as Elijah fled from Jezebel and Ahab's 
power for three and one-half years, so the Church is said 
to flee into the wilderness to a place prepared for her, 
where she is miraculously sustained of the Lord for 
three and a half "Times," or symbolic years, otherwise 
explained as 42 months, or 1260 days.— Revelation 2:20-23; 
12:6,14; 13:5; 11:2,3. 

That long period of time when the true Church was 
eclipsed by the success of Babylon marked the time of 
great spiritual drouth. As during the time of Elijah's 
absence at the brook Cherith and in Zidon there was no 
rain, so with the world, during those 1260 years there 
was no spiritual rain, no refreshment from on High. 
During that long period the Word of God, the Bible, was 
suppressed and neglected. The Bishops, Catholic and 
Protestant, suppressed it because if the people paid attention 
to the teachings of Jesus and the Twelve Apostles 
whom He appointed (St. Paul taking the place of Judas), 
they would proportionately ignore the teachings of the 



bishops who falsely proclaimed themselves "apostolic" 
bishops, and arrogated to themselves the power and authority 
which Jesus declared belonged only to The Twelve. 
These Twelve our Lord declared to be the twelve stars 

R5742 : page 236 

to guide the Church (Revelation 12:1), and the twelve 
foundation stones of the glorious New Jerusalem, which 
is about to be established.— Revelation 21:14. 

It was during that dark time that there was a famine 
in the land, as mentioned by the Prophet— not a famine 
for bread nor a thirst for water, but a famine for the 
hearing of the Word of the Lord. (Amos 8:11,12.) 
According to the Bible those 1260 years of drouth began 
with the year 539 A.D., when ecclesiastical power attained 
persecuting ability, and ended in 1799 A.D., as its 
persecutions came to an end, at the time of Napoleon's 
great victory, when the pope was taken prisoner to France. 

In another sense, however, the 1260 years would 
very properly extend from the year 325 A.D. to the year 
1585 A.D. It was in the year 325 A.D. that the self-styled 
apostolic bishops convened under the patronage of 
Emperor Constantine, constituted themselves the Ecumenical 
Council of Nice, and formulated the first of the great 
creeds, the Nicene Creed. From that time onward for 
1260 years the Bible was neglected; for the creeds made 
by these so-called apostolic bishops were accepted as 
instead of the Bible, as brief and comprehensive statements 
of its teachings, which alone were to be believed. 
Any one thereafter studying the Bible was esteemed to 
be finding fault with the creeds, and was correspondingly 
condemned. The creeds were studied, and the Bible 
thereafter was neglected. 

It was during that long period of 1260 years that the 
egregious errors which have since troubled mankind became 
interwoven with the creeds of the Dark Ages. And 
it is since those 1260 years ended that the reform movement 
has prevailed— not a satisfactory reformation, according 
to the Bible, but a reformation by sects. Misguided 
by the thought that the Church should be one of 
outward organization, each reformer gathered his followers 
to him and started a new sect, which claimed to be 
the true Church. Undoubtedly the Adversary had much 
to do with the organization of these various denominations, 
which nowhere have authority in the Bible. (1 Corinthians 1:11-13; 
3:3-5.) In recent times Christian 

people are realizing that none of these is the true Church 
of Christ, which is composed only of saints; and they 
gather to the Lord, irrespective of denominational lines 
of any kind. 



R5742 : page 237 



RESPONSIBILITY OF THE SPIRIT-BEGOTTEN 

"Whosoever is begotten of God sinneth not, but he that is begotten 
of God keepeth himself, and that Wicked One toucheth 
him not."— 1 John 5:18. 

WHEN attempting to explain spiritual things, 

there is always a difficulty, particularly because 

we have only human words with 

which to express ourselves. Therefore, in 

order to make spiritual things clear, the 

Scriptures give us various similies and other 

figures of speech. In this text the Apostle 

John speaks of those who are begotten of 

God, those who have experienced a change 

of nature, who were first begotten according 

to the flesh, as children of Adam, and who have 

been begotten again— begotten of God. (1 Peter 1:3.) 

Since our Lord's resurrection, God has been inviting 

some to come out from the world and become New 

Creatures— no longer human beings, but spirit beings. 

The first step toward this change of nature is the 
receiving of a new will. But we can see that it is a 
mistake to call the new will alone the New Creature; for 
the new will comes to us before we receive the Holy 
Spirit. It is the new will that presents our sacrifice. If 
we did not have the new will, we would not present our 
bodies a living sacrifice. The next step is that of the 
Redeemer's becoming a Surety for this sacrifice and for 
the attainment of the new nature. The third step is the 
Heavenly Father's acceptance of this sacrifice, of this 
slaying of the earthly nature by the Redeemer, and His 
giving of a special sign of His acceptance. That special 
sign of acceptance is the begetting of the Holy Spirit. 

It is very necessary that we keep the new human will 
separate and distinct from that which we receive at the 
begetting of the Spirit. We had the new will first; we 
desired and purposed to do God's will. Then we approached 
the Father in the way He had arranged— 
through our Redeemer. It is the new will that makes 
the sacrifice. The offering being presented, the merit of 
Jesus is applied, and thus the sacrifice becomes at once 
acceptable to the Father. Up to this point the will of the 
individual is still a human will, a new human will. The 
offering is then slain by the High Priest, our Lord Jesus, 
the acceptance of the Father being marked immediately 
by the begetting of the Spirit. 

Just what God does at this juncture we do not fully 
understand. We do not understand clearly what a 
natural begetting is, though we have better means of 
understanding the natural begetting than of understanding 
the spiritual begetting. As to the spiritual begetting, 
we have the Divine expression that it is the starting of 
a new life. The one receiving it gains a supernatural 
illumination. Thereafter he is a changed person, a new 
person, a New Creature. He is now in Christ Jesus. 



He has new hopes, aims and objects, and is more and 

more enabled to apprehend spiritual things as the quickening 

influences of the Holy Spirit operate upon his mind. 

But all this is something that cannot be explained to 
those who have not taken the necessary steps by which 
spiritual things may be understood. "The natural man 
receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they 
are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because 
they are spiritually discerned." (1 Corinthians 2:9-15.) 
Not until we have received this Heavenly illumination 
can we discern spiritual things. Nor do we at 
first discern them in the way of appreciating them fully. 
Spiritual discernment grows from a small beginning. 
"Old things have passed away and all things have become 
new." These old things pass away, not instantly, 
but gradually; and the starting point is marked by this 
expression, "begotten of God." 

NEW CREATURE DOES NOT PRACTISE SIN 

To be begotten of God, then, is to receive the beginning 
of a new life, a new nature. The Apostle John 
declares of such, "Whosoever is begotten of God 
doth not commit sin [doth not practise sin— Diaglott]." 
(1 John 3:9.) So long as these are under such holy control, 
inspired by the great and precious promises, and 
possessing the holy will, they could not sin wilfully— could 
not practise sin in their lives. 

We are to distinguish between a wilful sin and being 
overtaken by a fault. The reference in our text is to 
wilful sin, the practise of sin. The New Creature cannot 
sin because it is the Heavenly seed, the seed of the new 
nature. Every flower, every animal, sprang from a seed 
of life. However infinitesimal the seed may be, however 
embryotic, life is there. Likewise with the Christian; so 
long as any of the holy mind of God is present, there is 
life. But if he sins wilfully, this holy seed is dead. If 
this seed perish, the individual is dead as a New Creature. 
Nothing would then await the individual but the Second 
Death; for he had been lifted out of the first, or Adamic 
death, and to die again would mean that he had come 
under the extreme penalty of God's Law a second time. 
This would be an individual sentence, and would be 
eternal. Such would be "twice dead," as the Apostle 
Jude puts it— "plucked up by the roots."— Jude 12. 

So we see the Apostle John's meaning— whoever is in 
the spirit-begotten condition, whoever has this embryo of 
the new nature, could not sin wilfully, could not take 
pleasure in sin, could not give himself over to sin. To 
do so would signify that he had lost this Holy Spirit, and 
that he had become unholy again. As St. Peter explains, 
it would be like the sow that was washed returning to 
her wallowing in the mire. The Apostle John says that 
one begotten of the Holy Spirit will "keep himself, and 
that Wicked One toucheth him not." He not only will 
not sin wilfully, but he will keep constantly on guard, 



watching himself, just as a watchman guards the castle 
or the city or the house. He watches all the doors, all 
the avenues of access. 

THE NECESSITY FOR VIGILANCE 

This thought of setting a watch over ourselves, of 
keeping ourselves so that the Wicked One cannot touch 
or injure us, suggests another thought: The Lord Himself 
is the great Center of righteousness, purity, truth. 
All who are on the side of righteousness, purity, truth, 
will shun sin, will have no fellowship with it; for even 
if we should not really enter into sin in act, if we have 
any sympathy with it, we would be to that extent out of 
harmony with the Lord. As in a circle the nearer to 

R5743 : page 237 

the center the greater the safety; so it is with the circle 
of righteousness, whose Center is Jehovah Himself. 

The slightest sympathy with sin would cause the child 
of God to depart to that extent from the Center of purity. 
As he widened the distance between himself and the 
Lord, he would draw nearer to the outer rim of the circle. 
Think of an island surrounded by water infested with 
crocodiles. The person who would remain in the center 
of the island would be perfectly safe from those enemies. 
But the nearer one approached to the coast line, the 
greater his danger. So Satan is represented as a wily 
foe; and to the extent that any of us would not watch 
himself, he would be getting nearer to the circumference 
of that circle. Any sympathy with what is not in the 
fullest harmony with the mind of the Lord, any participation 
in sin, would carry him closer and closer to the place 
of danger. The intimation of the Scriptures is that such 

R5743 : page 238 

a one would be in great danger of being touched, caught, 
by the great Adversary and his demon host, to his injury, 
perhaps to his ruin. 

Presumably every Christian has had something of this 
experience of drawing near to the place of danger. In 
proportion as we live near to the Lord, we are under 
Divine protection. In proportion as we waver in our 
loyalty, we come nearer to the Adversary. One might 
thus endanger himself without actually sinning. His 
heart might still be true to the Lord, yet he might be 
touched by sin by being involved with others in some 
way. Therefore the Word of God warns us to watch our 
actions, to watch our companionship, our conduct, to 
abide "in the secret place of the Most High," to "make 
straight paths for our feet," lest that which is weak and 
lame be turned out of the way. Rather, let it be healed, 
by keeping very close to our God, as far away as possible 
from the point of danger. 



R5743 : page 238 

A WORD OF PASTORAL COUNSEL 

WE NOTE a strong similarity in some respects 

between our spiritual and our natural experiences. 

We must partake of food if we 

would have strength. For the New Creature 

in Christ, God's Word has provided this 

necessary food— milk for babes, strong meat 

for those of greater development. As we 

feed upon the gracious promises of God's 

Word, they strengthen our hearts and nerve 

our energies for patient endurance and active 

service for the glory of our King, for the blessing of 

the brethren, and for our own spiritual upbuilding. We 

perceive that one great lack amongst Christian people in 

general is that very many have ceased to partake of the 

spiritual food which the Heavenly Father has provided 

for the nourishment of His people. Many, therefore, 

are weak and sickly spiritually; and many have fallen 

asleep in respect to spiritual matters, having become 

overcharged with the cares of this life and the deceitfulness 

of riches, money-lust, and the excitement of business 

and pleasure.— Mark 4:18,19. 

Since we have come to a knowledge of Present Truth 
we find our spiritual appetite sharpening more and more. 
We are growing day by day by means of the nourishment 
supplied. We love the strong meat. We take delight 
in masticating it. A work of Bible study is progressing 
all over the world, the like of which was never before 
known. The Classes of the I.B.S.A. are becoming 
known for their knowledge of the Word of God, collectively 
and individually. The world, especially the 
"Christian world," is taking knowledge of them. 

But here we need to note dangers threatening these 
Bible Students. And these dangers we especially call to 
the attention of the Class leaders. The first is that it is 
true in respect to spiritual feasting as in respect to 
natural feasting, that we need liquids as well as solids. 
By solids we refer to those spiritual foods which require 
mastication, mental assimilation, investigation, etc. From 
these we derive our strength. The liquid refreshments 
correspond more particularly to our spiritual fellowship 
which is non-doctrinal; namely, exhortation, praise, worship, 
testimony respecting the Lord, our personal relationship 
with Him, His gracious providential care over 
us, etc. The Class that neglects the liquid refreshments 
is sure to feel the loss. As the physical system requires 
the liquids to carry the nutriment properly to all parts, 
so the spiritual organism requires the liquid refreshments 
to carry the strength of the nutriment of the doctrines of 
Christ to every member for the mutual refreshment of all. 



Again, it is noticed that while both solids and liquids 
are needed, it is preferable not to use the two at the same 
time. He who washes his solid food down with liquid 
refreshment fails to get all the nutriment out of it, because 
he masticates less. As the process of digestion is 
begun in the mouth, where the saliva is mixed thoroughly 
with the food, the washing of the food down with liquids 
interferes with an important part of digestion. Therefore, 
all physicians advise that little liquid be taken with 
the solids, but that at appropriate times a sufficiency of 
liquids be supplied to the system. So we advise in the 
spiritual eating— that the solids, the doctrines of the 
Word of God, be thoroughly masticated, with comparatively 
little of testimony or exhortation intermingled— just 
a little of praise and worship to give a proper setting. 
Then let the spiritual liquids be appropriated in full 
measure at suitable seasons. 



R5743 : page 238 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
RE THE "SPIRIT OF DIVISION" 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Last month we wrote you asking for separate Pilgrim 
visits, and we have your reply of June 25th suggesting the 
possibility of our triumph over the "spirit of division," and 

stating your intention of making suggestion to the Class 

that a portion of the time of the visiting Pilgrim brother be 
given to us. 

For your letter we wish to thank you, and to thank our 
Heavenly Father whose providences are over us. We do not 
want to have the spirit of division, and we continually search 
our hearts for that which we must overcome, and do continually 
pray and study the Word for the Holy Spirit in our 
hearts, and for the spirit of a sound mind. We will welcome 
reproof, correction, guidance, as the Lord may send it. 

By the favor of God we have one chief desire: to be in 
accord with His will, to make our calling and election sure, 
to love and serve the brethren— and all in His way. Day by 
day our most earnest desire for these things increases, and we 
are determined to be His children wholly, believing His promises, 
believing these things are His will for us. In humility 
and thankfulness we testify that we are being dealt with as 
sons. So, if it should be the Father's will, we do desire to 
have the Pilgrim brethren visit us, and our request was made 
if we know our hearts, without a thought of complaint against 
or criticism of others. 

The regular Class was organized before our coming 

into it; the leaders have an established policy, so to speak. 
From time to time it has seemed to us that the Scriptures, 
and our Pastor's faithful interpretation of them, were not 
being followed, which developed to an issue between us, and 



we quietly resigned and withdrew— absolutely without harshness, 
with words and thoughts of love. We continually pray 
for each of them, we yearn for them and miss them, and 
search our own hearts to see if we can find bitterness or 
wrong that must be gotten out. 

Our consecration is to God our Father, as we will it, and 
not to anything or anybody else. We will to choose His 
way, and pray for wisdom to see it and grace to walk in it, 
and we wish for fellowship with the Pilgrim brethren to this 
end alone. No class meetings are held here with the Pilgrims 
—the meetings being either public or semi-public— and 
we feel the need of heart-to-heart meetings with these 
brethren, at times when there will be no outsiders present. 

Our withdrawal from the Class was not hasty, but only 
prompt when the choice was necessary as to whom we must 
follow. It is not our thought to recite a grievance— we have 
none— nor disappointment, nor hurt, nor regret; for the ordering 
is of the Lord, and we are rejoicing in His providence. 

So in this matter we are thankful in advance for what 
shall be done. All of the children of God are so safe! and 
we have very great cause for blessing and praising His name, 

R5743 : page 239 

feeling we shall be cared for. I have tried to write from the 
heart— sincerely. If you have any further suggestion or 
counsel, or if nothing more be considered necessary, we shall 
think it well. 

Looking over into the Land, the tabernacling days nearly 
over, the world in fear, the way each day yet narrower, how 
could we have time or inclination to quarrel with the brethren! 
I pray your hearts may be continued in patient endurance; we 
daily speak of you in love and sympathy. God bless you! 

In Christ, faithfully yours, . 



R5744 : page 239 

SOME EUREKA Y DRAMA ITEMS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Having had so many good experiences and rich blessings 
connected with the EUREKA Y DRAMA and Colporteur 
work, particularly this Spring, we wish to advise you of 
some of them. 

And then our recent visit to Chicago, where we had the 
privilege of hearing you and others speak encouraging words 
to Harvesters, reinforced by personal talks with many, has 
stirred us further to write you. 

Two brothers and sisters are now working Peoria and 
Knox counties (111.). The brothers travel in a wagon— a 
real DRAMA wagon. In this they carry all their baggage, besides 
the DRAMA machines, sleeping tent and cooking utensils. 
Between towns they canvass the farmers, which helps financially. 
When money sales cannot be made, books are frequently 



exchanged for eggs, butter, vegetables, bread, grain 
for their horse, etc. In this way, opportunities frequently 
come to present the Truth to a class who have not hitherto 
been reached. 

We two sisters have a little more expense traveling on 
trains, but this is soon offset by the sale of books in the 
towns. We canvass during the three days in which the 
DRAMA is shown, and often exchange books for room and 
table board. 

The Colporteur work in these ways we find much more 
interesting and blessed. We find, too, as others have, that the 
trouble in the world is waking people up and they listen with 
interest to our message. 

We show the EUREKA Y in three parts, thus averaging six 
entertainments a week. Our audiences number from fifty to 
three hundred; many of these are from the country. Sometimes 
we have had the use of very good halls free, other times 
paying only a small sum. The carbide light is used where 
there is no electricity and it works successfully at a very 
small cost— about fifteen cents per entertainment. We are 
now planning to give some open-air exhibitions in parks. 

Our EUREKA Y is practically self-supporting. We have 
talked with several who have the EUREKA Y lying idle because 
of lack of funds, and thought these few items would 
be of interest and help to others. 

We realize every day the great privilege of the Harvest 
work, particularly at this time, and that our sacrifice is very 
small compared with the blessings with which our Father 
rewards our humble efforts. We give Him thanks and praise 
for every manifestation of His great love and for the increasing 
light as it is presented in THE WATCH TOWER. We also 
thank Him for that faithful and wise Servant, and pray 
richest blessings upon him. With much Christian love, 

Yours in joyful service, EMMA ANDERSON. 



A MOST SATISFYING PORTION 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I want to try to tell you how greatly I have been blest by 
your precious ministry through THE WATCH TOWER of April 
15th last. Every article in it was of the richest spiritual food; 
but the first one, "The Sum of All Graces," has been especially 
helpful to me, as I was already seeking more earnestly to cultivate 
love, desiring greatly that I might be so filled with the 
sweet spirit of love— with love itself— that it would just 
naturally yield its own fruitage in my life. Your analysis of 
love's component elements in this article, particularly the first 
two, "Love is patient," and "Love is kind," and the seventh 
and eighth, "Love is good-tempered," and "Love is guileless," 
was a most satisfying portion to my hungry heart. As I have 
read and reread them my very soul yearned within me; and 
my desires became stronger, and hope and faith brighter. 

Then when I came to your proposition that we pray every 
morning that the Lord will bless us in the cultivation of love 



throughout the day, and report to Him at night, I resolved to 
do so with greater zeal and earnestness than ever before. And 
so the next day, while full of trials peculiar to my natural 
disposition, I was blessed with victories beyond anything I 
ever enjoyed before. I am still practising with marked progress. 

I want to tell you, dear Pastor, that while I have been 
blest in taking the "Vow," and making the "Morning Resolve" 
my own, and by the many helpful suggestions that have come 
to us from your consecrated heart and head, yet this one has 
brought me more joy, more victory, greater triumphs over my 
weaknesses than anything else. 

What a blessing it has been to watch through the day for 
opportunities for cultivating love even in my thoughts; and 
then at night how sweet to rejoice before the Throne of 
Heavenly Grace because of victories gained, and to humbly 
acknowledge His gracious provision for the forgiveness and 
cleansing for any failures made! 

I wish I could tell you how rich my experience has been 
every day since I took this more determined stand, after 
reading this TOWER. I am so glad that you intimated that we 
might write you of our progress; for I have wanted so much 
to express my Christian love for you, and my growing appreciation 
of your labor of love for the Lord's people. I am 
sure the saints are refreshed and helped by you continually. 

Praying the Lord's blessing on you continually as you seek 
to bring forth the meat in due season for the Household of 
Faith, I am 

Your Sister by His grace, MRS. A. L. RYALS. --Georgia. 



AWAKENED BY THE PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We write to apprise you of the fact that a class of Bible 
Students of this town have organized as an Ecclesia— 24 members 
—Brother W. Sargent of Halifax officiating; and have 
voted you in as Pastor and Elder. Five Deacons were chosen 
from the Class. 

Your PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION awakened us when it 
was given in this town last August. We met together just 
after that to study "The Divine Plan of the Ages," and 
shortly, "We who sat in darkness saw a great light." 

Our class of Truth seekers steadily increased until now 
we number over 50 regular attendants besides many irregular 
ones. Out of this Bible Class 24 have made a full consecration 
of their life to the Lord; and we, who six months ago 
"were not a people," are now a people of God. A few of us 
had lived the consecrated life for some years; the rest came 
out of the world's people, some with socialist, others infidel 
tendencies, etc. We are indeed grateful to our Heavenly 
Father and His Son our Redeemer and to you for this 
precious Harvest Truth which has reached our ears late in 
this acceptable Day of sacrifice. But thank God, at last "we 
have found Him of whom Moses and the Prophets wrote," 
yea, the Apostles, too; and now the Word of God from 



Genesis to Revelation has become luminous and we are finding 
it a mine of precious treasure. 

We want you to know that this class in this little corner 
of the world have the utmost confidence in you as the Lord's 
faithful servant, used to deliver His Message, in spite of the 
fact that from every pulpit in this town and the adjoining 
city of Sydney you and your teachings are being denounced 
as worse than false. We are consumed with a desire to 
spread this Truth; and though sometimes we cast our pearls 
before swine that turn again and rend us, yet many people 
find it good news and seek for more. Praying the Lord's 
rich blessing upon you, we are 

Yours in The Christ, 

ECCLESIA AT GLACE BAY. --Nova Scotia. 



CREATION DRAMA UPSETS BELIEF IN SPIRITISM 

MY DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I feel I must write and tell you that the beautiful CREATION 
DRAMA, shown at the Opera House, Kings Way, has 
entirely changed my life. 

I believed in Spiritism, and when I discovered the fall of 
the Nephilim, before the flood of Noah's day, and read about 
it, my belief was capsized at once. 

I have bought two of the SCENARIOS, two sets of STUDIES 
IN THE SCRIPTURES and a lovely Bible. I also get THE 
WATCH TOWER. I thank God for all His goodness, and may 
He bless you for all your good works. I pray that many 
others may be brought home through your instrumentality. 

I have already found a dear friend in the Truth, and 
hope I may be enabled to do good work as she does, in a 
village to which I am soon going. 

Thanking you so much and praying God to bless and 
keep you, I remain 

Yours faithfully, K. SMITH.-England. 



page 240 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 241 

VOL. XXXVI AUGUST 15 No. 16 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 



Privileges of the Throne of Grace 243 

Manner of Acceptable Prayer 243 

Selfish Petitions Unjustified 244 

"Blessed Are the Pure in Heart" 245 

Fault-Finders, Accusers of the Brethren 245 

The Final Issue— Life or Death 246 

Jehovah Our God is One 247 

Confusion of Trinitarian View 249 

Making Friends of the Unrighteous Mammon 250 

Trespasses and Sins and Their Effect Upon 
Character 251 

The Sin Against the Holy Spirit 251 

Elijah's Return and Victory 252 

Elijah's Flight and Vision 254 

What the Antitypical Elijah Sees 254 

Fulfilment of the Vision Begun 254 

Interesting Letters 255 

"Watch Tower" References Re Tabernacle 
Shadows 255 

When Their Happy Life Began 255 

page 242 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



The "Wright Bible" is permanently out of stock. 



All Cheques, Drafts, Money Orders, etc., should be 
made out to Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. There 
are no exceptions to this rule. 



"CREATION" SCENARIO, SPECIAL PRICES 

In July 1 issue we gave a very special price on the paper 
bound SCENARIO-ten complete (30 parts) for $1.00, including 
postage. 

We have an extra supply of the De Luxe $1.00 edition. 
We offer these at once— two for the price of one; postpaid. 
Get them into the hands of the public. 



I.B.S.A. CONVENTION NEAR HARRISBURG, PA. 

In our next issue we hope to give full particulars re an 
eight days' convention at a beautiful, quiet spot near Harrisburg, 
Pa., September 5th to 12th inclusive. It has a fine Auditorium 
and other conveniences. Terms $1 per day, upward. 
Apply at once. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER 

Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY IX. 

Week of September 5...Q. 57 to 61 Week of September 19. .Q. 70 to 80 
Week of September 12..Q. 62 to 69 Week of September 26. .Q. 81 to 89 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each, 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



R5744 : page 243 

PRIVILEGES OF THE THRONE OF GRACE 

"Let us therefore come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that 



we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of 
need."— Hebrews 4:16. 

WHILE these words of the Apostle have always 

been applicable to the people of God, they 

are especially important to us, for we realize 

that we are now living in this very evil 

day to which he referred in his letter to 

the Ephesians; that it has already come, and 

that only those who have put on the whole 

armor of God will be properly equipped to 

withstand the assaults of the enemy. His 

instruction that the Christian supply himself 

with the whole armor of God indicates a need for 

the armor, a difficulty in withstanding the attacks to be 

expected in this day, and the fewness of those who will 

eventually stand. The exhortation is not to take merely 

the shield of faith, not merely the helmet of salvation, 

not merely the breastplate of righteousness, not merely 

the Sword of the Spirit, not merely the sandals of preparation, 

not merely the girdle of Truth; but all of these. 

The implication is that we shall need all of these if we 

stand all the assaults to be expected in the evil day. 

Alas, how few seem to realize the importance of this 
armor which God has commended! Their difficulty is 
the result of their not recognizing the time in which 
they are now living, of their not being sufficiently 
awake, of not being zealous to search the Scriptures, 
and to arm themselves therewith for the battle of the 
Great Day of God Almighty. 

But with all the preparation the earnest Christian 
may make, he should see to it that there is a direct and 
continual communication between his heart and his Lord. 
In the Bible God has given us His Message, His promises, 
His instruction, in advance. Elsewhere St. Paul 
has declared that this Word "is sufficient, that the man 

R5745 : page 243 

of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every 
good work." We appreciate this assurance and also 
realize our own unworthiness, our littleness and our 
imperfections. But despite all these our Lord has assured 
us that we may approach with courage the Throne 
of Heavenly Grace and there obtain mercy and find 
grace to help in time of need— and forgiveness of sins. 

This promise of forgiveness does not include the 
thought of original sin; for that is forgiven us at the 
time when we consecrate ourselves to the Lord; and 
therefore it need not be remembered day by day. But, 
having surrendered our will to the Lord and having 
started out in the narrow way, we should know what 
our reasonable service to Him would include. (Romans 12:1.) 
We have need of every provision that He has 
made for us. It is our daily transgressions that require 
daily forgiveness. Any one, therefore, who would 



be a good soldier of the Lord Jesus must keep in close 
touch with Headquarters. This he is privileged to do 
by coming daily to the Throne of Grace. 

If we would contrast the privilege of approaching 
God with that of approaching earthly potentates, we 
would see a marked manifestation of God's favor to us. 
With the King of England or the German Kaiser or 
any other earthly sovereign, the dignity of the throne is 
maintained so that it is difficult for any to approach. 
One must earnestly desire to do so. And if he would 
come into the king's presence, he must wear a certain 
style of dress, observe a certain etiquette, and also have 
a proper introduction. If the king were gracious, an 
interview might then be granted. But our God, the 
Mighty Creator of the Universe, has graciously granted 
to each one who has been begotten of the Holy Spirit 
the privilege of bringing everything to Him in prayer 
—all his needs, all his difficulties— and of calling Him by 
the endearing name of "Father." What wondrous grace! 

Then each of God's children before approaching the 
Throne of Grace should seek to know what things are 
approved of the Lord and what things are disapproved. 
It should be the one ambition of the child of God to 
know the Father's will and to guide his affairs accordingly. 
But taking it for granted that our hearts are fully 
submissive to the Lord's will, the Apostle is here describing 
the Christian soldier who has put on the whole 
armor of God, or who is putting it on, and who is seeking 
to come up to the highest standard. He will need, 
with all his armor, to cultivate and to use the privilege 
of prayer.— Ephesians 6:18. 

THE MANNER OF ACCEPTABLE PRAYER 

The foregoing reference tells us how prayer should 
be offered— "praying always with all prayer and supplication 
in the Spirit." We should lay emphasis on the 
words "in the Spirit." Contrast this sort of prayer with 
others which are not "in the Spirit," but merely formalistic. 
We know that the heathen have great formalities 
in their prayers. The Chinese, for instance, have a 
wheel on which certain prayers are inscribed, and they 
think that the more times the wheel is turned around 
the more times the prayer goes up to their god. These 
are vain repetitions. But the Chinese are heathen— they 
have not learned of the true God. Others approach the 

R5745 : page 244 

true God, using vain repetitions, not knowing what they 

want or what is best for them or what is God's will. 

Some Christians use printed forms of petition which are 

not really their own sentiment or spirit, but which as 

worshipers they offer to the Lord in a more or less perfunctory 

manner. Some prayers are represented by 

beads. These are used by our Roman Catholic friends. 



Each bead represents a prayer, and the repetition is supposed 
to help the worshiper. He counts these beads over 
and over, repeating his prayer over each bead. 

All these endeavors on the part of humanity, heathen 
and Christian, to approach God in prayer indicate that 
there is a recognized need of Divine assistance. But 
God is not to be approached in a merely formal manner. 
He is not to be mocked. If we should approach 
an earthly king in such a perfunctory way, he would 
see through the hollowness of the petition and would 
resent it. And so we may know that if we come with 
merely a lip service to God our prayers will not be 
heard. We must remember, too, that only those prayers 
are acceptable to God which come from those in covenant 
relationship with Him through our Lord Jesus Christ. 
There is no other way by which we have a right to 
come to the Almighty addressing Him as "Our Father." 

Reverting again to the text, "Praying always, with all 
prayer and supplication— in the Spirit," we understand 
the Apostle to mean that with every prayer we offer, 
whatever may be our petition, there should be an earnestness 
of spirit. The prayer must always be offered "in 
the spirit," with heart-appreciation of what we are doing. 
Otherwise it would not be acceptable to God. It 
must be a "supplication," an earnest entreaty. When we 
pray to God, we are to "watch thereunto, with all perseverance" 
—having importunity in prayer, not soon 
growing weary if our petitions do not seem to be quickly 
answered. We are not to pray for the things that the 
Word of God does not justify us in believing are the 
Lord's will, but for the things which we believe are His 
will; and we are to really desire what we ask for. Then 
we are to watch for the fulfilment of our prayers, and 
thus be prepared for the blessing when it comes. Our 
Father knoweth what things we have need of before we 
ask Him. -Matthew 6:32,8. 

SELFISH PETITIONS UNJUSTIFIED 

The object of prayer, then, is to benefit ourselves, 
and to bring us into that attitude of mind which will be 
in heart-readiness to receive our Father's blessing. God 
does not wish to give His choicest blessings where they 
would be fruitless. When He gives us these blessings, 
He purposes that our hearts shall be in that condition 
which will assimilate them and bring forth fruitage. 
We must ever be in an attitude of full submission to 
His will. We know that our Heavenly Father not only 
has the fullest knowledge of our needs, but is waiting 
to bestow His richest gifts upon His children, as soon 
as we are ready for them. Then let us never come 
before Him with vain, meaningless repetitions. 

While the world would pray merely for food, clothing, 
temporal blessings or for victory over their enemies, 
we as God's children should yield up our wills to Him 
and pray in the words of our Master's exemplary prayer: 



"Our Father, who art in Heaven, hallowed be Thy name; 

Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done." Then, "Give 

us this day our daily bread," whether it be little or 

much— not saying what kind of food, but simply receiving 

what He sees we need. We have placed these 

matters entirely in the Lord's hands. We ask especially 

for the spiritual Bread. Our prayers are to be along 

the lines of the Spirit and not of the flesh. We are to 

pray only incidentally for the earthly things, because 

we have consecrated our bodies to God. Since the body 

is to die, since it has been accepted as a sacrifice, we 

are to seek to perpetuate that body which we have 

given to the Lord only long enough for our spiritual development 

and testing and for the completion of whatever 

work He has for us to do. We are also to be willing 

and glad to surrender it as soon as the Lord is ready to 

consummate the sacrifice. We have it now only as the 

instrument of the New Creature. 

As New Creatures, then, we are to pray always in 
harmony with the interests of this new nature. We are 
to hunger for the Bread from Heaven and to feed upon 
it. We are to develop the fruits and graces of the Holy 
Spirit. We read that the Father is more willing to give 
good things to them that ask Him than are earthly parents 
to give good gifts to their children. So then, we 
are not only to pray in the Spirit, but as the Lord's Word 
indicates, our prayers are to be along the lines of the 
Spirit, of the New Creature, whose needs are first in 
our sight and in the Lord's sight, and whose interests the 
Lord is especially pleased to bless and to have us consider 
and pray for. 

THE CHRISTIAN'S VITAL BREATH 

The logical conclusion of all this is that the Lord's 
consecrated people would have little to pray for of an 
earthly kind, realizing that with the Church the end is 
not restitution, but sacrifice unto death, and then the 
glorious resurrection. Therefore the prayers of the 
consecrated should be for grace to meet in a faithful 
spirit our various trials and difficulties while we are 
putting on the armor, and likewise after we have put it 
on, and are learning how to use the Sword of the Spirit, 
how to resist the Adversary, and the foes entrenched 
in our own flesh— our Philistines. We need much grace 
to be rightly exercised by the trials and the assaults of 
the enemy and to realize that all these things are to work 
together for good to us who love God, who are "the called 
according to His purpose." We are learning day by day 
how to "make our calling and election sure." 

The Lord's people are encouraged to take part in the 
prayer meeting, and individually they are to approach 
daily the Throne of Grace. Our Lord has declared that 
where two or three are met together in His name He will 
be in their midst. When a petition is made having 
something of general interest, we are to unite our 



hearts that the blessing may be spread abroad and extend 
to many hearts. The suggestion is that the Lord's 
people should do considerable of their praying in fellowship, 
in cooperation. But this would not hinder our 
private praying to the Lord, hourly if need be, telling 
him of our realization of our faults and our weaknesses 
and asking for the application of the precious merit of 
our Savior's sacrifice to remove every spot and every 
wrinkle from our garments. Such prayer is the very 
essence of the Christian's life, his "vital breath." 

We find that the encroachments of the Adversary 
and of the world and of the flesh are liable to discourage 

R5746 : page 244 

us or to entangle us with the things of the present 
life. But the Lord has made it so possible for us to 
approach Him that we can go to Him with any trial, 
any difficulty, and be sure that our petition has Divine 
attention and will have Divine aid. We have spoken of 
our fleshly weaknesses as sometimes hindering us from 
prayer. There is a disposition on the part of many 
Christians, after having done something that has wounded 
the conscience, to avoid going to the Lord in prayer 
for awhile, to dread to go, to feel ashamed to go— 

R5746 : page 245 

thinking that they will feel better about it afterwards. 
This course is fraught with great danger; for it is likely 
to hinder our spiritual growth. Therefore it should not 
be permitted. We should realize that there is all the 
greater need of our going then to the Throne of Heavenly 
Grace. The Lord has known of our weaknesses in 
advance. He knew beforehand of our failure, and 
wished us to profit by the experience, that we might, 
in harmony with our prayers, become stronger against 
sin, against everything displeasing to Him. 

ONE OF SATAN'S CHIEF METHODS OF ATTACK 

The Adversary has to do, no doubt, with seeking to 
interrupt our prayers, our communications with the 
Father. One of our hymns declares that 

"Satan trembles when he sees 
The weakest saint upon his knees." 

We need not go to this extreme of thought, that Satan 
really does so tremble; but we may know that he realizes 
something of the power of prayer in the life of the child 
of God, and one of his chief lines of attack is to seek 
to cut off our communication with the Lord. Just as in 
warfare a skilful general seeks to cut off the enemy 
from its communication with headquarters, with its base 
of supplies, so with Satan. If he could succeed in cutting 



off our communication with the Heavenly Courts, we 
would be so much more liable to fall under his mischievous 
and wicked assaults. Then we would indeed 
be helpless, without Divine direction. 

Is it asked, What could Satan do to cut off our communication? 
We reply that there are various ways of 
intruding upon the human mind— thoughts may enter 
the mind while the child of God is at prayer or at other 
times— thoughts of business, of pleasure, of sin, of 
worldly interests and projects, etc. We do not know 
how much power the Adversary is given in connection 
with the Lord's people. We do know that he is powerless 
to interfere with their will. But he has power to 
stimulate certain organs of our minds, so that unless we 
are very alert we might be cut off from proper fellowship 
with the Lord, and our Christian courage might 
become more or less weakened. Thus we would be proportionately 
less able to resist the world, the flesh and the 
Adversary. 

It is, therefore, proper to take every precaution to 
keep the lines of communication with our Heavenly 
Father well open. For instance, in private prayer, if 
there is a tendency toward drowsiness or toward thoughts 
going to other things, then we might lift the head, if it 
be bowed; or if the eyes be closed, we might open the 
eyes, and raise them. We are to see to it that in all our 
prayers and supplications these are in the Spirit, that 
they are not perfunctory, not formalisms. We are to 
see to it that they are the real expressions of our heart. 
We may say that a few sentences of real heart-prayer 
will accomplish more good for the child of the Lord than 
any amount of lip service. We advise that any who 
have difficulty in keeping the mind concentrated while 
in prayer should rather intensify and shorten their petitions 
and that in all their prayers they should see that 
the things they desire and pray for are in harmony with 
the Lord's Word— in the interest of the New Creature. 



R5746 : page 245 

"BLESSED ARE THE PURE IN HEART" 

"Unto the pure all things are pure; but unto them that are 
defiled and unfaithful is nothing pure; but both their mind 
and conscience are defiled. They profess to have known 
God, but by their works they renounce Him, being 
abominable and disobedient, and to every good work 
worthless." "Keep thy heart with all diligence; for 
out of it are the issues of life." 
-Titus 1:15,16; Proverbs 4:23. 

OUR first text is an extremely severe arraignment. 
The context seems to imply that the 
Apostle Paul was addressing some who 



were identified in a sense with the Cause 
of God, but whose doctrines and manner of 
life were in conflict with the Message of 
the Gospel. Whether he referred to unbelieving 
Jews or to those who had at 
least outwardly become followers of Christ 
we may not be sure. He was referring, at 
any rate, to those who professed to have known God, 
whether they knew Him through the Law or through 
the Gospel. The language seems to imply that these 
were fault-finders. They could find fault with everything 
—nobody could do anything just right, no doctrines 
were right. We have all met people of this character- 
people who see nothing pure, nothing good, anywhere, 
and who are denouncing others all the time. 

The Apostle's statement is very strong, very forceful 
—"Unto the pure all things are pure; but unto them 
that are defiled and unfaithful is nothing pure." We 
understand him to mean by these words, not literally 
that the pure could find nothing that is impure, nor that 
the impure could find nothing pure, but that this is true 
in a broad, general way. Those who are themselves 
pure can see righteousness in the Divine Law and in the 
Divine arrangement. They can see the true, pure hearts 
of God's sincere "little ones," in spite of the weaknesses 
of their fallen flesh. But the unfaithful become defiled, 
their consciences become perverted, so that they 
are unable to see anything or anybody in a proper light. 
They have permitted ill-natured thoughts to enter the 
mind and lodge there— suspicions, evil surmisings, such 
as, "Every man has his price. Every man can be bought. 
There is not one that is honest"; and all that sort of 
thing. They have been more or less judging others by 
themselves. 

Not only the minds of such become corrupted, seeing 
nothing pure, nothing good, nothing right, in others; 
but their consciences become defiled. At first the conscience 
of such would to some extent reprove them. But 
gradually, if they yield to this wrong heart attitude, 
their consciences become corrupt and hardened, so that 
they do not realize that they are prevaricating, misjudging, 
do not see how unjust, impure and blind they 
have become. "They profess to have known God," says 
the Apostle— knowing something in an intellectual way 
about His Plan and Word— "but by their works they 
deny Him." Their works are contrary to God's Word, 
which instructs that all should seek to do all the good 
they can, to see all the good they can, and to give generous 
judgment to others. 

FAULT-FINDERS, ACCUSERS OF THE BRETHREN 

These defiled ones deny God, renounce Him in their 
works— as St. Paul declares, they are "abominable, and 
disobedient" to God, walking contrary to His instructions. 
This is surely an abominable thing to do— after 



knowing the Lord to go in an opposite direction, and 
set His counsel at naught. Such are "to every good 
work worthless." They do not accomplish anything 
good, but the very opposite; yet they find fault with 
everybody else. 

R5746 : page 246 

The Apostle is not saying here that such have 
necessarily become immoral and vile in that they have 
become delvers into all kinds of sin and vice. We are 
not to read into his words anything that is not there. 
But he does say that so far as any good work is concerned 
they will defile it, injure it. Better would it be 
that they keep away from the Lord's work entirely. 
They have allowed the bitter spirit to work in them until 
everything takes on the color of their own minds. 
They do not recognize to what an extent they are unjust, 
unrighteous, in their thoughts, their words, their 
conduct. They are injurious to every good work. 

There are lessons of warning here for all of us, lest 
we should be led astray by the spirit of the Wicked One 
and become mere fault-finders, accusers of the brethren 
—not giving our time, our hands, our feet, our tongues, 
to doing good, to blessing and upbuilding the brethren, 
but rather to tearing down. In proportion as any one 
does this, he is worthless, yea, worse than worthless, to 
the Lord and to His Cause. 

NECESSITY FOR GUARDING THE HEART 

"Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are 
the issues of life," exhorts the Wise Man. The thought 
embodied in this exhortation is of the utmost importance. 
Truly these are words of wisdom! As the heart is perhaps 
the most important organ of the human body, so the 
word "heart" is here used in a figurative way to represent 
the center of the affections of the human mind. 
The implication is that the heart needs keeping. There 
are many things to distract, to draw away, to lead astray. 
Not only the burden of business, but also the trend of 
the world in general and of our fallen flesh, tend to 
lead the heart away from righteousness, from the service 
of God, from purity, love and kindliness toward others. 

The great Adversary also gives his assistance in attempts 
to thus mislead. The heart— the will, the affections 
—of every human being should be loyal to God 
and to righteousness. It was made so originally. As 
the magnetic needle turns to the pole, so the human 

R5747 : page 246 

heart should turn to the Lord. Anything to the contrary 
represents a sinful, distorted, perverted condition. 
But as a matter of fact, sin has become firmly implanted 
in the fallen human nature. During these long centuries 



of sin many people have striven to keep their hearts 
right with God. But after getting right, the majority 
fail to abide in that condition, to keep their heart in 
God's love, to keep it from going into wrong avenues, 
from getting into the wrong condition. 

We often have difficulty in managing our bodies. 
There are appetites of the flesh that need constant watching. 
The tongue needs continual guarding. While we 
are to watch all these things carefully, yet the most important 
thing to watch is the heart; for all our evil 
tendencies have their mainspring there. "A good man 
out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth 
good things; and an evil man out of the evil treasure 
of his heart bringeth forth evil things." We should be 
ever alert to see that our heart is kept pure, true. If 
we find impurities there, they should be prayerfully 
fought against and made right. We should keep our minds 
filled with that which is pure, worthy, Godlike. 

As children of God we have learned that the only way 
to have our hearts right with our Father is through the 
Lord Jesus Christ. We have come to God through 
Christ and thus become His sons, receiving His Holy 
Spirit. Then we have a new influence, a new fountain, 
opened in the heart, which changes its current, which 
sweetens its outflow. Thenceforth we love righteousness 
and hate iniquity. If there is any variation from this at 
any time, we should see that we are promptly brought 
back into alignment with the Spirit of the Lord. We 
need to keep our heart continually under inspection, so 
that we may abide in close fellowship with the Father 
and with our Lord Jesus. 

"For out of it [the heart] are the issues of life," declared 
Solomon. From this organ— the heart— the blood 
is pumped out to all parts of the body. The body is 
thus dependent upon the heart for its strength, its vitality, 
its very life. The body would be dead if the heart 
did not continually propel the blood through the system. 
So the issues of our bodily life are going forth from 
the heart every day, yea, every moment. It is either 
issuing little life or much life each day. So it is with 
the seat of our affections— so it is with our will. All 
who come in contact with us day by day are influenced 
for good or for evil by the spirit we manifest. It is 
highly important that all our conduct in life should be 
under the proper direction of a pure heart— one that 
is carefully watched and kept under inspection, so that 
today as we go forth, a good issue shall flow out from 
our heart to others. Thus the Lord will be pleased with 
us, and will count us "dear children." Thus shall our 
minds and consciences be kept undefiled. 

THE FINAL ISSUE-LIFE OR DEATH 

But there is a further sense, a vital sense, in which 
the issues of life are from the heart. God has informed 
us that though He sentenced our race to death, He has 



made provision for a future and an eternal life for all. 
And the conditions on which any may have this eternal 
life are set forth in the Scriptures. They tell us of 
certain things that must be done. To us who are called 
and accepted now it is important that we do all we are 
able to do, because by nature we have sin entrenched 
in our flesh. Like all of Adam's race, we are imperfect 
by nature through his fall; but the Lord informs us 
that if we become His children He will judge us by the 
heart— by our will, our intention, our desire, our efforts. 
Therefore when we are thinking of the glorious prize, 
we are to remember that the ultimate issue of this matter, 
the final decision, will depend altogether upon how 
we have fulfilled the conditions. It is as in a court, 
where a jury is sworn in to decide what the verdict shall 
be— whether in favor of one party or the other party. 
There will be an issue in our case, a decision, from which 
there will be no appeal. 

The world will be on trial in the next Age, but the 
Church of Christ is on trial now— from the time they 
are begotten of the Holy Spirit. The new life is on 
trial. Our new heart is before the bar of Divine judgment. 
That new heart, then, needs keeping very carefully, 
since connected with it are the issues of eternal 
life or eternal death. Our hopes are not dependent on a 
perfect body; some may have a sick body, some may 
have a naturally amiable disposition, and others not. 
But our old bodies are reckoned dead from the moment 
we become New Creatures, and the New Creature is 
responsible for the control of the body to the best of its 
ability. These new hearts are to be kept loyal to God, 
to the principles of righteousness, truth, equity— loyal 
to our Covenant. If we fail properly to cultivate Christlike 
character, if we fail to keep in attunement with the 
Lord, then we shall never develop as New Creatures in 
Christ. And when the decisive testings come, we shall 
be found wanting. 

The Lord has promised to give the blessing of glory, 
honor, immortality, join t-heirship with Jesus, to those 

R5747 : page 247 

who during the Gospel Age attain His character-likeness. 
And that character-likeness to God will demonstrate 
our loyalty to the principles of righteousness and 
to the Divine will. In the case of our Lord Jesus, 
He was willing, glad, to sacrifice everything to do the 
Father's will. So must it be with all who would be 
counted in with Christ. The issues, the results, of our 
life are here. God says to us, as followers of Christ, 
as His professed disciples, "I have set before you life 
and death, blessing and cursing. Choose life that ye 
may live." Life is the blessing; death is the curse. 
All through the Bible this thought is maintained— that 
the gift of God is His blessing of eternal life, and that 
"the wages of sin" is the curse of death— not torment. 



So to the Christian the issue of our life here on earth 
is life eternal, if we are faithful. Failing to gain the 
life eternal, we shall go into death— the Second Death; 
for if we are disloyal to the principles of righteousness 
and to the opportunities granted us in this trial for everlasting 
life that has come to us in the Gospel Age, there 
remains no future opportunity for us. These words apply 
to those who have really become children of God, 
who have tasted of the "heavenly gift." How important, 
then, to keep our hearts true, loyal, undefiled! 

FINAL ISSUE OF LIFE DIFFERING IN DEGREE 

Amongst those in whose cases the issue will be everlasting 
life, there will be different ranks, as regards the 
degree of honor and blessing. As the Apostle pictures it, 
"For star differeth from star in glory; so also is the 
resurrection of the dead"— so it will be with those who 
have a part in the First Resurrection. Some will have 
a brighter glory in the Kingdom than others. We might 
say that there will be various issues— greater honor and 
less honor. As elsewhere shown in the Scriptures, there 
are two classes who will gain everlasting life on the 
spiritual plane of being. Many will be of the Great 
Company; some will be of the Little Flock, the Bride 
of Christ. Some will attain the highest plane, immortality; 
but more will get life similar to that of the angels, 
on a lower spirit plane. 

So we see the wisdom of the Scriptural exhortation 
that the heart needs constant attention, because there are 
such important, vital issues in respect to it. And we 
see the wisdom in warning of the danger of permitting 
the mind and the conscience to become defiled and impure. 
Some might say, "I will be very careful about 
every word I speak." Very well so far. But to keep 
the tongue would not alone be sufficient to give eternal 
life; for the heart might be quite different from the 
tongue in some cases. One might be able to speak very 
smoothly, yet have a deceitful, impure heart. Again, 
one might say, "I will watch my body, and not sin with 
it." But that would not be enough. We must get down 
to the source. The Lord is looking at the desires, the 
intentions of the heart, in His people. This needs special 
watching, because the heart is the battle-ground, so great 
are the issues from it— life or death. If life, then we 
desire that we may have the highest place that God 
is willing to grant us. And it is ours by meeting the 
conditions. 



R5747 : page 247 

JEHOVAH OUR GOD IS ONE 

"To us there is but one God, the Father, of 



whom are all things."— 1 Corinthians 8:6. 

NOTWITHSTANDING the wide-spread acceptance 

of the doctrine of the Trinity, we 

have held closely to the Bible teaching that 

there is but one God. Jesus called God His 

Father, and spoke of Himself as the Son of 

God. A father is a life-giver. A son is an 

offspring, one who receives life from a 

father. This distinction implies that the 

father existed first. And so Jesus says of 

Himself, "I proceeded forth and came from 

God. "-John 8:42. 

In our writings we show the clear teachings of the 
Bible, that Jesus in His pre-human condition was the 
Logos, the Word, or Message, from the Father; and that 
as such He was called a god, but not the God— the Father. 
On so important a question as the equality of the Father 
and the Son, we must not rely upon any man's testimony 
except that of the inspired writers of the Scriptures. 
We should accept no dictum save that of the 
Divine Word itself. Let us ask Jesus. He replies, "My 
Father is greater than I"; "I can of Mine own self do 
nothing; as I hear I judge"; "My Father is greater than 
all"; "I ascend to My Father and your Father, to My 
God and your God"; "This is life eternal, that they 

R5748 : page 247 

might know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ 
whom Thou hast sent. "-John 14:28; 5:30; 10:29; 17:3; 
20:17. 

In our writings we point out that Jesus was the first 
of God's creatures, the only being directly created by 
Jehovah; and that Jehovah did all subsequent creating 
through the Son. Thus we read that Jesus was "the beginning 
of the creation of God," "the First-born of every 
creature," "the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and 
the end, the first and the last" of the Father's direct 
creation. (Revelation 3:14; 22:13; Colossians 1:15.) 
The Apostle John declares (John 1:1-3), "In the beginning 
[not Jehovah's beginning, for He had no beginning; 
but the world's beginning, or man's beginning] was the 
Word [the Logos], and the Word was with the God and 
the Word was a god. All things were made by Him, and 
without Him was not anything made that was made." 
Could this subject be made plainer? Why confuse ourselves 
needlessly? Why fight against the plain statements 
of God's Word to uphold a theory which is without 
Bible support and was formulated in the Dark Ages? 

We teach, as does the Bible, that the Lord Jesus came 
from Heaven to earth; was born of a virgin mother; that 
He, "the Logos, was made flesh and dwelt among us," 
and His disciples "beheld His glory, the glory as of the 
Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth!" 
(John 1:14.) Jesus had not two natures, but one nature, 



having changed the higher, the spiritual nature, for 
the human nature. As the Scriptures declare, "He who 
was rich, for our sakes became poor, that we through His 
poverty might be rich." (2 Corinthians 8:9.) And as 
He grew to manhood He grew in favor with God and 
man. He was perfect— "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners."— Luke 2:52; Hebrews 7:26. 

JESUS BECAME A NEW CREATURE 

At thirty years of age, this Perfect One, having 
reached the perfection of manhood according to the Law 
consecrated, or devoted, His life to God as the great 
Sacrifice for human sin, fulfilling the Scriptures, "a body 
hast Thou prepared Me," "for the suffering of death." 
(Hebrews 10:5; 2:9.) That consecrated sacrifice of the 
Man Jesus God accepted, indicating His acceptance by 
the anointing of Jesus with the Holy Spirit at Jordan. 
Thenceforth He was dual— a perfect human body with 

R5748 : page 248 

a newly begotten mind— spirit-begotten. He then, as a 
New Creature, was to complete the sacrifice of His flesh; 
and His new mind— the New Creature— was to go on to 
perfection. He prayed that the Father would restore 
Him to the glory which He had with the Father "before 
the world was." (John 17:5.) In His humility He asked 
no higher glory. His sacrifice was finished at Calvary, 
and His new mind, His spirit-begotten new nature was, 
in the resurrection, granted the new body which the 
Father had promised. "Sown in dishonor," He was 
"raised in glory"; "sown in weakness," He was "raised in 
power"; "sown a natural body," He was "raised a 
spiritual body."— 1 Corinthians 15:43,44. 

Our Lord was not originally created in the way the 
angels were; for He was the direct creation of the 
Father, whereas the angels were the indirect creations 
of God, through the Son. St. Paul declares that all 
things are of the Father, and all things are through, by 
the Son. (1 Corinthians 8:6.) He was the Father's 
honored agent in all other works of creation. 

Our Lord Jesus became the Christ, the Anointed, when 
He received the anointing of the Holy Spirit at His baptism. 
He was perfected as the Christ at His resurrection. 
He was a god (Mighty One) before He came into 
the world; He also was a god from the time He received 
the begetting of the Holy Spirit at Jordan; and He is 
still a god, set down at the right hand of the Father. 
But He is not The God, He never was and never will be. 
Note again His own words after His resurrection, when 
speaking to Mary Magdalene: "I ascend to My Father 
and your Father; to My God and your God." (John 20:17.) 
Hear what St. Paul says, "To us there is but 
one God, the Father, of whom are all things, * * * 
and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by [or through] whom are all 



things." (1 Corinthians 8:6.) Again, in referring to Jehovah, 
the Apostle calls Him, "God, even the Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ"; and again, "The God and Father 
of our Lord Jesus Christ," and "the God of our Lord 
Jesus Christ."— 2 Corinthians 1:3; Ephesians 1:3,17. 

A COMMON, BUT UNSCRIPTURAL VIEW 

The Lord Jesus is not the second person of a triune 
God. The word "triune" is unscriptural; so is the 
thought. St. Paul sets the matter straight in his words 
quoted above. He also declares that Jesus "thought 
not of robbery to be equal with God, but made Himself 
of no reputation." No translation of this passage 
(Philippians 2:6), save in our Common Version gives the 
thought that Jesus considered Himself equal to God the 
Father, but all are to the contrary of this. Our Common 
Version rendering is evidently a mistranslation. The 
entire argument of the Apostle shows that Christ humiliated 
Himself, not that He claimed equality with Jehovah! 

The word "trinity" is not found in the Bible. The 
only text in the Bible which seems in any way to suggest 
a trinity is acknowledged even by trinitarians themselves 
to be a forgery, incorporated into the text about the fifth 
century. This interpolation forms a part of 1 John 5:7,8. 
We quote the passage, with the interpolated words enclosed 
in brackets: "For there are three that bear record 
[in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: 
and these three are one; and there are three that bear 
witness in earth,] the Spirit and the water and the blood: 
and these three agree in one." See Revised Version, 
Emphatic Diaglott, American Standard Union translation, 
Young's translation, etc. This passage is pronounced 
an interpolation by such eminent authorities as 
Sir Isaac Newton, Benson, Adam Clarke, Home, Griesbach, 
Tischendorf and Alford. 

We have explained in our writings that there was a 
time when our Lord Jesus did not exist, when Jehovah 
was alone. How else could the Bible declare that Jesus 
was the "beginning of the creation of God"? (Rev. 3:14.) 
What is the value of language, anyway, if we do not give 
words their manifest meaning? Jesus undoubtedly had 
a beginning. This beginning was ages before He came to 
earth as a human being to die for Adam and his race. 
Those who denounce us should read our writings before 
criticizing them. Then they would not criticize at all, 
if honest; for they would know that there is no ground 
for criticism on the part of those who hold to the Bible 
as the Word of God. 

THE LOGOS TRANSFERRED FROM HEAVEN TO EARTH 

The Lord Jesus had a Heavenly nature before He 
came into the world. He exchanged that nature, as we 
have stated, for an earthly one, in order that He might 
give His flesh, His humanity, a Ransom-price for the 



sins of the whole world. Having accomplished this great 
work, He was granted by the Father an exaltation still 
higher than His previous glorious position and nature, 
even though His previous station had been second only 
to Jehovah Himself. St. Paul declares of the position 
given Christ at His resurrection: "Wherefore God also 
hath highly exalted Him and given Him a name above 
every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should 
bow, of things in Heaven, and things in earth, and things 
under the earth [those now in the tomb, but yet to be 
raised to learn the Truth as it is in Jesus]; and that every 
tongue should confess that Jesus is Lord, to the glory of 
God the Father."— Philippians 2:9-11. 

When on earth Jesus was not a sinful man in any 
sense. His birth of the Virgin Mary was miraculous. 
His holy life was transferred to human conditions. He 
was made a man— "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners," and fit, therefore, to be the great Sin 
offering for Adam and all his posterity. He was simply 
the Man Jesus up to the time of His immersion in Jordan; 
but the anointing He there received constituted Him 
the Anointed of God, the Christ, the Messiah. 

MADE "PARTAKER OF THE DIVINE NATURE" 

Jesus was a god, a Mighty One, higher than the angels, 
before He became a man. When born a babe, He was 
not a god at all, but a human being; and as the perfect 
man of thirty He was not a god. But when He received 
the anointing of the Holy Spirit, of Divine power, He 
became a Mighty One, because of this spirit-begetting. 
And since His resurrection He is a god, greater than 
ever before, "partaker of the Divine nature"; for His 
Church are called to this great exaltation, and they are 
called to the obtaining of the glory of their Lord, that 
they may be with Him, as His Bride, and be like Him, 
members of His glorious Body.— 2 Thessalonians 2:14; 
1 John 3:2; Revelation 21:2,9; 22:17; 1 Corinthians 10:16,17; 
12:12,13,27; 2 Peter 1:4. 

Our Lord is the great Head of His Church, and 
Head and Body must partake of the same nature in 
glory. He gave up His human nature in death to purchase 
the human race. For parts of three days He lay 
dead in the tomb— not alive in any sense; for death is 
the absence of life. He had given up His human life 
never to take it up again. It was the purchase-price for 
the world. He was resurrected to the Divine plane, an 
exaltation never before given to any creature of God. 
His Bride is called to the same glorious nature as her 
Head, whose inheritance she is invited to share. Jesus 
was raised from the dead by the power of God.— Romans 6:4; 
8:11; Acts 2:22,24,32,33. 

R5749 : page 249 

CONFUSION OF TRINITARIAN VIEW 



Notice for a moment the great confusion from which 
we are saved by following the Bible's own testimony respecting 
our Lord Jesus and by throwing out the ridiculous 
nonsense of the Dark Ages. We are saved from 
thinking of our God as three beings with only one body 
or one being with three bodies. Trinitarians do not know 
which of these creedal statements to take— some say one 
and some say the other. But both are wholly irrational: 
three are not one and one is not three. The oneness between 
the Father and the Son is explained by our Lord 
Himself. He prayed that His disciples might become one 
in the same sense that He and the Father were one— 
surely not that His disciples might become one person, 
but that they might be one in spirit, in mind, in purpose, 
as were the Father and Himself. See John 17:20-23. 
The followers of Jesus become one in mind and purpose 
by each giving up his own will to do God's will. And 
Jesus and the Father are one because Jesus surrendered 
His will to the Father's will, saying, "Not My will, but 
Thine be done"; "I came not to do Mine own will, but 
the will of Him that sent Me"; "Lo, I come; I delight 
to do Thy will, O My God!" These are the words of 
the Lord Jesus to the Father. 

Touching the rise of the Trinitarian view, Abbott and 
Conant's Religious Dictionary, page 944, says, "It was 
not until the beginning of the fourth century that the 
Trinitarian view began to be elaborated and formulated 
into a doctrine and an endeavor made to reconcile it 
with the belief of the Church in ONE GOD." "Out of 
the attempt to solve this problem sprang the doctrine of 
the Trinity." Trinity "is a very marked feature in Hindooism, 
and is discernible in Persian, Egyptian, Roman, 
Japanese and the most ancient Grecian mythologies." 

Like some other doctrines received by Protestants from 
Papacy, this one is accepted and fully endorsed, although 
its educated adherents are aware that not a text of 
Scripture can be adduced to its support. Yea, more; 
whoever will not affirm this unscriptural doctrine as his 
faith is declared by the articles of the Evangelical Alliance 
to be non-orthodox— a heretic. Hebrews 1:8 has 
been used by Trinitarians as a proof text that Jesus is 
Jehovah, and the fact is cited that the word God here is 
theos, the same as verse 9 which refers to the Father. 
They seem not to have noticed that the word god, 2 Corinthians 4:4, 
which refers to Satan, is also theos in the 
Greek. Theos is used of any mighty one, the same as 
Elohim in the Hebrew. 

Philippians 2:8,9 implies that our Lord's present glory 
is greater than the glory which He possessed before He 
became a man; otherwise it could not have been an exaltation. 
Now having the Divine, immortal nature He 
cannot die. "Christ dieth no more." How straightforward 
and simple and reasonable is the Scriptural presentation 
compared with human traditions! In what a 
jumble of contradictions and confusion do they find 



themselves who say that Jesus and the Father are one 
God! This would involve the idea that our Lord Jesus 
acted the hypocrite when on earth and only pretended 
to address God in prayer, when He Himself was the 
same God. Such should conclude, too, that since we read 
that God cannot be tempted of any, it was only a farce 
when Jesus was tempted of Satan. Again, the Father 
has always been immortal, hence could not die. How 
then, could Jesus have died? The Apostles are all false 
witnesses in declaring Jesus' death and resurrection if 
He did not die. The Scriptures declare, however, that 
He did die— "He poured out His soul [His being] unto 
death," not merely His body, as many assert— Isaiah 53:12. 

If they admit that Jesus really died, they take the 
other horn of the dilemma; for believing that their three 
Gods are all one person as many do, when Jesus died 
they must all three have died. If they all died, who raised 
them to life? How foolish all this sounds! Yet if Jesus 
and the Father are the same person, the same Being, 
then when Jesus died the Father must have died. Shall 
we thus contradict the Apostles and Prophets and Jesus 
Himself, and ignore reason and common sense, in order 
to hold to a dogma handed to us from the dark, superstitious 
past, by a corrupt apostate Church? Nay! "To the 
Law and to the testimony! If they speak not according 
to this Word, it is because there is no light in them." 

TESTIMONY OF SCRIPTURES RE THE HOLY SPIRIT 

We next inquire, What say the Scriptures with regard 
to the Holy Spirit? The nominal churches, Protestant 
and Catholic, affirm that the Holy Spirit is a person, 
the third person of the Trinity. They claim that all this 
is "a great mystery." Yes, truly it is a mystery, such 
as is characteristic of the confusion of man-made creeds 
held by Babylon. But to those who turn to the Word of 
God and let it speak, all is clear and plain. We suggest 
that whatever definition of the term "Holy Spirit" will 
meet all known conditions and harmonize all Scriptures 
bearing thereon may be understood to be the true meaning 
of the term. We will first give what we conceive to 
be such a definition, and then ask the reader to subject 
every Scripture where this term is used to this definition 
and see if it does not make harmony of all. 

We understand the Bible to teach that the Holy Spirit 
is the Divine will, influence, power or disposition, exercised 
anywhere and for any purpose, at the Divine pleasure. 
God exercises His Spirit or energy in a variety of 
ways, using various agencies, and accomplishing various 
results. Whatever God does through agencies is as truly 
His work as though He were the direct actor, since all 
His agencies are His creation— created by His own 
Power; just as a contractor for building is said to build 
a house, though he may never have lifted a tool upon it. 
He does it with his materials and through his agents. 
Thus, when we read that Jehovah God created the heavens 



and the earth, we are not to suppose that He personally 
handled them. He used an Agent. "He spake and 
it was done. He commanded and it stood fast." His 
holy Power was exercised through His Only Begotten. 
God's Spirit was exercised in times past through the 
Prophets. "They spake as they were moved by the Holy 
Spirit" [Power] of God. The masculine pronoun is 
often used in our Common Version Bible in referring to 
the Holy Spirit of God, because God, who is a Spirit, is 
represented as masculine, as indicative of strength. The 
pronoun translated he when referring to the Holy Spirit 
can with equal consistency be translated it, and is often 
so rendered. See Diaglott rendering of John 14:17,26, 
as an example. For further elucidation of this subject 
of the Holy Spirit, we refer the interested reader to our 
Fifth Volume of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Chapters 
8-11, where we have treated the subject at length. 



"One reads with father's specs upon his head, 

And sees the thing just as his father did; 

Another reads through Campbell or through Scott, 

And thinks it means exactly what they thought. 

Some read to prove a pre-adopted creed, 

Thus understand but little what they read; 

And every passage in the Book they bend 

To make it suit that all-important end. 

Some people read, as I have often thought, 

To teach the Book, instead of to be taught." 



R5749 : page 250 

MAKING FRIENDS OF THE UNRIGHTEOUS MAMMON 

"And I say unto you, Make to yourselves friends of the mammon 
of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may 
receive you into everlasting habitations."— Luke 16:9. 

GOD'S chosen heritage was the Jewish people. 
Under the Mosaic Covenant there were certain 
members of that nation who were representatives 
of God and of the people 
Israel. Therefore Jesus could say to His 
disciples, "The Scribes and Pharisees sit in 
Moses' seat. Whatsoever, therefore, they 
bid you do, that observe and do; but do not 
after their works; for they say and do not." 
(Matthew 23:2,3.) God had committed to 
them these special responsibilities, blessings, privileges 
and knowledge, and the people were more or less dependent 
upon them; and they were unjust in their dealings 
with the people. 
Through His Son, the Lord sent word to these Scribes 



and Pharisees that they were to be cast out of the 
stewardship. They had come to understand in a general 
way that a New Dispensation was coming in— the Gospel 
Age. John the Baptist, the forerunner of Christ, had 
also proclaimed that the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand. 
Now Jesus gives a parable, which explains the reason for 
the course which these classes should take. He assumes 
the case of an unjust steward who was called upon by his 
lord to render up his accounts, because his stewardship 
was about to end. 

When notified that his dismissal was at hand, this 
steward tried to make friends of all who were debtors to 
his master. No matter how unjust the steward had been 
with these debtors before, he now minimized their accounts, 
as he had a right to do. In olden times a steward 
had the right to make contracts, etc., for his master. So 
this steward cut down the accounts and made friends of 
the people. Commenting upon his course, our Lord said 
that this was a very wise procedure on the part of the 
steward, for thus he would be ingratiated into the favor 
of those who could help him. While our Lord commended 
this course as good worldly wisdom, He did not 
commend the steward's injustice, but his shrewdness in 
adopting a policy which would win the favor and friendship 
of those whom he had unjustly treated before. 

Applied to His time, our Master's words would teach 
that the Scribes and Pharisees should have sought to win 
the love and gratitude of their Jewish brethren. Had 
they tried to make the people happy and contented, it 
might have gone better with them afterward. But they 
did not do this; and when the great time of trouble came 
upon the nation, in the year 70 A.D., these religious rulers 

R5750 : page 250 

were among the chief mourners and sufferers in the 
trouble. They had not been as wise as the unjust steward. 

OUR PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY AS GOD'S STEWARDS 

Then our Lord applied the parable to His disciples, 
and gave them a lesson. "Likewise I say the same unto 
you." The application of the parable to His followers is 
somewhat different from its application to the Scribes 
and Pharisees. "I say unto you: Make for yourselves 
friends of the mammon of unrighteousness." In other 
words, the Lord's people are here advised to use whatever 
of the unrighteous mammon they may have in doing 
as much good as possible, in blessing and assisting others; 
and thus they will make grateful, appreciative friends. 

This does not mean that our good deeds and our use 
of whatever means the Lord has given us should be with 
a view to bringing commendation and material advantage 
to ourselves, but with a view to being of real service in 
blessing others along the lines laid down in the Scriptures. 
Thus the Lord's children make themselves truly worthy 



and pleasing to God. We believe this is a good plan to 
follow now. The Master declared that the children of 
this world are generally wiser than the children of light 
in recognizing what is for their best interests. 

TIME OF TROUBLE PICTURED IN FRENCH REVOLUTION 

The ecclesiastical powers of today are professedly 
sitting in the seat of Christ. The masses of the people 
know nothing better than what their religious rulers tell 
them. Now that these Doctors of the Law see the present 
Dispensation coming to an end, they should seek to 
correct their former mistakes in dealing with their flocks, 
should seek to make some reparation for all their past 
delinquencies. They have been to a greater or less extent 
hiding "the key of knowledge" (Luke 11:52), to a 
greater or less extent imposing on the superstitions of 
the people, and taking the people's money under false 
pretenses. They should now seek to rectify all this so 
far as possible by telling the people the truth. They 
should try to save themselves from the violence of the 
fall which is coming to them. Were they to do so they 
would not fall so hard when the great disaster comes. 
But in antagonizing the interests of the people more and 
more they are adding to their own distress in the near 
future, as the Scriptures point out. 

We should not be surprised if the priests and ministers 
will suffer more distress in the great trouble time nearing 
than will the people, because of their having hoodwinked 
the people. The Catholic priests suffered terribly 
at the time of the French Revolution, which was a picture 
on a small scale of the approaching great cataclysm. 
The French Revolution, we understand, is clearly referred 
to in Revelation 12:15,16. See also STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. 3, pp. 50-54, and pp. 64-69. We 
believe that the nominal church clergy and leaders will 
particularly suffer in the universal overthrow of the 
Present Order near at hand— some of them because they 
have actively opposed the Truth; some because of posing 
as representatives of truth and enlightenment and the 
liberties of the people, and failing really to stand for the 
truth which they recognized— keeping quiet about it for 
policy's sake. They have failed to conserve the interests 
which they pretended to serve. 

APPLICATION OF PARABLE TO THE SAINTS 

In applying the words of Jesus to ourselves, they 
would seem to teach that to whatever extent we have the 
mammon of unrighteousness, worldly goods, we should 
be inclined to be liberal rather than penurious, according 
to the measure of our ability. We take it that the Lord 
is showing us here that we as His followers have more 
or less of means, opportunity, influence, etc., and that we 
should use these talents He has given us in forwarding 
His Cause. And if in our presentations of Truth a certain 



amount of denunciation may be met with, we should 
rather let the matter go unnoticed and seek to be generous, 
so far as is compatible with faithfulness to the Lord and 
the spirit of His Word. 

The Master adds, "that when ye fail, they may receive 
you into everlasting habitations." Those who could receive 
us into everlasting habitations would be only the 
Lord and His angels. He has promised to receive all His 
faithful ones. Our use of the unrighteous mammon, our 
sacrificing of earthly interests, which might in some cases 
bring us blessings from men, would surely at last bring 
us the crowning blessing from the Lord, as is promised. 
Our failing will be the reaching of the end of our sacrificial 
course. All of the Lord's people are to die— that is 
the purport of their consecration; it is a sacrifice even 
unto death. If they are of this class who make friends 

R5750 : page 251 

with, or of, or through, the mammon of unrighteousness, 
if they sacrifice these earthly things, then when they fail, 
when they die, when they have finished their course, they 
will be received into everlasting habitations— the place 
prepared for the faithful class of "more than conquerors," 
the "House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens." 

We would not apply the word "they" necessarily to 
those of whom we made friends. God is our Friend, 
if we as His children live a life of self-sacrifice and 
ignore the selfish use of earthly mammon in favor of the 
service of the Lord. Then our friends, those who will 
receive us when we fail, will be not those alone or those 
necessarily who may have been benefited by our sacrifices, 
but will be especially those beyond the veil— the Father, 
the Lord Jesus, the glorified saints, and all the holy angels. 
Blessed expectation! 



R5750 : page 251 

TRESPASSES AND SINS AND THEIR EFFECT ON CHARACTER 

"All unrighteousness is sin: and there 
is a sin not unto death."— 1 John 5:17. 

WE SHOULD recognize a distinction between 

trespasses and sins. A sin is that which 

is more or less wilfully and intentionally 

committed. A trespass is a sin in a certain 

sense, but one committed without intention. 

The fact that a sin is called a trespass 

would imply that it was not done wilfully. 

The Divine Law stands whether we 

are able to keep it or not; and every violation 

of the Divine Law is a sin in one 

sense. But those violations of God's Law which are 



wholly the result of our unavoidable weaknesses are not 
culpable sins, and hence not in the same category with 
sins more or less wilful. 

So far as the world is concerned, it is already under 
condemnation for sin. Those who have accepted Christ 
and have received the forgiveness of their sins through 
Him, are spoken of by the Apostle Paul as those whose 
sins "are past, through the forbearance of God." 
(Romans 3:25.) Because of their consecration of their 
lives to be the followers of Christ these sins are forever 
gone, so far as responsibility for their transgressions is 
concerned. From this time on the Lord's people are 
counted no more as sinners, but as saints whose whole 
lives have been devoted to righteousness. 

Nevertheless, we have this treasure of the New Creature 
in earthen vessels, our mortal bodies. The New 
Creature in Christ does not expect to practise sin any 
more; for if he should sin wilfully, this would mean his 
entire repudiation of the Covenant into which he has 
entered with the Lord. But notwithstanding this, he 
will commit trespasses; for he has merely the good intentions 
of the heart, with only an imperfect body in 
which to operate. The Apostles recognized this fact. 
St. Paul declared that in his flesh dwelt no perfection. 
St. John says that whosoever says that he has no sin 
deceives himself, and the Truth is not in him. (1 John 1:8-10.) 
This same Apostle, in the same Epistle, declares 
that whoever sins is of the Devil. In this last 
text he evidently refers to the practise of sin, to wilful 
sin, not to unavoidable trespasses; for he has just said 
that all commit these unintentional violations of God's 
Law. St. James says that in many things we all offend. 
(James 3:2.) To will is present with every consecrated 
child of God; but how to perform is the problem. 

OUR ATTITUDE BECAUSE OF TRESPASSES 

According to the Scriptures it is sinful for the Lord's 
people to injure one another in word, act or thought. 
But many do not realize this high standard, even after 
they have come into the family of God. They may not 
learn until months, or even years afterward, the full 
measure of the Divine Law respecting every affair in 
life. Therefore there are many who for a time are guilty 
of evil-speaking and evil-thinking, but who are unconscious 
of having done wrong. These transgressions of 
the Divine Law are trespasses. This should be our attitude 
toward God: "Gracious Heavenly Father, we cannot 
do perfectly. We pray Thee, forgive our trespasses, 
as we forgive those who trespass against us. We come 
with courage to Thy Throne of Heavenly Grace, asking 
for the covering of the merit of our Savior for these 
trespasses, and for grace to overcome as far as possible 
and to become holy in thought, in word, in deed." 

But if any man sin, it is a different matter. In proportion 
as he wilfully violates the Divine Law, in that 



proportion he shall suffer stripes. Sins leave their mark 
on the character; for they are to some extent at least 
intentional violations of the principles of righteousness 
and of the Covenant with God by which every real 
Christian obligates himself to obey the Divine injunction. 
The Scriptures clearly indicate that if one of 
these deliberately sins, he commits the sin unto death, 
for which no penalty will be sufficient except the extinction 
of the Second Death. 

R5751 : page 251 

TRESPASSES NOT NECESSARILY A HINDRANCE 

The text, "If any man sin, we have an Advocate 
with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous," evidently 
refers to trespasses and not to deliberate, or wilful sins; 
for, as we have already noted, the same Apostle writes, 
"He that sinneth is of the Devil"; "that which is begotten 
of God sinneth not." Any one begotten of God, possessed 
of the Holy Spirit, could not, so long as he is in 
possession of this Holy Spirit, commit a sin with full 
intention. Except under the influence of strong temptation 
of the flesh, he could not sin knowingly; for if he 
were to commit such a sin, he would be manifesting that 
he had lost the Holy Spirit entirely. So long as the 
Holy Spirit abides in him he could not wilfully, intelligently, 
commit sin. He might be overcome by the weaknesses 
of the flesh, and thus might give a measure of 
consent to the wrong; but this would be only a partial 
sin. Yet for that portion which would involve the consent 
of his mind he would receive stripes, in proportion 
to the degree of wilfulness connected with the matter. 

Our unintentional trespasses, properly striven against, 
evidently do not interfere with the development of 
character. The implication of the Scriptures is that the 
New Creature who is properly growing is striving against 
all kinds of sin and imperfection and is waging a good 
warfare. In the case of trespasses which are unavoidable 
on his part, instead of doing him an injury, these 
serve to show him what points in his character are weak 
and need to be strengthened. He learns of his weaknesses 
only by more or less falling into trespasses unintentionally, 
unwillingly. As he finds weaknesses in his 
character-development, it becomes his pleasure and 
earnest effort to fortify himself along these lines, that he 
may become "strong in the Lord and in the power of 
His might."— Ephesians 6:10. 

THE SIN AGAINST THE HOLY SPIRIT 

Our Lord declared that all manner of sin and 
blasphemy shall be forgiven men except the blasphemy 

R5751 : page 252 



against the Holy Spirit. His thought here, we believe, is 

that because men are more or less imperfect in their 

judgment, on that account the Lord would be willing 

to forgive all such blemishes and trespasses; for they 

are unintentional. Hence there would be Divine forgiveness 

for some of the great trespasses and transgressions 

which they have committed. The crucifixion of 

our Lord was not really intentional. Speaking of those 

who crucified Christ the Apostle Peter says, "I wot, 

brethren, that through ignorance ye did it, as did also 

your rulers." St. Paul expresses the same thought, saying, 

"For had they known, they would not have crucified 

the Lord of Glory."— Acts 3:17; 1 Corinthians 2:8. 

These statements imply that this act was more or 
less of a trespass on the part of the perpetrators. There 
was a measure of sin, a measure of knowledge. In proportion 
as they had knowledge they had responsibility, 
and proportionately received stripes, nationally and individually. 
Therefore the Scriptures tell us that there 
will be future opportunities of blessing to those who 
crucified the Prince of Life. Their eyes will be opened 
when they awake. We are glad of this. They did not 
sin with full knowledge and wilfulness, and are not, 
therefore, subjects of the Second Death. They will have 
a future trial. But we understand they will come up 
merely as members of the race of Adam. They will 
have no special favor as Jews, and may require, indeed, 
many stripes. Some may never be recovered. 

What is it to sin against the Holy Spirit? We reply 
that the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of the Truth, of righteousness. 
Whoever recognizes the Spirit of the Truth, 
the Lord's Spirit, and intentionally does violence to it 
and to the messengers of that Truth, because they are 
its messengers, is sinning against the Holy Spirit; and 
to whatever extent one does this he is a wilful sinner. 
If his act be committed with full knowledge, full light, 
there would never be forgiveness for the sin, either in 
this life or in the life to come. And the end of that sin 
against full light and understanding would be the Second 
Death. While every intentional sin against the Holy 
Spirit, against the Truth, must have a punishment, 
whether in this Age or in the incoming Age, yet the punishment 
will not be the Second Death unless the knowledge, 
the sin, be a full, complete one. 



R5751 : page 252 

ELIJAH'S RETURN AND VICTORY 
-SEPTEMBER 5.-1 KINGS 18:16-40.- 



ELIJAH'S EXPERIENCES TYPICAL-KING AHAB AND QUEEN 
JEZEBEL ALSO TYPES-THREE AND A HALF YEARS' DROUGHT 
PREFIGURED TWELVE HUNDRED AND SIXTY YEARS OF 



SPIRITUAL DROUGHT-ELIJAH'S PRAYER OF FAITH BROUGHT 

NATURAL SHOWERS-CHURCH'S PRAYERS OF FAITH 
BROUGHT SPIRITUAL SHOWERS AND A GREAT REFORMATION. 

OUR lesson is interesting as we find it simply 

recorded in the Bible, but the interest of 

Bible students increases from the time they 

learn that Elijah was not only a Prophet of 

the Lord, but also a type of the Church's 

earthly experiences. The Book of Revelation (2:20-25; 

18:7) pictures to us Queen 

Jezebel as representing a great religious system 

of this Gospel Age which did great 

violence to the Truth. Ahab represented 

the worldly governments. His wife represented a false 

Christian Church system married to earthly governments. 

As Ahab represented the worldly governments 

claiming to be Christ's kingdoms, so Queen Jezebel pictured, 

or typified, a false Church system, which, instead 

of maintaining its purity as the virgin Church of Christ, 

became married or united to these earthly systems. Contrary 

to this, the true virgin Church of Christ was to 

remain faithful to her Heavenly Lord, awaiting His 

Second Coming; and her marriage to Him was then to 

be accomplished. 

As the Prophets of Baal were under the care of Queen 
Jezebel and under the patronage of King Ahab, so the 
priests and the religious representatives of a great 
church system have been the obedient servants of the 
great false institutions pictured by Ahab and Jezebel. 
Similarly, Elijah the Prophet and his dealings with Ahab, 
Jezebel and the affairs of Israel, was a type of the true 
Church of Christ in the flesh— this side the veil. Although 
the true Church is indeed represented symbolically 
by a woman, it is also represented sometimes by a 
man, when the picture includes the Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Head of the Church. 

In Revelation we have the three and a half years of 
Elijah's experience stated in symbolic language— forty-two 
months— 1,260 days— three and a half times or years. 
(Revelation 11:2,3; 12:6,14; 13:5.) In Revelation the 
time was symbolic, so that each day of the three and a 
half years represented a year, or the whole period 1,260 
years. Some Bible scholars have applied this period as 
beginning in 539 A.D. and ending in 1798 A.D., at the 
time when Napoleon Bonaparte took the Pope of Rome 
prisoner to Paris. 

As during Elijah's hiding in the wilderness there 
was no rain until he came forth, as told in today's lesson, 
so in the Church's experiences there was a lack of rain, 
a drouth spiritually, for twelve hundred and sixty years, 
ending in 1798. 

As just before the time of drought in Israel ended, 
there was a great contest (related in to-day's lesson), with 
the victory on the side of the Lord, so in the history of 
the Church a great contest took place between Catholicism 



and Protestantism in the period styled the Reformation. 
In the Revelation picture the Church, symbolized 
by a woman, is seen driven into the wilderness- 
lost to the general view. The woman corresponds in 
the type to Elijah hidden from view to the king, the 
queen and the prophets of Baal— in the world, but not 
of it. As Elijah was fed in the wilderness by the 
ravens, so the account in Revelation says that the woman, 
the true Church, secluded from general view, was, nevertheless, 
spiritually fed during the twelve hundred and 
sixty years in which the famine for spiritual food prevailed 
in the world. 

The Elijah class did a very courageous work after 
emerging from the wilderness condition. Spiritual refreshment 
came in abundant measure. For a time it 
looked as though Queen Jezebel had been vanquished, 
and that the slaying of her prophets with the Sword of 
Truth had demonstrated their errors and put the Truth 
of God and its servant, Elijah, the true Church, into a 
commanding position. However, this was not for long. 
Our next lesson will show us the Elijah class again fleeing 
from Jezebel's power. 

WHY DEPRIVED OF RAIN 

Many express surprise that in response to earnest 
Bible study the Word of God in our day is telling such 
a beautiful Message of Divine Wisdom, Justice, Love 

R5751 : page 253 

and Power— a Message very contrary to the teachings of 
the past. "How," they ask, "is it possible for Bible 
students of today to have so much more light on God's 
Word than was found by equally zealous Bible students 
of the past?" 

We reply that the twelve hundred and sixty years of 
spiritual drought are the explanation. About the year 300 
A.D., Christian bishops began to claim Apostolic powers 
and to style themselves Apostolic Bishops. The claim is 
still made that the bishops of the Church of Rome, of 
the Church of England, etc., are of equal authority with 
the twelve Apostles, while the Bible claims to the contrary 
—that the twelve Apostles selected by Jesus (St. 
Paul taking the place of Judas) were to be the only 
foundations of the Christian Church, their teachings being 
on a full parallel with those of the Lord Jesus— 
they being His special mouthpieces to the Church, orally 
and through their epistles. Jesus prophesied the falling 
away which would result in some falsely claiming to be 

R5752 : page 253 

Apostles. See Rev. 2:2. Compare 2 Pet. 2:1; Acts 20:30. 

This exaltation of the bishops came in gradually and 
was given great force by the action of Emperor Constantine 



in calling for a Church Council at Nice, Bithynia, 
325 A.D. The Council, under the Emperor's guidance, 
produced the Nicene Creed as representing the faith of 
the people of God. Subsequently that creed was impressed 
upon the people as being the only proper and 
infallible faith. Similarly, other additions to the creed 
were made later on by the bishops. The indorsement of 
these creeds implied that the bishops who made them had 
the right, the authority, the Divine revelation necessary 
for the work; and the people gradually endorsing the 
creeds were really endorsing at the same time the doctrine 
of Apostolic Succession, which was subsequently 
made a feature of the creeds. 

From the time the Nicene Creed was promulgated 
and accepted, 325 A.D., there was practically no more 
Bible study for over twelve centuries. During all that 
time Bible study was considered unnecessary, because 
the Apostolic Bishops had formulated the creeds as 
proper statements of the Church's faith. To study the 
Bible would have meant the studying of how to fight 
against the Emperor and the combined views and teachings 
of the bishops. Besides, Bibles, then written on parchment, 
were worth a fortune and possessed by few; and 
education necessary for reading was extremely limited. 

REVIVAL OF BIBLE STUDY 

Twelve hundred years after the first expression by 
the so-called Apostolic Bishops brings us to 1526, when 
the art of printing had become common. In that year 
Prof. Tyndale, having prepared his MS., published it in 
Germany, because of the opposition of the English 
clergy. He imported his New Testaments into London, 
in whose shops the people began to purchase them. 
Few were able to read; but many were glad to organize 
classes and to hire a reader, that they might know the 
Word of God. At this same time the Germans were 
learning something of the New Testament and its different 
teachings, from Luther and his associates. 

The Church of England bishops had heard about this 
New Testament. They forthwith bought up the entire 
edition in the shops, and publicly burnt them in front of 
St. Paul's Cathedral, London. They feared that the people 
would become interested in the words of Jesus and 
the Divinely-inspired Twelve Apostles; and that they, 
who had taken to themselves the title of "Apostolic 
Bishop," would become mere ciphers. They knew, too, 
that the eighteen Ecumenical Councils held during those 
twelve hundred years had declared to be true Christian 
faith many things not taught in the Bible, and that they 
had omitted many things that are taught therein. They 
feared that the people, becoming Bible students, would 
know of these things, and thus would be upset the general 
belief based in the creeds— and not in the Bible. 

We see, however, that their fears were almost groundless. 
The teachings of the creeds, impressed for twelve 



centuries, have so fastened themselves upon the minds 
of the people that they can read to the contrary in the 
Bible and never notice the discrepancy! However, 
a great Bible-study inclination came at that time to the 
British people. Several other translations were subsequently 
brought out, until finally the bishops considered 
it advisable to give the Bible to the people, impressing 
upon them the thought that the bishops had all along 
been upholding the Bible. Then, too, they warned the 
people against putting any construction upon the Bible 
that would make it different from the teaching of the 
so-called "Apostolic Bishops" in the creeds— threatening 
them with eternal torment. 

Interest in the Bible continuing, King James thought 
to popularize himself by authorizing a committee to 
prepare the so-called King James Version. While it was 
in preparation, the Roman Catholics, not to be outdone, 
produced a version entitled the Douay Bible— still in 
vogue. This also was given to the people, with the suggestion 
that it was in harmony with the creeds, and that 
any one interpreting it differently would be a heretic 
who could not be stopped even in Purgatory, but would 
pass straight on to eternal torture. 

As it was, Tyndale and some of the others interested 
in the Bible suffered martyrdom, as enemies of the 
"Apostolic Bishops," and their creeds and institutions. 
The conflict proceeded, as already suggested, until 1799, 
when the Bible came into great prominence, nearly all 
of our great Bible Societies of today having been organized 
within fifteen years after that date. The foretold 
period of spiritual drought having been ended, a great 
spiritual shower came to the world. Nevertheless, as 
our next lesson will show, Ahab, and especially Jezebel, 
were unchanged. Elijah's life being again in danger, he 
fled to the wilderness. 



PILGRIMS ALL, IN SOLEMN HASTE 

"Silent, like men in solemn haste, 
Girded wayfarers of the waste, 
We pass out at the world's wide gate, 
Turning our back on all its state; 
We press along the narrow road 
That leads to life, to bliss, to God. 

"We cannot and we would not stay; 
We dread the snares that throng the way; 
We fling aside the weight and sin, 
Resolved the victory to win; 
We know the peril, but our eyes 
Rest on the splendor of the prize. 

'"Tis but a little and we come 

To our reward, our crown, our Home! 



Another year, or more, or less, 
And we have crossed the wilderness; 
Finished the toil, the rest begun, 
The battle fought, the triumph won! 

"We grudge not, then, the toil, the way; 

Its ending is the endless Day! 

We shrink not from these tempests keen, 

With little of the calm between; 

We welcome each descending sun; 

Ere morn our joy may be begun!" 



R5752 : page 254 

ELIJAH'S FLIGHT AND VISION 

--SEPTEMBER 12.-1 KINGS 19:8-18.- 

JEZEBEL UNREPENTANT-AHAB UPHOLDS HER -ELIJAHS 
LIFE THREATENED-HE FLEES, DISCOURAGED-GOD GRANTED 

HIM A VISION OF THE FUTURE-THE WIND, THE 
EARTHQUAKE, THE FIRE, THE STILL, SMALL VOICE-WHAT 
THESE THINGS SIGNIFY NOW TO THE ANTITYPICAL ELIJAH CLASS. 

ELIJAH expected that, after three and a half 

years of Divine chastisement, followed by a 

special manifestation of Divine Power 

against the representatives of Baal, the true 

God and the true religion would have a 

measure of prosperity with the people. He 

was surprised to find Queen Jezebel bitter 

and murderous as ever and King Ahab fully 

dominated by her influence. He fled, sadly 

discouraged. After a long sleep, relieving 

his nervous strain, the Lord gave him, through an angel, 

a special message of comfort and food which lasted forty 

days, until he came to the Mount of God— Horeb. 

There Elijah went through a series of experiences 
(whether literal or in vision we may not be too certain), 
in which the Lord was to reveal Himself. First came 
the winds, rending the rocks; but God was not in the 
winds. Next came the earthquake, with destructive 
force; but God was not in the earthquake. Then followed 
the devouring fire, but God was not in the fire. 
Finally came the still, small Voice, which Luther's translation 
renders, "The Voice of Eden." God was in the 
Voice— it really and truly represented Him. This narrative 
multiplies in its force to Bible students when they 
realize that all these things which occurred to Elijah 
foreshadowed experiences with which the Church of 
Christ in the flesh is intimately connected. 

Jezebel still represents a form of godliness great and 
boastful, and supported by earthly power, represented in 
King Ahab. The picture intimates to us that the great 



social and religious upheaval of a century ago did not 
deeply affect or greatly alter the outward attitude of the 
Church nominal and the world toward the true Church 
of Christ in the flesh, represented typically by the Prophet 
Elijah. The reformation was partial only. Great institutions 
still upheld many of the serious errors of the 
past. The Elijah class again passed out of public view, 
though not out of communion and fellowship with God, 
Divine supervision providing for their necessities of 
rest and spiritual refreshment. 

Mount Horeb, otherwise called the "Mount of God," 
fitly represented in the picture Messiah's Kingdom. The 
coming of Elijah to it portrayed the fact that the Church 
will be in and under the Kingdom administration while 
still in the flesh, although the last members of the Church 

R5753 : page 254 

will not fully participate in the Kingdom honors and 
blessings until they shall have experienced the great 
resurrection "change" noted by St. Paul in the words, 
"We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed," 
for "flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of 
God."— 1 Corinthians 15:50-52. 

WHAT THE ANTITYPICAL ELIJAH SEES 

Many Bible students understand that chronologically 
Messiah's Kingdom began its operation in the world in 
the year 1878, while the last members of the Elijah class 
are still in the flesh. How soon the entire company of 
the Elijah class will pass beyond the veil and the Kingdom 
be ushered in with power and great glory is not 
definitely stated in the Bible. 

While in this condition Bible students the world over 
have been receiving of the Lord a special vision of the 
future. That is to say, through Bible study they have 
been learning that Messiah's Kingdom is to be inaugurated 
in a Time of Trouble such as was not since there 
was a nation— no, nor ever shall be afterward. (Daniel 12:1; 
Matthew 24:21.) They have learned that the 
winds of strife, the present war, have been held back for 
years by Divine Power, during the time when God's people 
have been assisted in Bible study, symbolically spoken 
of as the sealing of the saints in their foreheads. Revelation 7:1-4. 
These see the four parts of the great 
Divine Program which will usher in the Kingdom of 
God, for which so long God's saints have prayed, "Thy 
Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth, even as in 
Heaven." They see that the winds represent the war; 
that the earthquake of Elijah's vision represents a great 
social revolution, which will follow the great war, lapping 
upon it, perhaps. They see that, following the revolution, 
anarchy is to be expected, symbolized by fire, 
consuming, destroying, the present order of things— symbolically 
represented by St. Peter as consuming the ecclesiastical 



heavens and the social, financial and political 
earth, giving place to the new heavens, Messiah's Kingdom, 
and the new earth, society upon a new basis approved 
by the Kingdom. --2 Peter 3:10-13. 

In none of these great experiences coming to the 
world will God be manifest. They will all be merely 
preparatory, terrible experiences, to fit and prepare man 
for the Voice of Eden, which will subsequently be heard, 
bringing the message which will be "the desire of all 
nations." The same Voice of Eden is mentioned by the 
Lord through Zephaniah the Prophet, saying that first 
the fire of God's jealousy will consume the present order 
of things; and that then, following the fire, God will 
"turn to the people a pure Message, that they may all 
call upon the name of the Lord, to serve Him with one 
consent."— Zephaniah 3:8,9. 

FULFILMENT OF THE VISION BEGUN 

Bible students understand that these four great features 
of God's Plan portrayed to Elijah have already 
begun a fulfilment— that the present European war is the 
letting loose of "the four winds of heaven"— winds of 
strife. It is unnecessary to say that no such war has 
ever before been. Official reports show that more than 
twelve millions of men have already been either killed, 
wounded or captured, in the army. The world has been 
getting ready for this war for forty years and wondering 
why it did not come sooner. The newspapers have 
been declaring year after year that it would surely come 
before Fall or before Spring. Now we see why it has been 
held off— that the angels were commanded of the Lord 
not to loose the winds until the servants of God should 
be "sealed in their foreheads." 

This intellectual appreciation of God's Plan our Lord 
clearly foretold, saying to His people now living, "When 
ye see these things begin to come to pass, then lift up 
your heads and rejoice; for your deliverance draweth 
nigh." Bible students see these things beginning in the 
present war. They know what to expect in the near future. 
The fact that Elijah saw these things before he 
was taken up in the chariot of fire should not be understood 
to mean that all these experiences will be past before 
the Church will be translated, "changed in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye," but rather that all 
these things were shown to Elijah on the Mount of God 
as identified with the inauguration of the Kingdom. Then 
he had other experiences before he left. 

R5753 : page 255 

Some are inquiring why God permits such a great 
war. The Bible answer is that this war and all the 
other death experiences of our race are parts of a great 
Divine lesson on the exceeding sinfulness of sin. There 
is no war in Heaven— no sickness, no death, no sorrow, 



no pain, no insane asylums, no sanitariums, no doctors— 

because there is no sin there. But we have all these terrible 

conditions on earth because sin entered the world, 

as the Bible tells us, six thousand years ago, and because 

death is the penalty for sin— not eternal torment, as we 

were once taught. "The wages of sin is death"; "The 

soul that sinneth, it shall die." (Romans 6:23; Ezekiel 18:4.) 

The resurrection of the dead is the hope of the 

world, and is built upon the great sacrifice which Jesus 

gave when He died for our sins. 

THE ANTITYPICAL ELIJAH ENCOURAGED 

St. Paul, as well as Jesus, tells us about our day. He 
not only describes it as a day of symbolical fire, but he 
also assures us that all who are truly the Lord's people 
will be granted an opening of the eyes of their understanding 
to appreciate where we are. "The fire of that 
Day shall try every man's work of what sort it is." He 
tells us that all who build their faith and character with 
the gold, silver and precious stones of Divine Truth will 
pass through the fiery ordeal of this time safe— "kept by 
the power of God." Others who have built their faith 
and hope with the wood, hay and stubble of human tradition 
will suffer loss, though themselves may be saved 
by the fire. (1 Corinthians 3:11-15.) He tells us that 
that Day shall come upon all the world as a thief and as 
a snare. "But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that 
that Day should overtake you as a thief. Ye are all 
children of the light and children of the Day." Let 
us, therefore, walk in the light, as children of the light. — 
1 Thessalonians 5:1-6. 

As Elijah was discouraged until the Lord gave him 
the vision showing how He ultimately would be revealed 
through the winds, the earthquake, the fire and the still, 
small Voice, so it has been with the Church. There was a 
time during which much discouragement was felt, until 
the Lord began to make clear the Divine Plan by which 
Messiah's Kingdom would be inaugurated. Seeing this 
Plan, the Bible students are now lifting up their heads 
and rejoicing, as Jesus instructed, knowing that their 
deliverance will be inaugurated through the great Time 
of Trouble, of which they see only the beginning. 



R5753 : page 255 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
WATCH TOWER REFERENCES RE TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
[FROM 1907 TO 1915] 

MY DEAR PASTOR AND BROTHER:- 

Excuse me for taking a few moments of your valuable 



time. I write this message thinking perhaps it may be a 
means of assistance and blessing to some of the Lord's flock. 

In studying the TABERNACLE SHADOWS, certain questions 
often come up which might receive a more satisfactory answer. 
Few of the friends, however, have the time to look 
up past references in THE WATCH TOWER. Quite a while ago 
I made a list of every reference I could find in the TOWERS 
from 1907 to 1914, relating to the TABERNACLE, and when we 
went over the TABERNACLE in class I found the added references 
exceedingly helpful and satisfying. I thought I might 
pass the blessing along to others. Hence I enclose a list of 
them, and you may do with them as you see fit. Our Bible 
Helps give references up to 1907, and these take up from that 
year to 1914 and also some Convention Reports. 

God bless you, dear Brother, in all your labors of love, 
now and hereafter. You are constantly in my prayers. I love 
you and your work dearly. 

Yours in the One Hope, DAVID DAVID IAN. --Calif. 

WATCH TOWER REFERENCES 

Significance of Garments of Glory and Beauty Year 1910 Page 136 

Coals from the Altar— what they typified " 1910 " 137 

Atonement Day Type of Resurrection " 1910 " 138 

Condition of Israel on Day of Atonement " 1910 " 247 

Going Outside the Camp " 1910 " 150 

" " " " 1909 " 133 

Sins Borne by Scapegoat " 1910 " 235 

Lord's Goat and Scapegoat " 1911 " 426 

" " " " " 1911 " 234 

Melchisedec Priesthood— how long? " 1910 " 270 

Beginning of Melchisedec Priesthood " 1910 " 270 

Is Church Royal Priesthood Now? " 1910 " 318 

Priests or Levites— which? " 1910 " 283 

Court Condition— Progressive Justification and 
completed Justification " 1910 " 246 

Christ's Merit imputed at time of consecration. " 1910 " 206 
" " " " " " 1910 " 246 

Justification completed at Consecration " 1912 " 152 

' " 1912 " 184 

Court Condition " 1911 " 22 

Great Company as Levites " 1911 "22,23 

Melchisedec and Aaron as Types 

Do We enter the Holy as Individuals? 

" 1911 ' 

Falling into Great Company— not reinstated.. 

Two Altars Contrasted (Hebrews 13:10) 

Incense abode in Most Holy " 1911 " 239 

R5754 : page 255 

Incense and Satisfaction of Justice " 1911 " 239 

Who Typified by Levites? " 1911 " 348 

Why represented in Court?— Their Service After 

Day of Atonement " 1911 " 349 

Tentative Levites " 1911 " 349 



" 1911 " 


44 


" 1911 " 


235 


239 




.. " 1911 


" 235 


" 1911 " 


238 



Type Changes at Close of Age " 1911" 349 

Typical and Antitypical Gifts and Sacrifices " 1911 " 415 

Male and Female Distinctions to Cease— when? 

(Luke 20:34-36) " 1909 " 174 

Moses a Mediator before Aaron a Priest " 1909 " 325 

Levites had no Inheritance " 1912 " 152 

"Urim and Thummim" " 1912 " 186 

Great Company and First Resurrection " 1912 " 297 

Were the Atonement Day Sin-offerings for the year 

preceding, or for the ensuing year? " 1907 " 230 

Do., do., do " 1913 " 19 

Manifestation of High Priest " 1910 " 136 

White Robe of High Priest " 1910 " 136 

APPLICATION OF THE RANSOM 

Following references are helpful studied in connection with chapter 
IV., TABERNACLE SHADOWS-"The Great Day of Atonement:" 

World is not yet Bought Year 1912 Page 107 

Ransom Points to be Remembered " 1909 " 349 

Deliverance from the Curse " 1911 " 187 

Ransom— Application to all Mankind " 1911" 151 

Does our Lord Now own the human race? " 1910 " 199 

"Sold all he had and Bought" " 1909 " 379 

Christ Made a Curse for Israel " 1912 " 197 

What the Church Sacrifices " 1911 " 390 



WHEN THEIR HAPPY LIFE BEGAN 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

May the love of God be with thee! It has long been my 
desire to tell you my appreciation in my feeble way. Three 
years ago, I had the pleasure to listen to a workman in the 
Standard Oil Yard, Pt. Richmond, Cal. When I heard him 
I was amazed and coming home that night I told my wife 
that I had heard a man talk as none else before in my life, 
although I used to seek around for the Truth, but had failed 
to find that which I could love. My wife asked me to bring 
that man (Brother Starr) home, so I brought him home one 
night and I got some of my friends over to hear him. Thanks 
be to God for that night, for there began our happy life! 
Our home before that time was not very happy; but since 
then it has certainly changed. We are now consecrated to 
the Lord, and one of our friends, a sister, has done the same. 
Happiness untold in both homes is now to be found. 

The Lord has been feeding us from His storehouse, and 
each time when we read THE WATCH TOWER, and see the 
letters from the friends, I simply must pray for each one of 
them! It has been hard for me to learn certain lessons. I 
have prayed for patience and would forget time and time 
again. I am a hard workman and my associates are very 
impatient. So in a recent WATCH TOWER you told us to pray 
for love to be cultivated in us, and in the evening report to 



our Heavenly Father. Since then I have had great blessings 
along the line of patience. Both my wife and I love the 
brethren, for among them we spend all the time we can, 
thanking our Heavenly Father for his loving kindness to us. 
My wife is doing colporteur work as much as her strength 
permits, and we have both had great blessings therefrom. 
The six volumes have brought us untold happiness. Daily 
we pray the Lord to give you strength. We love you and ask 
you to include us in your petitions to the Lord that we may 
be among that Little Flock. 

BROTHER AND SISTER CHRISTIAN LARSEN.-Cal. 



page 256 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 257 

VOL. XXXVI SEPTEMBER 1 No. 17 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

Christian Duty and the War 259 

War's Demoralizing Influence 259 

Ministers as Recruiting Agents 260 

The Ultimate Design of the Law of God 261 

Definition of "Good Conscience" 262 

Honesty Respecting Faith Essential 262 

Full Deliverance Promised to God's Saints 264 

Human Works vs. Works of New Creature 265 

God's Part a Great Work 265 

Elijah's Work Before Ascension 266 

Lesson Taught by the War 266 

Why God Permits War 266 

"Yet Will I Rejoice in the Lord" (Poem) 267 

Obedience and Kingship 268 

Messiah's Kingdom Begun 268 

Restitution Blessings in Kansas 268 

The Two Parts of the Harvest Work 269 

The Plowman Overtaking the Reaper 269 

Promote the World's Peace 270 

Interesting Letters 271 

page 258 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



I.B.S.A. CONVENTION, HERSHEY, PA., SEPT. 5-12 

Hershey is described as a delightful, quiet place, exactly 
suitable for an I.B.S.A. Convention. It is a new little 
city, whose chief enterprise is the manufacture of the Hershey 
Chocolates, etc. The I.B.S.A. have been invited to have 
an eight-day Convention there and are promised every possible 
convenience for the comfort of the gathering. Board 
and lodging can be had at from One Dollar per day upward. 

We are not expecting delegates from far-off places, but 
we believe Hershey will be a very convenient place for quite 
a good many residing in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Delaware, 
Maryland and Virginia. There will quite probably be a thousand 
in attendance. Those who can afford it should count 
on $1.50 a day for expenses, besides railway fare, although, 
as stated, $1.00 would be a possibility. 

Railroad Rates.— All roads in the Trunk Line Assn. 
(Middle Atlantic States) have granted a special rate of 2c 
per mile, in each direction; tickets on sale Sept. 3 to 5, with 
final return limit Sept. 15. Where ten or more travel together, 
a still greater saving may possibly be effected by the 
purchase of a common ticket on the theatrical plan. Confer 
with your local agent, mentioning I.B.S.A. Convention. 

Those desiring to attend will please advise the Convention 
Committee, 13 Hicks Street, Brooklyn, N.Y., at once. 



PASTOR RUSSELL'S SERMONS IN SPANISH 

Sermons in Spanish will appear in La Prensa of Los 
Angeles, Cal., weekly. A clubbing rate of $2 per year has 
been arranged for, through H. A. Varro, 755 S. Flower St., 
Los Angeles, Cal. 



CURE FOR PYORRHEA DISCOVERED 

Doctors and dentists are elated over the discovery of a 
cure for pyorrhea. This disease affects the teeth, gradually 
producing slight inflammation and pus. Since learning what 



pyorrhea is and how to cure it, doctors declare that it has 
been responsible for many other diseases— indigestion, bowel 
trouble, etc. 

The medicine is Ipecac. Expert dentists and physicians 
inject the Ipecac at the roots of the affected teeth— sometimes 
hypodermically into the veins. For those who cannot have 
the service of a competent dentist we recommend tincture of 
Ipecac, to be used twice a day on the gums, letting it soak to 
the roots of the teeth. Also we recommend that Ipecac be 
taken internally, one drop of the tincture in a little water for 
a dose. 



R5758 : page 258 

THE GENERAL WORK NOT INTERRUPTED 

A notice in THE WATCH TOWER to the effect that a goodly 
number of the friends had left Bethel has been misunderstood. 
Those who left are quite competent to earn their own living, 
and more. They left Bethel in as good financial condition as 
they came to it, because all expenses were met while here. 

The general work is not interrupted, but proceeds as usual. 
Only the Drama Department and the Newspaper Department 
were particularly affected by the curtailment of expenses. The 
pilgrim work progresses as usual; also the Colporteur Work 
and the Tract Distribution. In the latter case, however, we 
are making one change; we prepay postage or express or 
freight charges only on regular volunteer matter and on small 
sample parcels of mail. We have learned with regret that 
some who have ordered free literature have not been careful 
of their stewardship, but have allowed the literature to lie 
idle, unused. If now they pay the express charges, it will 
make them more careful not to order more than they will 
use. In the case of volunteer matter supplied to classes, it 
is our understanding that the Class Secretary takes responsibility. 
Free literature for the announcement of Pilgrim visits 
will be classed in with the regular volunteer matter to be sent 
express prepaid. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR OCTOBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
October follow: (1) 149; (2) 282; (3) 114; (4) 105; (5) 22; (6) 
273; (7) 112; (8) 160; (9) 261; (10) 166; (11) 128; (12) 313; (13) 
50; (14) 325; (15) 104; (16) 279; (17) Vow; (18) 145; (19) 199; 
(20) 245; (21) 130; (22) 168; (23) 267; (24) 235; (25) 222; (26) 
305; (27) 303; (28) 19; (29) 324; (30) 283; (31) 119. 



R5754 : page 259 

CHRISTIAN DUTY AND THE WAR 

AS THE war progresses a bitter, partisan spirit 

spreads. The people of each of the warring 

nations are convinced that right is on 

their side, and that everything to the contrary 

is wrong. The sense of justice seems 

more and more to go blind. Any attempt 

to consider matters justly, equitably, is resented 

as disloyalty, stupidity, etc. The 

best elements of the natural man seem to 

be paralyzing under the influence of the 

war. Germany and her allies claim that they have maintained 

the world's peace for thirty years, during all of 

which time their jealous neighbors, noting their prosperity, 

have sought to hinder it and have awaited only a 

favorable moment for attempting their destruction. To 

them their commercial progress and attempt to build a 

navy proportionate to their population have aroused the 

jealousy of their neighbors already entrenched commercially 

on the sea. 

They claim that Belgium was not neutral, but conniving 
with their enemies, and that, any way, the passing of 
German armies through Belgium was a military necessity. 
Similarly they claim that the protection of their 
national life against the European combination makes 
necessary their submarine warfare and blockade and 
other things which they do not prefer. They claim, too, 
that necessity knows no law, that this is the hour of 
their necessity, and that the object of war is success— to 
be obtained as honorably as possible, but to be obtained. 

Britain and her allies take the contrary view. They 
declare that for forty years they have noted the progress 
of the Germans and considered it a menace to their 
rights. Accordingly, the French maintained an army of 
equal size with Germany; Russia, an army of double the 
size; while Great Britain has striven to have a navy 
stronger than that of all the remaining nations of the 
world. If Germany be not crushed now, her spirit of 
progress will ultimately put her at the head of the nations, 
commercially and financially. This would mean that all 
the other nations would be less powerful proportionately. 
They see in this a terrible nightmare of militarism. Germany 
must be crushed at any cost, not only for the sake 
of the present, but also for the sake of future generations. 

The Bible declares, "God is not in all their thoughts." 
(Psalm 10:4.) Although all the nations of the Continent, 
except the Turks, style themselves Christian nations, 
not one of them manifests any faith in God. They all 
feel that the entire responsibility, both for the present 
and for the future, rests altogether upon themselves. 

"FEAR HATH SURPRISED THE HYPOCRITES" 



Convinced of having a Divine commission and with 
sundry forms of godliness, but without any of its power 
or faith, many of these nations are only now awakening 
to the fact that this war is not like other wars— that God 
has let loose the winds, is no longer restraining them. 
The time has come for Him to allow the angry passions 
of men to bring the whirlwind of trouble, which shortly 
will lead on to revolution and then to anarchy, and will 
thus prepare the way of the Lord and His Kingdom. 

What a sad spectacle the war presents— twenty millions 
of soldiers engaged, at a cost of over forty million 
dollars per day for their maintenance! Twelve millions 
of men in the prime of life have already been wounded, 
captured or killed. The consumption of ammunition is 
astounding. One of the British ministers recently declared 
that in one battle in Belgium the British forces 
used more ammunition than in the entire Boer War! 

National debts were already enormous, and British 
consols (bonds) were selling at twenty-five per cent, less 
than their face value before this war began. Can any 
rational person suppose that the debts of the warring 
nations represented by their bonds will ever be paid? 
And when the people shall realize the meaning of all 
this and of the crash of financial institutions which this 
will involve, the discovery will be terrible. The only 
logical result to be expected of the discouraged people 
will be as the Bible predicts— so great an earthquake as 
was not since man was on the earth— social earthquake, 
revolution, gigantic in its character.— Rev. 16:18. 

WAR'S DEMORALIZING INFLUENCE 

Professed ministers of Christ of various denominations 
seem to be vying with each other in leaving the 
Great Captain of our Salvation and His standard of 
peace and love in order to associate themselves more and 
more with militarism. Appealed to by the representatives 
of the Government, these professed representatives 
of the Prince of Peace are making themselves popular 
with their governments by preaching war. We hear 
only a little from Great Britain along these lines, but the 
suggestion of the Bishop of London is quite sufficient on 
this point. His suggestion urges boys and girls to marry 
early and to raise large families, presumably for mortal 
combat— not to be soldiers of the Cross of Christ and 
followers of the Lamb, but soldiers of the Cross of St. 
George which marks the British flag. 

Recently in Canada the Editor was astounded by the 
activity of the preachers there— especially those of the 
Church of England. One was out in Khaki uniform 

R5755 : page 260 

marching through the streets with the volunteers. Asked 
by a college friend, "Did I see you in the ranks?" he 
answered, "Yes; I wanted to encourage the boys." "And 



did you think of going to the front, to the trenches?" 
"Not a bit of it!" He was merely acting as a decoy to 
get others to the front; just as a bull they have at one 
of the Chicago stockyards which meets the animals about 
to be slaughtered and, tossing his head in the air, becomes 
their leader up the gangway leading to the 
slaughter. There he knows his little niche, into which 
he glides and is sheltered; while the others drive and 
press one another forward to the slaughter. But it is in 
the pulpit that the minister has his opportunity to address 
the mothers— "Why not have your boy go to the front?" 

MINISTERS AS RECRUITING AGENTS 

To give the matter a religious coloring, some of these 
ministers have taken texts from the Bible, which certainly 
have no application whatever to the subject in 
hand. The text of one in preaching about the valor of 
the Canadians who lost their lives in war was, "Blessed 
are the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth." 
(Revelation 14:13.) The text of another, intended to 
encourage enlistment, etc., was, "These are they that 
follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth."— Rev. 14:4. 

What a terrible perversion! And for what a purpose! 
To inflame the passions of humanity, to deceive people, 
to get them to do the very thing which Christ has directed 
shall not be done. Such ministers may gain favor and 
influence with their earthly king and his ministers and 
representatives in the government, but how will they 
stand with the other King, whose Empire is to be inaugurated 
with the great Battle of Armageddon, to which 
this present war is leading? We tremble to think of their 
responsibility, if they know what they are doing. 

It is quite possible that they do not realize the true 
situation. Ninety-five per cent, probably, of all the 
educated ministers in all the great cities have confessed 
for years that they do not believe the Bible. Indirectly 
they have admitted that they merely use it as a book 
from which to select texts because the common people 
have a sort of superstitious respect for it. They have 
gotten so in the habit of selecting texts without any 
reference to the contexts— so in the habit of deceiving 
themselves and their trusting flocks— that they probably 
do not realize what they are doing and how they are 
misrepresenting the Word of God. We know that the 
Lord's judgment in all cases will be just; we defer to it. 

The ministers of Toronto, to show their patriotism 
and their confidence that the war is of God, that all the 
holy angels are applauding the recruits and that they will 
all go to Heaven at death, etc., etc., we suppose, have 
raised a purse of money for the purchase of a Gatling 
gun, to be carried across the seas and used to kill German 
Christians— in whose Christianity they have no 
confidence and evidently believe that God has none. The 
viewpoint of Bible students is that the fact that both 
British and Germans claim ninety-five per cent, of their 



population to be Christians is no proof that they are such 
really. Hence the Toronto preachers, in purchasing the 
Gatling gun to kill Christians, are quite right, probably, 
in supposing that they will not be killing real Christians, 
just as Bible students feel doubts that all Toronto 
ministers are Christians, in the true sense of the word. 

THE CHRISTIAN'S PROPER ATTITUDE 

Meanwhile, where do the true followers of Christ 
stand, and what is their duty? Bible students more and 
more are awakening to a realization of what the present 
war is, and are conscientiously inquiring respecting their 
own responsibility. Some have inquired in respect to the 
situation in connection with the manufacture of war 
ammunition. Our advice to them has been to avoid engaging 
in such work as this, except as the money would 
be absolutely necessary to provide food and shelter for 
their families and themselves. And then, taking such a 
situation merely as a matter of necessity, we recommend 
that it be vacated as speedily as something else can be 
found, no matter how poor the pay, if it will provide 
life's necessities. 

We are not unaware that this is a far-reaching subject, 
and that many would class us as narrow in the 
giving of such advice. Some would tell us that we carry 
this matter to an extreme; that on the same principle an 
employee of a railroad or steamboat should avoid loading 
such war munitions, the bill-clerk object to his part of 
the matter, the stenographer to his, etc. We would say 
that so far as reasonably possible we should avoid having 
anything to do with these implements of destruction, but 
if compelled from necessity, should hold our situation only 
until one for a better cause could be obtained. 

In SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. VI., we have set forth a 
suggestion that the followers of Christ seek by every 
proper means to avoid participation in war. We there 
suggested the possibility, but that in the event of 
conscription the Lord's followers should use all their 
influence toward obtaining positions in the Hospital 
Corps or in the Provision Department of the Army, rather 
than in the actual warfare. We suggested further that 
if it were impossible to avoid going into the trenches, it 
would still not be necessary to violate the Divine requirement, 
"Thou shalt do no murder." 

We have been wondering since if the course we have 
suggested is the best one. We wonder if such a course 
would not mean compromise. We reflect that to become 
a member of the army and to put on the military uniform 
implies the duties and obligations of a soldier as recognized 
and accepted. A protest made to an officer would 
be insignificant— the public in general would not know 
of it. Would not the Christian be really out of his place 
under such conditions? 

"But," some one replies, "if one were to refuse the 
uniform and the military service he would be shot." 



We reply that if the presentation were properly made 
there might be some kind of exoneration; but if not, 
would it be any worse to be shot because of loyalty to 
the Prince of Peace and refusal to disobey His order than 
to be shot while under the banner of these earthly kings 
and apparently giving them support and, in appearance 
at least, compromising the teachings of our Heavenly 
King? Of the two deaths we would prefer the former- 
prefer to die because of faithfulness to our Heavenly 
King. Certainly the one dying for his loyalty to the 
principles of the Lord's teachings would accomplish far 
more by his death than would the one dying in the 
trenches. We cannot tell how great the influence would 
be for peace, for righteousness, for God, if a few hundred 
of the Lord's faithful were to follow the course of 
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, and refuse to bow 
down to the god of war. Like those noble men they 
might say, "Our God is able to deliver us, if He chooses 
so to do; but if He does not choose to deliver us, that 
will not alter our course. We will serve Him and follow 
His direction, come what may." 

Those Hebrews of the past cast into the fiery furnace 
because of their faithfulness to God, but afterwards delivered, 
are a noble example. Indeed, the millions of 
soldiers enduring terrible privations through loyalty to 

R5755 : page 261 

earthly kings during the present great war are wonderful 
examples and illustrations. May not the soldiers of 
Christ well say to themselves, "If the Ancient Worthies 
knew God only partially, yet were so faithful to Him, 
and if these earthly soldiers are so faithful to earthly 
kings, what manner of persons ought we to be who have 
come into the family of God by the Spirit of begetting, 
who have entered the School of Christ, who are being 
guided and led by the Captain of our Salvation, and who 
have His exceeding great and precious promises in respect 
to our eternal future! How should we stand for 
Him and for His teachings? Could we lay down our 
lives in a better way than by faithfulness to the King 
of kings and Lord of lords, our Redeemer and Head?" 

We are not urging this course. We are merely suggesting 
it. The responsibility fully belongs with each 
individual. We are discharging our responsibility toward 
many Bible students who are inquiring of us respecting 
the mind of the Lord on this subject. We gave them 
our best thoughts previously, but now fear that we were 
too conservative. We always advocate conservatism, in 
the sense of not rushing into difficulties simply because 
they are difficulties and would mean trouble. But we do 
advocate that, while seeking to avoid trouble and to live 
peaceably with all men, where duty calls, or danger, we 
should not be wanting there. 



R5755 : page 261 

THE ULTIMATE DESIGN OF THE LAW OF GOD 

"The end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart, 
and a good conscience and an undissembled faith." 
— 1 Timothy 1:5. 

WE HAVE in the above text the summing up 

of the Divine Law in the word "commandment." 

As a matter of fact, there are various 

commandments, all of which were in a 

general way represented in the Decalogue. 

Our Lord divided these commandments into 

two parts, declaring that these two parts were 

a synoptical statement of the entire Law 

of God. A law is a commandment, imposed 

by rightful authority— a rule of conduct 

which we are bound to obey. The children of Israel did 

not appreciate the commandments given in the Law. To 

them it consisted of merely so many statements of what 

they should do and what they should not do— no more. 

They did not get the proper scope of the matter. Even 

the Christian Church has largely failed to get a comprehensive 

view of the Divine Law. 

R5756 : page 261 

We are not to think of the Law as imperfect, for God, 
being perfect, could not give an imperfect law. God's 
Law, or commandment, then, is perfect. Speaking of the 
Law the Apostle Paul writes, "The Law is holy, and the 
commandment holy, and just and good." (Romans 7:12.) 
The reason why the Israelites could not keep the Law 
was not that the Law was imperfect, but that they were 
sold under sin, as the Apostle declares. (V. 14.) We 
recognize the Law as being the standard of perfection. 
Our Lord, when He came, "magnified the Law and 
made it honorable." He showed how grand and far-reaching 
the Law is when fully comprehended. 

It is impossible for any of the fallen race to live up 
to the requirements of God's perfect Law, because of 
the imperfections and weaknesses of the flesh. In the 
case of the Church, this impossibility is removed by 
Christ. "The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in 
us," because God has made this arrangement for us, 
that the merit of Christ shall cover our imperfections 
and shortcomings. This enables us to live in full harmony 
with this Law; for we can keep it in spirit, though 
not fully in letter, and the blood of Jesus makes up for 
all the rest— our unwilling imperfections. 

PURE, UNSELFISH LOVE 

The Apostle speaks here of "the end of the commandment." 



The expression seems somewhat obscure. 
The thought seems to be this: the ultimate purpose of the 
Law, that which it is designed to produce, is love— to 
bring us to the place where we shall be in full harmony 
with the One who made the Law, and who is Himself 
the embodiment of Love. This will be the final result of 
God's Law to all who receive it. He wishes that those 
who are perfect shall remain perfect, and that those who 
are imperfect shall see the proper standard for all Jehovah's 
creatures to be a just standard, a loving standard; 
that God is to be obeyed, not from compulsion, but 
from love for Him and for the principles of righteousness. 
It is His ultimate purpose that all His intelligent 
creatures who will be granted eternal life must be perfect, 
in full harmony with their Creator. 

The Apostle proceeds to point out that this love required 
by God's Law must be of a certain quality. We 
can understand the love of a parent for a child, the love 
of a person for an animal— quite proper if not carried 
to an extreme. There might be more or less selfishness 
in such love. A person might love a dog because it was 
his dog, or love his child because it was his child. This 
love, therefore, would have a selfish feature and would 
not be the disinterested kind, the benevolent kind, not 
the highest form of love. The love that would fulfil all 
the requirements of God's Law would be "love out of a 
pure heart." 

Love can be entertained in a heart not altogether 
pure. There can be a mixture of love and selfishness, 
and this is very generally the case with fallen humanity. 
Even as Christians our love may be only partly pure 
at first, but gradually the spirit of the commandment, 
received into our heart, should purge out the selfishness. 
Godlike love would mean love for God's Truth, love for 
His holy Law, love for His creatures. It is an unselfish 
love, as is the love of God. God has nothing to gain by 
all He is doing for the Church or purposes to do for the 
world. He does it out of a pure heart, out of a good, 
benevolent, loving heart— not to see what He can get 
out of it. 

A pure heart is one which has no selfishness in its 
motives; it has a desire to do good to all, to do evil to 
none, to see others blessed as well as itself; to love and 
serve God perfectly, with all its powers. Our Lord 
commended this condition of heart, saying, "Blessed are 
the pure in heart; for they shall see God." It is very 
evident, then, that such a pure-hearted person is not 
merely one who starts out in the Christian life with a 
good intention. All who start in the Christian life do so 
with a good intention; but they must be instructed and 
educated. They must develop to perfection this purity of 
heart. Hence the experiences of the Christian are for 
the very purpose of bringing his heart into this condition 
of pure, unselfish love. 

At the beginning of the Christian way our hearts are 
pure in the sense of being sincere, truthful. We mean 



what we say, what we profess. We are not merely drawing 
near to God with our lips and not with our hearts. But 

R5756 : page 262 

love out of a pure heart, this purity of love referred to 
in our text, is attained by the putting off more and more 
of the things of selfishness and the putting on more fully 
of the Lord's Spirit. The Apostle is addressing these 
words to Christians, implying that they have some of 
these things to put off after they have become Christians. 
"Put off all these— anger, malice, envy, hatred, strife," 
works of the flesh and of the Devil. These things more 
or less attach to you. And put on all these— meekness, 
self-control, patience, faith, long-suffering, gentleness, 
brotherly-kindness, love. As we do these things, our 
hearts will be in the attitude the Apostle mentions. We 
shall have attained that which God purposes, designs; 
namely, "love out of a pure heart." 

DEFINITION OF "GOOD CONSCIENCE" 

The Apostle proceeds to say, "and a good conscience." 
Conscience seems to be that moral quality of the mind 
which admonishes in regard to right and wrong. Some 
persons have a keen conscience and can quickly discern 
as to what is right and what is wrong. Others have 
a very dull conscience and find it difficult to determine 
between right and wrong, or else are measurably indifferent 
as to the moral quality of their course. While 
God created man with a good conscience, ability to determine 
accurately what is right and what is wrong, 
sin has depraved this conscience. Hence it is the duty 
of every Christian to get his conscience made right, to 
educate his conscience to discern correctly. God lays 
down the principles of righteousness in His Word. It 
is through the Law of God that the Christian is able 
to discern these principles, to see what is right or wrong 
in principle. 

The Golden Rule admonishes us, Do unto your neighbor 
as you would have him do unto you under similar 
circumstances. Consider what you would like to have 
your neighbor do unto you under certain circumstances 
and conditions, and thus help conscience to see what is 
the right thing to do. There are many things which are 
morally wrong, which are forbidden in the Law of 
God. These would be more readily discerned by the 
conscience, as there could be but one course of action 
possible in harmony with the expressed will of God 
on the matter. But there are other things which require 
a conscience trained to fine discernment. The 
Golden Rule is especially helpful here. As the principles 
of righteousness become firmly established in our characters, 
there is little difficulty in discerning the course of 
duty and of love. 

One whose conscience has not been properly trained 



by the Word of God might be entirely honest and yet be 

pursuing a wrong course. A man might follow a certain 

course for years; he might have been doing so with 

all good conscience, that is, in all sincerity. Perhaps 

long after he has become a Christian he would come to 

see that something he had been practising was not wise 

or proper. He would say, "I see now that I have been 

taking a wrong view of this matter. Hereafter I shall 

be better able to see my proper course under such circumstances. 

I realize that the principle of justice needs 

to be thoroughly ingrained in my being in order that I 

may be more pleasing to God. Christian love goes beyond 

justice, but justice must come first." A properly 

developed Christian has a properly educated conscience. 

A "good conscience," as used in our text, is a rightly 
educated conscience. It is not one which is always accusing 
its owner, making him feel that he is always doing 
wrong. There are morbid consciences which are 
constantly accusing, not able to get a proper balance. 
A truly good conscience is one which is well balanced. 
One may have a scale, for instance, that is perverted 
either one way or the other. A scale which is rightly 
adjusted will stand level. It is reliable. And so with a 
good conscience— it is one which can determine the 
slightest deviation from God's Law. 

HONESTY RESPECTING FAITH ESSENTIAL 

Lastly, St. Paul adds, "and an undissembled faith." 
An undissembled faith is a faith that is properly represented 
to others. It is not deceitful. To dissemble is 
to misrepresent. We are to have a faith which is not 
misrepresented, which is undissembled, as the Apostle 
says. We as Christians have a certain standard set 
before us in the Lord's Word. We are to go beyond the 
Law. We are under a still higher Law— the Law of sacrificial 
Love. Our faith takes hold of things not seen as 
yet, that portion of the Lord's arrangement for us which 
goes beyond what is now visible to us with the natural 
eye. Whatever the Lord has revealed to us that our 
faith has been able to accept as His will, must be held 
honestly and loyally. We must be honest with respect 
to our faith and in respect to our life. 

There are many who may have a good conception of 
justice and who may be fine people in many ways, and yet 
they might dissemble as regards their faith. They might 
think more or less that the end justifies the means, and 
that they might profess something in regard to their 
faith which would be for the good of someone else, even 
though it would not be true. There are people all over 
the world who thus dissemble in respect to their faith. 
They misrepresent their faith. They do not believe what 
they are teaching or what they profess to believe. 

Many are teaching eternal torment. If you ask them 
as to their belief on this subject, they will say, "I do 
not believe that doctrine, but it seems necessary to 



R5757 : page 262 

preach it." Others are teaching Higher Criticism, Evolution, 

New Thought, etc.,— deceiving and being deceived 

—yet still claiming to be Christians. All such 

people are in a wrong condition. Unless they speedily 

correct this they will not be fit for the Kingdom; for 

the purpose of the Law, Love, is to be fulfilled in those 

who will be accepted for that high and honorable station. 

This love requires, first of all, supreme loyalty 

to God, which means loyalty to His Word. What is the 

use of having an end of the Law, an ultimate object of 

the Law, if that end, that object, is never to be attained? 

Christ met this end, or object, of the Law. The righteousness 

of the Law was fulfilled in Him actually. The 

true Church now reach this in spirit. That is to say, 

their hearts, their minds, are in harmony with this Law; 

and they are striving day by day to more and more bring 

their lives— their words, thoughts and actions— into full 

accord with this perfect Law of Love. 

THE LAW OF THE NEW CREATION 

The Scriptures everywhere represent that in God's 
estimation love is the principal thing. Neither justice 
nor other qualities, other virtues, are ignored; but this 
quality is placed at the very top of the list of Christian 
graces. From the list which the Apostle Paul gives of 
the fruits of the Holy Spirit, we see that at the head 
he places love, then come joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, self-restraint. (Galatians 5:22,23.) 
The Apostle Peter gives the list of 

fruits of the Spirit as cumulative— as a process of addition, 
leading up to the sum of all the graces. He begins 
with faith, the foundation. Then are to be diligently 
added, fortitude, knowledge, self-restraint, patience, 

R5757 : page 263 

brotherly love, then the broad love which includes 
all the world, even our enemies. 

We are to remember, however, that love is not something 
which is instantly developed. It grows. Therefore 
those who have some love today, something of this 
Holy Spirit, may have more of it tomorrow, still more of 
it in a year; for it is a matter of development. Since 
God Himself is love, the implanting of the Divine likeness 
in humanity six thousand years ago when Father 
Adam was created signifies that God gave man the quality 
of love. Even in man's fallen condition we see this 
manifested more or less on every hand— natural love. 
This in many cases has become considerably perverted 
into self-love. But there are some very noble people 
who have a considerable degree of love naturally, who 
have much of original Godlikeness still remaining. They 



have much less to overcome in this direction than those 
who are more selfish. All the elements of sin seem to be 
more or less connected with selfishness— thus warring 
against the best interests of the individual. 

The love which the Bible commends to us as New 
Creatures is the love which had its start in our spirit-begetting. 
Whoever has been begotten of the Spirit of 
God has some of this pure, unselfish love of which St. 
Paul speaks. In proportion as one grows as a New 
Creature, he grows in love— so that he may gradually 
be filled, his capacity for love increasing in proportion 
to his growth. At the beginning of our Christian experience, 
we merely have a beginning of love, as it were. 
This is to spread and fill our whole system. This love 
of God will make us more loving, kind, gentle, toward 
our friends, toward everybody, even toward animals. 

But the Scriptures draw attention to the fact that as 
the love of God develops in us it will have a special 
interest in the brethren— those who have received the 
same Spirit. Therefore, wherever the Spirit of God is 
it will have a sympathetic flow toward others of the 
same spirit. Whoever has the Spirit of God at all will 
be sure to love his brethren, because he will see the 
mind of God in them; and this love will increase as he 
develops and as he sees development in the brethren. 

All the brethren in Christ, however, have imperfect 
bodies, and therefore can give but imperfect expression 
to the spirit of love. And since the brethren are brought 
closer together through their common hopes and ambitions, 
they are likely to become more of a trial to each 
other than are the world. They are tempted sometimes 
to say to a brother or a sister, "Well, you do not show 
much of the spirit of love!" Thus the spirit of criticism 
is aroused, and love is put to the test. In proportion 
as we grow in love, this spirit of love will be ours 
and we shall take a kindlier view of the frailties of the 
brethren. Our daily experiences should teach us more 
and more of our own shortcomings. The discovery of 
our own faults and the battling with them should humble 
us. Whoever realizes his own shortcomings should extend 
the feeling of sympathy toward his fellow pilgrims 
in the Heavenly way, who are fighting similar battles. 
Unless we do so we shall not be pleasing to our God. 

The fact that the brethren have this Spirit of God 
and are seeking to develop love, however much they may 
come short of their own ideals and of our ideals for 
them, demands that we love them. Our sympathy for 
them must broaden and deepen so that if we see them 
overtaken in a fault we shall seek to restore them in 
love, remembering ourselves, lest we also be tempted. 
As to the depth of love we should manifest, it is clearly 
laid down in the Scriptures. We should love the brethren 
as Christ loved us. This is very broad. Christ 
loved us to the extent that He was willing to lay down 
His life for us. We should be full of love, sympathy, 
for our brethren in Christ, desiring to be helpful to 



them. Whatever we do for them is a manifestation of 
our love for the Lord. 

The Lord has arranged that our love for the brethren 
and our laying down our lives for them and in their 
defense is all done to Him; and He so esteems it. If 
the time should come when it would be necessary, there 
should be a readiness to lay down our lives for them. 
But more particularly, we are to lay these down inch 
by inch in their service, whether it be by cleaning off 
the snow from the pavement, or caring for them when 
they are ill, or cooking the dinner or the breakfast, or 
mailing papers to them to encourage them in the good 
way— no matter what the service. All these ways and 
many others are ministries to those who are the Lord's— 
laying down our lives for them. We rejoice to have 
such privileges, such opportunities— using our time and 
strength as the Lord in His providence shall indicate, 
realizing that the only use we have for our present life is 
to lay it down in the service of the Lord's brethren and 
ours, and to do good to any as we have opportunity, 
giving the brethren the preference. 

We may never attain to the place, while we are in 
the flesh, where we shall say no word, do no act, to hurt 
a brother. We all have imperfections that we are striving 
against. But "The Lord looketh upon the heart," 
and not at the imperfect execution. If He sees the 
earnest endeavor to do His will, He will cover the deficiencies 
and imperfections with the merit of our Savior. 
If we make a mistake, we are to be glad to rectify 
it and to make proper apologies and reparation— assuring 
the brother that we did not mean to hurt his feelings. 
Or, if under temptation we felt less concern than we 
should about wounding him, we should ask pardon, confessing 
our sorrow, and then confess our fault at the 
Throne of Grace, asking forgiveness in Jesus' name. 

If, then, we hope to be of those who will be granted 
a place with Christ in His Throne, let us see to it that 
by His grace we attain the end of the commandment, 
the end of the Law, as given to the New Creation. Let 
it be "love out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, 
and an undissembled faith"— a love which inspires to 
the willing, joyful sacrifice of every earthly hope and 
ambition, and which gladly lays down even life itself 
for the brethren, that we may be accounted worthy of 
the heavenly inheritance awaiting the "more than conquerors." 
—Romans 8:37. 



R5758 : page 263 

LOVE'S ALCHEMY 

"Love is the filling from one's own 

Another's cup. 
Love is a daily laying down 



And taking up; 
A choosing of the stony path 

Through each new day 
That other feet may tread with ease 

A smoother way. 
Love is not blind, but looks abroad 

Through other eyes; 

And asks not, "Must I give?" but, "May 

I sacrifice?" 
Love hides its grief, that other hearts 

And lips may sing; 
And burdened, walks, that other lives 

May, buoyant, wing. 
Brother, hast thou a love like this 

Within thy soul? 
'Twill change thy name to saint when thou 

Dost reach this goal." 



R5757 : page 264 

FULL DELIVERANCE PROMISED TO GOD'S SAINTS 

"He shall call upon Me and I will answer him; I will be with 
him in trouble; I will deliver him and honor him."— 
Psalm 91:15. 

WHEN considering the above text, we are 

naturally interested to know who or what 

class would be thus favored of God and 

whether or not we might become members 

of that class. The context seems to show 

that the Psalm is prophetic and refers to 

the Lord Jesus and the Church— The Christ 

as a whole. No doubt it has been true in 

a certain sense of some others. For instance, 

when Abraham called upon the 

Lord, God heard him in his troubles and blessed him. 

And the Lord will yet give him great honor, because he 

loved and trusted God. The same might be said of the 

faithful ones all through the Jewish Dispensation. But the 

Psalm seems to refer especially to The Christ. These are 

the ones who bear the closest relationship to God. Their 

love is manifested in a special sense by their faithfulness 

to the will of God, their faithfulness in honoring His 

name, their faithfulness in upholding His Truth, in being 

willing to die in God's service, in laying down their lives 

for the brethren, in developing the fruits of the Holy 

Spirit; for all this is included in their covenant. 

It is this class, therefore, that the Lord will answer 
when they call upon Him; it is this class that He will 
deliver and honor, will care for in trouble. All who 
come to God, must necessarily, before they can be accepted, 
enter into a Covenant of Sacrifice with Him 



through Christ, giving up their will— loving the Lord 
and His will better than themselves and their own will 
or the will of any other. Of course, a large proportion 
of those who proclaim themselves to be Christians are 
merely nominal Christians— Christians in name only, who 
never made a covenant with God. 

Of those who do enter into this Covenant, not many, 
judging from what we can observe, carry it out faithfully, 
submitting their lives and their every interest to 
God's will. Noticeable examples of the faithful ones of 
the past were our Lord Jesus and His Apostles. And 
there have been others, of course, of this faithful class 
throughout this Gospel Age, now closing. All these 
are styled by Jehovah His jewels, and are to be made 
by Him into a glorious diadem, the Lord Jesus being its 
brightest and choicest gem. These are to show forth 
during eternal ages Jehovah's Wisdom, Justice, Love and 
Power. Throughout this Gospel Age God has been 
working in these to will and to do His good pleasure. 

CONDITIONS OF OBTAINING THE PROMISE 

But God works in no one contrary to that one's own 
will. If we wish to step out from under Christ's instruction, 
there is nothing to prevent us. God would that we 
remain, but is not willing to urge upon us, to press upon 
us, this matter. God wishes only such to worship Him 
as worship Him in spirit and in Truth, because they love 
Him. This class who seek faithfully to do the Lord's 
will because they love Him may call upon Him in every 
trouble and difficulty. His answer will not come in an 
audible voice, and may not come in the manner that we 
expect; but He will answer in the best way the petitions 
of His saints which are asked in harmony with His will, 
His Word. That is, as Jesus said, "If ye abide in Me, 
and My words abide in you [if you remember and act 
upon My teaching], ye may ask what ye will and it shall 
be done unto you"; for those thus abiding in Him would 
ask only those things which God has provided for them, 
only such things as His providence has arranged for 
them, only such things as His Word authorizes His saints 
to pray for. The Lord has promised these that they 
shall have their requests. He has been blessing and 
caring for His people throughout the Gospel Age. 
Their needs are often supplied before they call. They 
are to have the Word of God clearly in mind that their 
prayers and endeavors may be in line with His will. 
Thus their disappointments will be His appointments, 
and will be accepted as of the Lord. 

THE BLESSINGS OF TRIBULATION 

"I will be with him in trouble," is the promise. The 
intimation here is that the Lord will not, necessarily, 
prevent our getting into trouble. We might see the 
trouble coming and pray to the Lord, but He might not 



deliver us from the trouble. And we should not ask 
that we might be spared the affliction if His Wisdom 
sees it is best for us to have it. The trouble might prove 
very beneficial to us. 

The Lord has already told us in His Word that we 
are to rejoice even under tribulation; for tribulation, 
rightly received, will work out for us a "far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory." So while the Lord 
does not promise us that we shall escape trouble, He 
does promise that with the trouble He will give His children 
consolation of heart, sustaining grace, that will 
enable them to rejoice in the midst of their tribulation. 
(2 Corinthians 4:6-18; 12:9,10; Isaiah 43:1,2.) This 
was exemplified in our Lord Jesus and in the Apostles. 
Paul and Silas were able to sing praises to God in prison 
with their feet fast in the stocks and their backs bleeding 
from the whippings which they had received. They could 
rejoice in tribulation for Christ's sake. 

The Lord is ever with His people; therefore they 
should not be discouraged. His children have the comfort 
and assistance of the letter of the Truth and the 
spirit of the Truth. But they have all these blessings 
only in proportion as they are willing to exercise faith; 
for the glories promised are not yet theirs in reality; 
these are theirs only by promise now. 

OUR FULL DELIVERANCE 

"I will deliver him and honor him." The deliverance 
of the Lord's saints, in the fullest sense of the word, 
will be by their participation in the First, Chief Resurrection. 
Our Lord Jesus was delivered from all His 
trials and afflictions when He was raised from the dead. 
The promise to the Church also is that we shall be delivered 
when our resurrection "change" shall come to us. 
"Sown in weakness," we shall be "raised in power"; 
sown an animal body, we shall be "raised a spiritual 
body." This will be the full deliverance, and with it will 
come the promised honor and exaltation. 

There are deliverances, of course, for the children of 
God at the present time, according to our need. And the 
Lord gives us a certain kind of honor, but not usually 
the kind of honor that the world appreciates. This honor 
may come mixed with such tribulation as would make it 
not desirable in the world's eye. But the honor that will 
come to the saints in the end will be such as all will know 
and will appreciate. All the members of Christ will share 
in the Kingdom glories and honors with their Head. He 
and the members of His Body glorified will reign in the 
Father's Kingdom, and will be associated together 
throughout all eternity in the great work of God. 



"Press on, beloved, in the race, 
The goal is very near, 



Faint not, thou soon shalt see His face- 
Then, be thou of good cheer!" 



R5758 : page 265 

HUMAN WORKS VS. WORKS OF THE NEW CREATURE 

"Beloved, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling; 
for it is God that worketh in you both to will and to 
do of His good pleasure."— Philippians 2:12,13. 

OUR text is not an exhortation to the world. 

The Apostle is not urging natural men to 

work out their own salvation. The exhortation 

is to the Church of Christ alone, 

the "beloved," as St. Paul calls them. According 

to many theologians this advice 

would seem strange, because of the commonly 

accepted belief that a person is saved 

as soon as he becomes one of the Lord's 

R5759 : page 265 

people. To this we agree in part— "we are 
saved by hope." But the actual salvation we have not 
yet attained. It will not be attained until we shall have 
experienced the "change" of the First Resurrection. Up 
to that time there is always a possibility of our leaving 
the faith, being turned away from the faith— away from 
seeking to follow on faithfully to the attainment of the 
Lord's ultimate will concerning us. This salvation to 
the High Calling is to be worked out by the development 
of character. 

God has promised that certain characters shall attain 
to the highest place in His gift, the chief place of exaltation 
and favor, to be partakers of His own Divine nature. 
The Scriptures indicate that there are others who will 
attain to an inferior place— vessels unto lesser honor. 
(2 Timothy 2:20,21.) So we see that we should be on 
the qui vive, on the alert, to win the very best offered, 
the attainment of which will be pleasing to God as well 
as being the best thing for ourselves. Those who have 
entered into a covenant with the Lord must attain spirit 
nature, either on the Divine plane or a lower one; else 
they will lose all and die the Second Death. We are 
called in one hope of our Calling— that of attaining the 
Divine nature. There has been no other call issued 
during the Gospel Age. 

The question arises, Does this exhortation to work out 
our own salvation conflict with St. Paul's other statement, 
that our salvation "is not of works, lest any man 
should boast"? We reply, No; our salvation from death 
is entirely by faith. As men we have no opportunity of 
doing any works that would justify us before God. Until 



we have been accepted into God's family no works that 
we could do would be acceptable. God who is perfect, is 
not pleased to receive anything imperfect, either works 
or anything else. But when we have received the forgiveness 
of our sins— not by works, but by faith— and 
have become sons of God, through consecration and 
Spirit-begetting, then comes the time when we can do 
acceptable works; for we are then members of the Lord's 
family, and the Holy Spirit within us through this begetting 
now has an opportunity to show itself, to do some 
works. In other words, as imperfect human beings, we 
cannot work out our salvation; but as New Creatures we 
can do this.— Philippians 4:13. 

OUR PART OF THE WORK 

If after its begetting the New Creature never became 
active, it would never develop strength and character, 
just as a child would not develop if it never moved its 
limbs. We receive the Holy Spirit at the time of the 
Lord's acceptance of us, at our consecration. But this 
New Creature germ cannot long remain quiet. It must 
grow through nourishment, through feeding. At first we 
"desire the sincere milk of the Word, that we may grow 
thereby." We become strong by the exercise of ourselves 
as New Creatures. But it is God who started the new 
life in us. All our studying would not have made New 
Creatures of us; no amount of works would have done it. 
These things would never have brought us into the Lord's 
family; but after we have come into His family through 
the Lord Jesus, these good works will begin to show. 

The New Creature takes over the old body as its possession, 
to be its servant. Legally, the old body is dead, 
having been slain as a sacrifice. But actually, we still 
have it in lieu of our new body, that it may serve us until 
the New Creature is sufficiently developed to be given its 
resurrection body, and until our work here is done. It 
is the possession of this old, imperfect body that makes 
it necessary for us to wear the robe of Christ's righteousness 
while we remain in the flesh. 

The New Creature masters its old body, gets more 
and more control of the old disposition of the flesh. This 
may be more manifest to our neighbors and friends, and 
to our brethren, than to ourselves. The Father works in 
us as New Creatures, through Christ. And as we as 
New Creatures exercise ourselves in the control of the 
flesh, we become strong. Thus, as the Apostle says, we 
more and more become copies of God's dear Son. "It is 
God that worketh in us both to will and to do His good 
pleasure," and as we thus will and do, we accomplish our 
salvation. The Apostle is speaking here, not about the 
natural man, but of the "beloved" class, and is explaining 
that God wishes us to know that now, as we are His sons, 
He is working in us to accomplish His will. 

GOD'S PART A GREAT WORK 



There is a work that God did for us before we ever 
could have come into Christ— a great and important work. 
That work was the purchasing of us through the sacrificial 
death of the Lord Jesus, and the arrangement by 
which the knowledge of this reaches us. Through the 
circumstances, incidents, affairs of our lives He showed 
us the way by which we might become His children 
through full consecration. All this is the work of God, 
and in the Scriptures is called drawing and calling. "No 
man can come unto Me except the Father which sent Me 
draw him," said the Master. It is the Father who draws, 
but by way of the Son. Then we are called with a 
"Heavenly Calling." After we have accepted the Call 
upon the Lord's terms, there is a work to be done in us— 
a great work. And God is doing this work. 

Elsewhere the Apostle says of this class, "Ye are 
God's workmanship." Our Lord Jesus says of these, "I 
am the Vine, ye are the branches." The Father is the 
great Husbandman. It is for God to prune the branches 
of the Vine, to give them all the experiences requisite to 
their fruit-bearing. We all need pruning to develop the 
best of which we are capable as New Creatures, and to 
prove what we shall be qualified for. 

So God's work in us progresses. He works through 
the world, through the brethren, through all the varied 
experiences of life, and through His precious promises. 
In proportion as we love God, we get the good out of 
our experiences. "We know that all things work together 
for good to them that love God, to the called according 
to His purpose." If we know this, we shall receive in 
the spirit of submission and trust all that comes to us. 
The Lord continues to feed us upon His Word. Our 
progress is a matter of gradual development— a growing 
in grace, a growing in knowledge, a growing into God's 
character-likeness. Thus He works in His children to 
will and to do His good pleasure. He shows us more 
and more what His good pleasure is. Whoever becomes 
a child of God realizes later on more clearly than when 
he made his consecration what is the will of God, the 
mind of God. He comes to see things from an altogether 

R5759 : page 266 

different angle from his viewpoint when he first entered 
upon the narrow way. 

As the Lord works in us through His various providences, 
etc., we are to accept these nourishments for the 
New Creature, appropriating them to ourselves, that we 
may grow thereby— grow in strength of character, and 
thus be prepared for the Kingdom, for the glory, honor, 
immortality awaiting us if faithful. Of course, these 
great blessings and honors will not be given us unless we 
become such characters as the Lord will approve. The 
Apostle exhorts us to remember that what is to be 
reckoned on is, How much as a New Creature have you 



done in battling against the weaknesses of the flesh, in 
overcoming unfavorable surroundings? How fully have 
you really developed the likeness of Christ in your 
character? 



R5759 : page 266 

ELIJAH'S WORK BEFORE ASCENSION 

--SEPTEMBER 19.-1 KINGS 20:1-21.- 

DEFEATS THROUGH DRUNKENNESS-SYRIA'S KING WARS 
WITH ISRAEL-ISRAEL'S CAPITAL IN DANGER-KING BENHADAD 
CONFIDENT OF VICTORY-HE CELEBRATES IT 
IN ADVANCE IN DRUNKEN ORGIES-ISRAEL'S SMALL ARMY 
UNDER DIVINE COMMAND DEFEATS THE SYRIANS WITH 
TERRIBLE SLAUGHTER -MODERN WAR'S CONTRAST-WHY 
GOD PERMITS WARS, CALAMITIES, SICKNESS, INSANITY, 
ETC. -WHEN WARS WILL CEASE-SHOULD CHRISTIANS 
ENGAGE IN WAR? 

OUR lesson recounts the attack of the Syrians 

upon the Israelites, whose capital city, 

Samaria, is besieged and its king in fear 

of the necessity of capitulation. The Syrian 

king boastfully tells what he will do and 

commands a surrender. King Ahab, perplexed, 

considers resistance useless, until 

the Lord's message revives his courage, 

directing him how to proceed with the battle. 

Following this direction a great victory 

for the Israelites was gained— this partly because 

the Syrian king, Ben-Hadad, was very drunk, and many 

of his lords with him. They were thus incapacitated 

from using the vital strength of their large army, and 

suffered great defeat. 

All the wars of the past, however, pale into insignificance 
before the present great struggle progressing in 
Europe. One of the British lords, addressing workmen 
recently and urging efficiency in the manufacture of war 
munitions, declared that the British had expended for 
ammunition in Belgium recently more money than during 
the entire Boer War. The rapidity with which modern 
guns are fired and the terrible slaughter which they accomplish 
are appalling. Authentic reports declare that 
twelve millions of the picked men of Europe have already 
been either killed, wounded or made prisoners; and we 
may safely assume that the armies now contending 
number ten millions. 

When we consider that one man, armed with a rapid-fire 

R5760 : page 266 

gun, is more than an equivalent of twenty men, yea, 



than of a hundred men as in former wars, we get some 
conception of what a terrible war the present one is. 
The Scriptures seem to declare that it will bring no 
great victory to any of the contestants, but that eventually 
all the nations thus engaged will be terribly weakened, 
not only in the loss of their most able manhood, but also 
financially impoverished and embarrassed to the extent 
that their bonds will probably never be paid. 

LESSON TAUGHT BY THE WAR 

It is a sad reflection upon the boasted civilization of 
our day that such a war should be considered the only 
way by which the great nations of the world could come 
to an agreement on matters of mutual interest in respect 
to an earth which God has given to the children of men 
as their common heritage. When we consider that the 
nations at war are claiming to be Christian nations, the 
thought is all the more horrible. Our only comfort is in 
the thought that the poor deluded people do not understand 
the meaning of the term Christian, and that the 
great mass of them never were Christians. True Christians, 
saints, no doubt are to be found in all the armies 
of the countries where conscription is the law. Bible 
students from the different armies from time to time 
give us word of their welfare and of their endeavor to 
hold up the Light and to show forth the Lord's praises, 
even under such terrible conditions. 

Surely the people of the world are beginning to 
awaken to a realization of the fact that the boasted four 
hundred millions of Christians are, for the most part, as 
far from God and from Christian ideals as are the twelve 
hundred millions of heathens. Their awakening should 
help them to realize what the true Church is, and that 
her mission is not to convert the world but to prepare 
herself to be Messiah's Kingdom class, the Bride, the 
Lamb's Wife, Messiah's Joint-heir in His Heavenly 
Kingdom. If the war should teach this lesson to any 
considerable number, it will not have been in vain. And 
if these saints of God, learning the way more perfectly, 
shall carry out a full consecration of themselves to the 
Lord, and thus make their calling and election sure to a 
place in the Kingdom, they will have a share in the First 
Resurrection to spiritual conditions. Then, associated 
with their Redeemer, they will bless the world of mankind 
on the human plane, uplifting the willing and 
obedient to human perfection. 

WHY GOD PERMITS WAR 

Many are inquiring, Why does God permit war- 
yea, why do the Scriptures imply that God brings about 
wars? We reply that it makes little difference to the 
person dying whether his death comes as a result of a 
bayonet wound, a sword wound or a bullet wound, or 
whether it comes from consumption, pneumonia, smallpox 



or general constitutional breakdown. And if it makes 
little difference to the individual, we may say that it 
makes less difference to the Almighty. God's penalty 
upon our race is a death penalty— come how it may. For 
six thousand years the penalty has been in operation; 
and the entire race is going down to the tomb under that 
sentence, "Dying, thou shaltdie." 

The hope for all, then, is in Christ and through His 
death— by the resurrection of the dead which He will 
accomplish during the Millennium. His faithful Church, 
His Bride, who is to share with Him in the Kingdom, 
will be the first resurrected, and then to a plane of glory, 
honor and immortality. The remainder of the world will 
come forth, "every man in his own order," as the Bible 
declares. They will come forth that they may learn of 
the Goodness of God, the Wisdom of God, the Power of 
God, the Love of God, and be enabled to contrast these 
with what they learned in their previous lifetime under 

R5760 : page 267 

the reign of Sin and Death. Meantime, the Bible declares, 
from the Divine viewpoint the whole world of 
mankind are falling asleep in death, to await the awakening 
of Messiah's Kingdom and the beginning then of the 
grand opportunity which He has secured for all, whereby 
they may escape from sin and, ultimately, from death. 

"THERE SHALL BE NO MORE CURSE" 

The Divine promise and provision is that under 
Messiah's Kingdom wars will be made to cease forever, 
and all other calamities will cease. Instead of mankind's 
going down into the tomb, the reverse order will be 
established— the resurrection of the dead. Instead of 
sickness, disease and insanity will come healing, strength, 
restitution. (Acts 3:19-21.) Speaking of the effect of 
His Millennial Kingdom, Jesus declares that the curse 
will be rolled away and God's blessing will come on instead, 
until there shall be no more sighing or dying or 
crying or pain. All these blessings are as yet only promises, 
and hence only for the Church to rejoice in or 
understand— and they according to their degree of faith 
in God and of understanding of His Word. 

The Bible informs us that after Messiah's spiritual 
Kingdom shall have taken charge of the world's affairs, 
nothing will be permitted to hurt or destroy in all God's 
glorious Kingdom. This will mean that a spiritual police 
force will have humanity under absolute control. Every 
misdeed will be punished as soon as it is determined upon 
and before it shall have been put into effect. Likewise, 
every good act, good word and good thought will bring 
a blessing of restitution, health, strength— mental, moral, 
physical. Under such conditions the world will very 
speedily learn to differentiate right from wrong. They 
will speedily learn of the change of dispensation, and 



that thenceforth every sinful thought, word and act will 

be sure to receive punishment, while every good thought, 

good word and good act will be sure to receive a blessing. 

The Bible tells of this condition of things, saying, 

"When Thy judgments are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants 

of the world will learn righteousness."— Isaiah 11:9; 

26:9; 28:17. 

CHRISTIANS ENGAGING IN WAR 

Many are perplexed to understand the teachings of 
Jesus and the Apostles in respect to war, when they contrast 
these with the Lord's directions to the Jews and 
His blessing of their wars. This matter can be understood 
only from the one viewpoint— the Bible viewpoint. 

The first invitation to fallen men to become sons of 
God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord, dates from 
the time of Jesus, and particularly from the time that He 
died for our sins, arose from the dead, ascended to 
Heaven to appear in the presence of God on our behalf, 
and as a result of that work shed forth on the waiting 
disciples the Holy Spirit of God and the begetting power 
to a new nature. None prior to that had ever been sons 
of God from the time that Adam sinned. At very most 
Moses was a servant and Abraham a friend. St. John 
assures us that the liberty or privilege to become sons of 
God came through our Lord Jesus at His First Advent 
to those who fully accepted Him.— John 1:12,13. 

These sons of God, otherwise the Body of Christ, 
otherwise the Bride of Christ, are not of the world, but 
chosen and separated from the world by the Divine call 
and spirit-begetting. To these Jesus said, "Ye are not 
of the world, even as I am not of the world." "I have 
chosen you [out of the world], and ordained you that 
ye should go and bring forth fruit. Herein is My 
Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit." (John 17:14; 
15:16,8.) Now the fruits of the Spirit, the Apostle tells 
us, are manifest— meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering 
brotherly-kindness, love. These things being 
in us and abounding in good measure will make us that 
we shall be neither barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge 
of our Lord Jesus Christ; and that we shall have 
an abundant entrance ministered unto us into the everlasting 
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 
for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come," and which we 
are to enter by resurrection change, in due time.— 
Galatians 5:22,23; 2 Peter 1:5-11. 

SCRIPTURES MISAPPLIED 

Does God give special direction to this class of His 
spirit-begotten children in respect to war, or are they in 
this matter subject to the powers that be? We reply 
that all the Lord's people are soldiers of the Cross, and 
that the Apostle has forewarned us that the weapons of 
our warfare are not carnal. (2 Corinthians 10:4.) 



There is no commission anywhere in the Bible for God's 
consecrated people to war, to fight, to kill, to take from 
others either life or property. The present great war is 
merely a demonstration of the fact that if any considerable 
number of those participating in it ever were Christians, 
they have been merely babes in Christ and did not 
understand the teachings of the Lord. 

Nevertheless, we perceive that in all the warring 
countries the professed ministers of Christ are acting as 
recruiting agents. All kinds of arguments are used to 
persuade the young men of the country, contrary to the 
teachings of the Master. The same men who are accustomed 
to laugh at the declaration that the Turkish 
soldiers in former wars were promised, in event of death, 
a sure passport to Heavenly Paradise— these same ministers 
are now urging all the eligible with whom they have 
influence to prepare to go to battle to lay down their 
lives. While the Germans have put upon their soldiers' 
belts, "God with us," the British ministers are quoting 
Bible texts to encourage enlistment of their young men 
and to throw a halo of glory upon the soldier dead. 



R5762 : page 267 

"YET WILL I REJOICE IN THE LORD !" 

Though the fig-tree shall not blossom, 
Though the olive's labour fail, 

Though a murrain, sore and grievous, 
Smite the herd on hill and dale,— 

Yet my soul shall bless and praise Him, 
And my faith shall still prevail ! 

Though the earth be filled with violence, 
And the Dove of Peace hath fled, 

While the land and sea are groaning 
'Neath the burden of their dead,— 

Yet, amid the awful tumult, 
I rejoice and lift my head! 

Though the vision seem to tarry, 
And the waiting time prolong, 

Though my faith be strangely tested 
In the conflict fierce and strong, 

Yet His Grace shall be sufficient, 
And the burden of my song ! 

Though He slay me, I will trust Him, 
Though my very heart He break, 

For I know with loving wisdom 
He hath planned the way I take.— 

Thus my dying breath shall bless Him, 
And I'll praise Him when I wake! 

-G. W. SEIBERT. 



R5761 : page 268 

OBEDIENCE AND KINGSHIP 

-SEPTEMBER 26.-PSALM 21.- 

THE GLORY OF MESSIAH'S KINGDOM-THE REWARD OF HIS 
OBEDIENCE TO JEHOVAH-THE DESTRUCTION OF HIS FOES A 
NECESSITY-ARE WE FORTY YEARS INTO THE MILLENNIUM? 

"The King shall joy in Thy strength, O Jehovah, and 
in Thy salvation how greatly shall He rejoice!"— V. 1. 

THE Jews took a practical view of the promised 

Kingdom of Messiah, in which they 

were to have a glorious place, and in which 

all nations were to be blessed. Two things 

they failed to realize: first, that a Redemption-price 

for the sin of Adam must be 

provided before Adam and his race could 

be returned to Divine favor and everlasting 

life in Eden; second, that Messiah Himself, 

before having so great an exaltation as 

Jehovah purposed, must demonstrate His worthiness to 

it by humility, obedience, loyalty, even unto death. St. 

Paul points out that Jesus the Redeemer did all this— 

that He left the glory which He had with the Father, 

humbled Himself to become a man (though not a sinner), 

and then as a man further humbled Himself unto death, 

even the death of the Cross; that on this account God 

highly exalted Him far above angels, making Him partaker 

of the Divine nature and Inheritor of all the promises 

of glory, honor, immortality.— Philippians 2:8-11. 

Many who see this much fail to get the Scriptural 
declaration that God's purpose equally included a Church 
class as a Bride to Messiah— as sharer of His sufferings 
and trials, and sharer of His exaltation and glory. Only 
when this is seen can we properly understand the delay 
in the establishment of the Kingdom. It has delayed 
in order that the entire Church, foreordained of God, 
might be completed, tested, proved, glorified in the First 
Resurrection, and then inaugurated with Messiah as the 
Heavenly Kingdom. 

Many peculiar ideas prevail because of a failure to 
take the Scriptural proposition and because of a false 
theory that the Kingdom has already been set up in 
glory. Ridding our minds of these difficulties, Bible 
students are now discerning Messiah's Kingdom near at 
hand— even at the door. They are more and more realizing 
that the present terrible war is the beginning of a 
series of troubles which will wind up the present order 
of things and inaugurate the New Dispensation of 
Messiah's Kingdom, for which we have so long prayed, 



"Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth, even 
as it is done in Heaven." 
Although it will be a spiritual Kingdom, no less so 

R5762 : page 268 

than Satan's kingdom of the present time, and the 
Father's Kingdom— invisible to men— nevertheless it will 
be a real Kingdom, exercising power and authority more 
completely than any earthly kingdom could, because not 
handicapped by human limitations and conditions. Moreover, 
the Bible indicates to us that the Ancient Worthies 
of the Jewish line will be resurrected to perfection and 
in an earthly glory will become visible representatives to 
men of the glorified spiritual Christ, Head and Body. 
Jesus emphasized this thought to the Jews saying, "Ye 
shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the Prophets 
in the Kingdom." (Luke 13:28.) But respecting Himself 
He declared, "Yet a little while, and the world seeth 
Me no more." (John 14:19.) All will see Him, however, 
in the sense that eventually all the eyes of understanding 
will be opened, that all may see the light of the 
knowledge of the glory of God fill the whole earth.— 
Revelation 1:7; Habakkuk 2:14. 

MESSIAH'S KINGDOM BEGUN 

Many Bible students are claiming that, according to 
the prophecies, Messiah's Kingdom began in 1878. They 
claim that while its chief activities have been in respect 
to the Church— the harvesting of the wheat, the separating 
of the tares, etc.— nevertheless it has had a worldwide 
influence also, in that during this time of the 
dawning of the New Dispensation God has been lifting 
the veil of ignorance and showing mankind mechanical 
and chemical secrets which have proved invaluable thus 
far, and which undoubtedly will increase in the near 
future, when the Messianic Kingdom shall have been 
fully inaugurated, at the close of the great Time of 
Trouble, already beginning in Europe and in Mexico. 

Amongst the other indications of the operation of the 
Kingdom influence in the world, Bible students point to 
the wonderful progress made as respects reform along 
the lines of intemperance. The wonderful wave of prohibition 
which has spread voluntarily over many of the 
States of the American Union has been supplemented 
by the necessities of the war in foreign countries. We 
must not expect too much along these lines. We must 
expect more or less of reaction, especially in the case of 
so sudden a turn as the war brought upon Europeans. 

Indeed, evidence is not wanting that the first fervor 
of prohibition in Europe is reacting. We had similar 
experiences in America, but we perceive that as a whole 
the world is moving onward in this respect in a right 
direction. The movement against opium and other narcotics 
also tends in the right direction, as do the many 



exposures of vice and the lessons being given as respects 
the terrible penalty of vice, as witnessed in the now 
well-recognized fact that syphilis stops brain development 
and generally in a few years leads to insanity. 

While continuing to pray, "Thy Kingdom come," let 
us as God's consecrated people continue to labor in 
character-preparation, that we may be found worthy of 
a place in that Kingdom, making our calling and election 
sure. And let us continue to note evidences on every 
hand that we are in the dawning of the Kingdom, even 
though its Sun of Righteousness cannot fully arise until 
the Church shall have passed beyond the veil. In this 
connection we call attention to an interesting report in 
respect to one of our States, which, having passed prohibition 
laws, is said by its Governor to be enjoying grand 
blessings of prosperity— Kansas. The following extract 
is from the "North American." 

RESTITUTION BLESSINGS IN KANSAS 

Recently the Governor of Kansas issued a public 
statement, saying that he hoped no one would waste pity 
upon the people of his State. We quote:— 

'"With more than $200,000,000 on deposit in our 
State and National Banks, we could weather a worse 
storm than this without hardship.' This money, equally 
divided among the men, women, children and babies of 
Kansas, would give each of them $118 in cash, not to 
mention the tidy sum of $1,684 each is credited with as 
his or her share of the State's assessed wealth. Kansas 
last year produced $325,000,000 worth of farm products. 

"In eighty-seven of her one hundred and five counties 
there are no insane. In fifty-four of this number are 
no feeble-minded. Ninety-six counties have no inebriates, 
and in the other nine they are as scarce as hens' 
teeth. Thirty-eight county poorhouses are as empty as 
a last year's locust-shell, and most of these have been so 
for the best part of a decade. 

"The pauper population of the State falls a little 

R5762 : page 269 

short of 600. That is one pauper for each 3,000 of the 
kind making a living, and a good one— the kind that now 
own $255,000,000 worth of live stock and in the last 
twelve months have added more than $45,000,000 to 
their taxable personal property. Her own people this 
year hold more than $67,000,000 in this form of wealth, 
an increase of over 500 per cent, in five years. 

"At one time not long ago the jails in fifty-three 
counties were empty and sixty-five counties were on the 
roll as having no prisoners serving sentence in the penitentiary. 
Instead of being hampered by a large mass 
of illiterates— thirty years ago 49 per cent, of her population 
came under this head— her present ratio of two 
per cent, is next to the lowest in the land and two-thirds 



lower than Massachusetts, including Boston. 

"It is the combination of sense and solid muscle that 
has kept her growing stronger and richer through extremes 
of climate which soon would decimate a less fit 
lot. These people have made good in a zone once declared 
to be unquestionably unproductive. In the last 
twenty years they have made this 'unproductive' soil yield 
corn and wheat worth $2,517,902,640. 

"SO SOMETHING WOULD SEEM TO BE THE 
MATTER WITH KANSAS. 

"SOMETHING IS THE MATTER WITH HER. 
That something, we believe, can be boiled down into 
these first fourteen words constituting an amendment 
made to her constitution in 1881: 

"THE MANUFACTURE AND SALE OF INTOXICATING 
LIQUOR SHALL BE FOREVER 
PROHIBITED IN THIS STATE.' 

"It is this fundamental provision, fought and evaded 
in some localities as it was for a quarter-century, and 
strictly enforced in all parts of the State only within the 
last five years, that has helped Kansas to flaunt a two-hundred 
million bank-account in the face of a partial 
crop failure; that relieves her of spending much time, 
strength and money on paupers, criminals, insane and 
feeble-minded; that gives her people the best of chances 
for living and the fewest excuses for dying." 



R5761 : page 269 

THE TWO PARTS OF THE HARVEST WORK 

SOME of the dear people of God have wondered 

what relationship the PHOTO-DRAMA 

and the Colporteur work have to the end of 

the Harvest. One's knowledge of the 

DRAMA would necessarily be limited to his 

contact with it. There are some who have 

heard of it, but who have not much knowledge 

of it. The general reports received 

since its production have been very satisfactory. 

In some parts the Classes have been 

largely increased in number. In certain places the friends 

at first felt disappointed; but these reported later that 

after a few Sundays, when the people had had time to let 

the Truth sink more or less into their minds, a number 

came out of the churches, where they could not get satisfactory 

food, and began to attend our meetings. As a 

rule, wherever the DRAMA has been shown the Classes 

have been increased. Some very remarkable characters 

have come into the light of Present Truth— some of the 

Lord's people who before were in the darkness through 

prejudice and superstition, and others from the world. 

These who became thus interested have been started to 

investigating and reading the STUDIES, through the Colporteur 



work. 

Similarly, the 42,000,000 copies of BIBLE STUDENTS 
MONTHLY put out this last year, while they have not 
brought millions into the Classes by any means, have no 
doubt been doing a good work, a work of stirring up the 
minds of the people, awakening them to think, and reaching 
some of the Great Company class. Others, perhaps, 
have been brought directly to full consecration through 
our free literature. All of these works seem to belong to 
the Harvest; for they did not belong to a previous time. 

THE PLOWMAN OVERTAKING THE REAPER 

The Harvest work has been increased rapidly to its 
consummation. We are not to understand that the Harvest 
is yet wholly finished; for there are two parts to the 
work— the gathering of the wheat, and the burning of 
the tares. We might have thought that the gathering of 
the wheat has been accomplished; that if our expectations 
are true, with the end of the Gentile Times the number 
of the Very Elect would be complete, so that no more 
could enter. We are not positive of this, and we must 
not go by guessing. The latter part of the Harvest work 
is to be the burning of the tares, and the waking up of 
the Great Company class and preparing them to go out 
and purchase the oil for their lamps. Now seems to be 
the particular time, if we have the right focus on the 
matter, in which the Great Company class would hear- 
when the foolish virgins would get the light, get the oil, 
and the time when the wise virgins have gone in, or are 
soon to go in, to the Marriage. 

In the text of Scripture which speaks of the plowman 
overtaking the Reaper, we are to remember that the 
Reaper is the Lord, and that the plowman is the great 
Time of Trouble. This Time of Trouble will overtake 
the reaping work, and bring it to a close. But the Time 
of Trouble will go on, the plowman will keep on plowing, 
after all our efforts have ended in respect to the reaping. 
But meantime, before this dark night fully sets in, we 
are to go right on with the work which the Lord has put 
into our hands. The Truth is designed, not only to perfect 
the "Bride" of Christ, the Chief of the First-borns, 
but to develop the Great Company class, and also to be a 
witness to the whole world. Any carelessness on our 
part, or any cessation of activity in the service of the 
Truth while opportunity yet remains, would in our estimation 
be a great mistake. If we are loyal, the Lord will 
give us far greater opportunities in the future— the blessing 
of all the nations, all the kindreds, all the families of 
the earth. -Galatians 3:8,16,29. 

THOSE CONSECRATING BETWEEN THE AGES 

It is our thought that with the closing of the "door" 
of this Gospel Age there will be no more begetting of the 
Holy Spirit to the spirit nature. Any afterward coming 



to God through consecration, before the inauguration of 

the Restitution work, will be accepted by Him, not to the 

spirit plane of being, but to the earthly plane. Such 

would come in under the same conditions as the Ancient 

Worthies who were accepted of God. The Ancient 

Worthies came in, no call being opened to them— the 

High Calling not being yet open, and the Restitution opportunities 

not open. But they freely gave themselves up 

to God without knowing what blessings their consecration 

would bring, except that they had the intimation that they 

would, in the future life, have a "better resurrection" 

than would the remainder of the world. 

Our thought is that whoever under such conditions as 
these will make a full consecration to the Lord, to leave 
all to follow in His ways, and will live up faithfully, 

R5761 : page 270 

loyally, to that consecration, may be privileged to be 
counted as a similar class to those who preceded this 
Gospel Age. We know of no reason why the Lord would 
refuse to receive those who make a consecration after 
the close of the Gospel Age and its High Calling and 
before the full opening of the Millennial Age. 

THE BURNING OF THE TARES 

Whether the overcoming saints will have a part in the 
burning of the tare class is a thought not very clear at 
this time. "This honor have all His saints, to execute 
the judgments written." All the saints would include, 
then, those who would be living in the world when the 
judgments are executed, as well as the resurrected saints. 
Just how any living here would have a share in executing 
the judgments written we do not see; but we are keeping 
our eyes open, with the thought that this may be so. 

It would seem that the burning of the tares has now 
been going on for some time; that is, some who have 
professed that they are Christians and have thought that 
they are Christians, but have never entered into true relationship 
with the Lord and become of the wheat class, 
are to be destroyed as tares, shown in their true light. 
If questioned now as to their consecration, these will say, 
"I am no saint, but I wish to be right and just in my dealings 
so far as possible." Thus such demonstrate that they 
have not understood what it is to be a real Christian. 

This great war in Europe is waking up people to 
think in a way that they have never thought before; and 
now is the time when the real Christianity and the 
counterfeit will be differentiated. Many people will come 
more or less rapidly to recognize this. But there is a 
large proportion of tares that have not yet been burned. 
Emperor William of Germany, King George of England, 
the Czar of Russia, the Pope, etc., have not yet learned 
the difference between the true Christianity and the imitation. 
So it is with many others. But the burning will 



progress to its completion, and the true and the false will 
be completely manifested to all. 



R5762 : page 270 

PROMOTE THE WORLD'S PEACE 

[From editorial of New York American, Aug. 11, 1915.] 

THE people of this nation are either in favor of 

peace, or they are not. If they are in favor 

of peace, they should be against war and 

against the supplying of arms to the nations 

engaged in war, when they know that those 

arms are to be used to increase the murder 

and destruction of that war. If the people 

of this country are not in favor of peace, 

then they should continue to supply arms 

to the murdering nations and make all the 

money they can out of the murder. But in that event 

R5763 : page 270 

they should stop prating about peace. If we cannot be 
conscientious let us, at least, be consistent. We should 
cease assuming a virtue which we do not possess, and go 
coldly and boldly out to acquire any blood money which 
may be "coming our way." 

We have that right under international law, but have 
we that right under moral law? 

We have that right under the law of nations, but 
have we that right under the law of God? 

The Lord God has said, "Thou shalt not kill." Does 
that mean also, "Thou shalt not help to kill?" 

If it is criminal to be a murderer, is it not just as 
criminal to be an accessory before the fact? In the case 
of two accomplices in murder, is he who murders for hate 
any worse than he who murders for profit? 

These people of ours are sincerely devoted to "principle," 
and they do not care whether the operation of that 
principle embarrasses Germany and benefits England, or 
whether it embarrasses England and benefits Germany, 
as long as it is a just and righteous principle. We are 
not partisan in our "principle," President Wilson. We 
are not pro-German or pro-British, Mr. President. We 
stand for abstract principle and for its concrete application 
in a neutral, impartial and absolutely just and righteous 
manner. 

We speak thus directly to you, Mr. President, because 
we have the grateful testimony of your own words that 
you yourself view this matter as this newspaper views it. 
We find these words in your message upon the subject of 
Mexico, which you delivered to the Congress in August, 
1913: 



"I deem it my duty to exercise the authority conferred 
upon me by the law of March 14, 1912, to see 
to it that neither side of the struggle now going on in 
Mexico receive any assistance from this side of the 
border. I shall follow the best practise of nations in 
the matter of neutrality by forbidding the exportation 
of arms and munitions of war of any kind from the 
United States— a policy suggested by several interesting 
precedents, and certainly dictated by many 
manifest considerations of practical expediency. We 
cannot in the circumstances be the partisans of either 
party to the contest that now distracts Mexico, or 
constitute ourselves the virtual umpire between 
them." 

It seems to us, Mr. President, that you could not possibly 
have better stated then, and could not possibly 
better state now, the high and solemn obligation of this 
country to "follow the best practise of nations in the 
matter of neutrality by forbidding the exportation of 
arms and munitions of war of any kind from the United 
States," not only to the Republic of Mexico but to any 
and to all republics, kingdoms and empires which are engaged 
in this dreadful and frightfully destructive war 
across the Atlantic. 

Sir, is there any "manifest consideration of practical 
expediency," or any consideration of duty and of 
humanity which applies to the Mexican conflict that does 
not apply far more weightily to this other vastly greater 
and more deadly and destructive European conflict? 

The miserable plea that some Americans are making 
money out of this traffic can have no more weight with 
you, Mr. President, than it has with the millions of your 
fellow citizens who abhor blood money. The suggestion 
that we should sell arms and munitions of war in order 
to make up for the gigantic losses inflicted upon our 
peaceful, legitimate commerce by Great Britain doubtless 
meets with the same disapproval from you, Mr. President, 
that it meets from all self-respecting American men and 
women. Nor do we think that you, Mr. President, attach 
any importance to the preposterous argument that it would 
be unnatural for us to discontinue the sale of arms to the 
warring nations, since one side could not perhaps carry 
on the war many more months without a steady supply 
of arms and munitions from this country. 

NEUTRALITY, as you, of course, well know, Mr. 
President, DOES NOT ACTIVELY AID either belligerent 
to overcome the other, in any war. 



R5763 : page 271 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
LOVE SUFFERETH LONG AND IS KIND 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

For some time I have felt that I should write you about 
the results of THE PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION in this vicinity 
and of the strenuous opposition which this, together with our 
work, has brought about. 

At Manchester, Iowa, a permanent Class of eight or ten 
has been established by the service of the Dubuque Elders, 
holding regular meetings. The Baptist minister fought every 
inch of the way until he met with a misfortune which prevented 
further action on his part. He used all kinds of 
methods to bring the Truth and yourself into disrepute, continuing 
this for possibly two months, when he made a final 
effort for as large a crowd as possible to hear him "expose 
Russellism," as he termed it. 

Two of our brethren "faced the music" and heard a terrific 
onslaught which was generally accepted by the audience, 
although some expressed disapproval of his language and 
methods. The next morning the poor man was stricken with 
paralysis of the face and did not preach another sermon for 
about three months; he is now able to talk only a very short 
time. Many people in Manchester and vicinity assert that 
this affliction was a judgment sent upon him. The Methodist 
minister at this place is friendly and has attended a number 
of our meetings. 

At Warren, 111., we rented the Orpheum Theatre. At our 
first exhibition the manager of the house became so enthusiastic 
that he went out during its progress to bring in others 
to hear the "good tidings of great joy." During three exhibitions 
the opposition was very busy, and by the time of 
our fourth exhibition we were refused the use of the theatre 
because of the pressure the local ministers brought to bear 
upon the owner. They also intimidated the editor of the 
local newspaper so that he refused our paid advertisements. 

The Methodist minister here, who was the real instigator of 
the opposition, was so bitter that he not only made special 
attacks from his pulpit every Sunday, but even accosted 
people on the street— including the brethren from the 
Dubuque Class, threatening to drive them from the town, etc. 

We then rented a small hall owned by a man who had 
become much interested, but the intense opposition forced us 
from this place also. One of our brethren then leased the 
Opera House for five Sundays, paying part down and securing 
contract from the owner, who was friendly to the Truth. The 
ministers turned their attacks upon this man, three of them 
calling at his store. He replied that we should have his 
Opera House as often as we wanted it, even though he should 
lose every dollar he had; that WE were the only people who 
had ever preached the Gospel in Warren. At the same time 
another friend offered his home for our meetings, where a 
Class of ten or twelve meet regularly. 

The Presbyterian and Baptist ministers joined the Methodist 
in a special sermon on the same Sunday, on "Some 
Facts Concerning Russellism"— word for word alike, indicating 
a stereotyped attack. 

The owner of the Opera House attended the Methodist 
service and, in the midst of the attack, arose and challenged 



the minister to prove the things he was saying. 

During all this we have endeavored to manifest a spirit 
of love. We have continued preaching the Truth and have 
won the approval of all the fair-minded people of Warren, 
and are also recompensed by the organization of a Class of 
earnest Bible Students, who are rejoicing with us in the 
glorious prospects that await those who patiently endure. 
With love to all of like precious faith, we are 
Faithfully yours, THE DUBUQUE ECCLESIA.-Iowa. 



DEATH BLOW TO CLERGY ORDINATION 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I have today read Vol. 6, No. 8, of THE BIBLE STUDENTS 
MONTHLY, and have been deeply impressed by the article 
under the heading, "Clergy Ordination Proved Fraudulent," 
appearing therein. The text from Isaiah, "Cry aloud, spare 
not; show My people their transgression," is most appropriate. 
I unhesitatingly agree with every word in the article. 

In my opinion there is absolutely no Divine authority for 
ecclesiastical titles. I am happy to know that such a personage 
as yourself is living in this Age. This article of 
yours is, I believe, the death-blow to "Clergy Ordination"; it 
is bound to go to oblivion hereafter. 

May you, by the grace of God, continue to expound the 
Scriptures in this straightforward manner for many years. 
With every good wish for your future happiness, I am 

Yours cordially and fraternally, 

A. VANIER. -British Guiana. 



THE PROMISED ESCAPE PROVIDED 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Your recent letter has been read with much interest, as I 
had been passing through a siege of testing doubtless permitted 
to see if I would tolerate evil thoughts. Your kind and sympathetic 
letter struck the proper chord. The thought that 
possibly the Adversary had been touching me awakened the 
impulse to call at once upon our dear Lord for relief, remembering 
the promise of 1 Corinthians 10:13. 

He has answered my prayer, has granted me release, and 
has given me that peace of mind which those only can know 
who dwell "in the secret place of the Most High." 

Although this has been a very severe test, the one which I 
had soon after making consecration was more so. It began in 
thoughts of hatred toward every one I met. This continued 
about two days, when I commenced continually repeating the 
sentence, "I LOVE EVERYBODY!" 

Having a very sensitive nature and an abhorrence of evil 
which is highly developed, it is possible that my self-examination 
is too critical. My daily and oft-repeated prayer is that 
everything not in harmony with the Divine will may be rooted 



out of my heart, making it a fit temple of the Holy Spirit. 

I have never let slip an opportunity to witness for the 
Truth, either by handing out literature or by word of mouth. 
This activity has resulted in my business being boycotted. I 
was notified that this would result if I persisted. But I rejoice 
in the persecution, which I experience also in my own 
home. It only stimulates me to further zeal for the Lord. 

Again thanking you for your sympathy and brotherly love, 
which I appreciate more than words can express, with much 
love, I remain 

Your brother and fellow-servant, H. C. KEITH.— Ind. 



BRITAIN'S SOLDIERS STUDYING THE TRUTH 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY:- 

I have a brother who has been twice wounded in the war. 
I wrote and told him some Truth and sent some tracts while 
he was in England. (He is still there at Belfield Park, Weymouth, 
County Dorset.) He wrote and told me that to forgive 
your enemies is not in a soldier's creed, and that they 
must take revenge on the Germans. 

I received a letter again a day or two ago, and he said he 
was pleased with the tracts I sent, and that he was beginning 
to realize the Truth. He says he got some of the men to 
read them, and now they have a class of fourteen, and their 
officer has allowed them a tent for study. They sent for 
books to the London Tabernacle, and received them. He 
says their officer drops in occasionally. He asked for more 
tracts on the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, so I sent some, 
together with other tracts. I ask your prayers for these poor 
men, should any have the qualifications for the Truth. I 
told my brother to write again to London Tabernacle to see 
if they could not get somebody to go down to teach them. It 
would, indeed, be well if this could be done. I pray that your 
good work will bring forth fruit. Pray for me! 

Yours very sincerely in Christ, 

EDWARD H. CLAY.-Toronto, Can. 



FAR-OFF TASMANIA HEARD FROM 

DEAR FRIEND :- 

I must tell you what a blessing the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
have been to me, and what joy and peace they have 
given me! Although a believer for years past, yet I was 
dissatisfied and unwilling to consecrate myself. But now the 
Lord has seemed to meet me as He met the Prodigal in our 
Lord's parable. 

The "Vow unto the Lord" I have recently taken, and I 
would like to be baptized; I suppose, however, that none of 
the Pilgrims visit this place, as it is isolated and the people 
are generally indifferent to spiritual matters. I have met but 
one interested person— a humble, simple woman— grieving 



over the loss of a child, the sorrow opening her heart to the 
things of God. Talking with her, she begged me to come 
again; she is eager to know more. I think others like her 
can be found here. 

I should like to tell Pastor Russell fully what his books 
have done for me; but although I cannot do this, I do pray 
for him and his coworkers. 

I hope soon to send a contribution for the work; I hope 
also that a Pilgrim will make his appearance up this way. I 
occasionally attend a monthly religious service and would 
like some Withdrawal Letters if you will kindly send them. 

Your Sister in Christ, 

MRS. BLANCHE JOHNSON.-Tasmania. 



page 272 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 273 

VOL. XXXVI SEPTEMBER 15 No. 18 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 275 

Rev. Dr. Gordon's War Views 275 

Sorry Plight of the Clergy 276 

Results of One Year of War 277 

The Miraculous Birth of Jesus 279 

St. Peter's Testimony 279 

St. Paul's View of the Subject 279 

St. John's Statements 280 

Apostolic Injunction Never So Significant 280 

No Clear Chronology Until Our Day 281 

Day of Christ Now on Hand 281 

The Armor Over the Robe 282 

Ahab's Sin— Covetousness, Murder 284 

Elijah's Fiery Chariot 285 

Elijah Not in Heaven 285 

Gilgal— Bethel— Jericho— Jordan 286 

Interesting Letters 287 

From the Battlefield of France 287 

Things Once Dark Now Clear 287 

B.S.M. in Letter-Box Did It 287 

page 274 



PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



JUDGE RUTHERFORD'S COMPREHENSIVE DEFENSE 
OF PASTOR RUSSELL 

This splendidly illustrated booklet can now be supplied at 
10c each, or twenty-five copies for $2.00, postpaid. Orders 
may be sent direct to the Society. 



THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT IN STOCK 

This valuable aid in Bible study has been out of stock for 
some months. Meantime we have had some of the defective 
plates corrected so that the present edition is equal to any we 
have ever had. One edition only— Leather, postpaid, $2.00. 
With it we offer free a new subscription to THE WATCH 
TOWER. 



A POPULAR BOOKLET ON HELL 

No other booklet is so much in demand as the one entitled, 
"WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL?" We have these 
now in good supply at 5 cents each. By the dozen, in booklet, 
50 cents; in TOWER form, 40 cents per dozen, 25 for 75 cents, 
$2.00 per hundred, postpaid. 



BEREAN QUESTION BOOKS 

We now have in stock Berean Question Booklets for 
each of the six volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, and 
also for TABERNACLE SHADOWS. Price, post-paid, 5c. each; 
50c. per dozen. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 

Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDIES IX., X. 

Week of October 3.. Q. 90 to 96 Week of October 17.. Q. 103 to 109 
Week of October 10. .Q. 97 to 102 Week of October 24..Q. 1 to 2 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each; 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



THIRD VOLUME STUDY NEXT 

Our Berean Bible Study Classes have nearly finished 
STUDIES Vol. II. We give timely notice that the next Study 
used will be Vol. III. Question Booklets, 5 cents, 50 cents 
per dozen, postpaid. 



R5764 : page 275 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

REV. DR. GORDON'S WAR VIEWS 

THE Toronto Globe publishes the following 
stirring article from the pen of Rev. 
Charles W. Gordon, D.D., widely known 
under the pen-name of Ralph Connor. Rev. 
Gordon, as Chaplain of the Forty-third 
Battalion Cameron Highlanders, has returned 



to Canada, bringing back his 

wounded brother, Lieutenant A. R. Gordon. 

His article in the Globe follows: 

BRITAIN SEES SPECTRE OF DEFEAT 

"Every one has been dutifully saying that this war is 
a serious business, but no man living, not even Kitchener 
himself, knew till three months ago just how serious 
it was. Kitchener knows now. Asquith knows. Lloyd-George 
knows. Bonar Law knows. The labor leaders 
of Britain and the labor unions know just how serious, 
how deadly serious, this war is. And on London streets 
and in London offices, in the drawing-rooms and at 
"week-ends," men are asking each other in whispers, 
questions they would not dare to ask aloud, and are 
getting answers that sometimes give a queer feeling at 
their British hearts. 

"A serious business indeed is this war. The issue 
of it the cheerful and irresponsible Optimist, with his 
eye on the past, when wars were waged by men and not 
by machines, and when valor, not explosives, won fights, 
declares to be assured— only one issue is possible— victory 
to our arms. A pleasant man this Cheerful Optimist, 
till you notice that his eye is upon the back trail 
or in the clouds. When you know him, you damn him 
for being a misleading fool. Every man in the Empire 
that ought to be listened to sees no hope of victory, absolutely 
none, and little hope of a drawn battle, unless 
conditions be changed, so as to be utterly different from 
those under which the war has been hitherto waged. 

"The first impression one got on reaching London, 
about two months ago, was that the traditional British 
cocksureness had been shattered and had been replaced 
by a paralyzing sense of uncertainty. You caught it 
everywhere; on the streets, in the hotels, at dinners, in 
the House of Commons and in the press— even in the 
press! It was not so much what people said, but what 
they refused to say. It was the determined and obvious 
effort to be cheerful that depressed and disturbed one. 
Everybody was saying to his neighbor, 'Cheer up, things 
will improve.' 

"BLAMES WAR OFFICE FOR STATE OF THINGS 

"But everybody, when by himself, refused to cheer 
up. He was mostly engaged during those lonely moments 
in blaming in his own particular way, something or 
somebody, and not the Germans either, but very largely 
those in the War Office. 

"What was wrong? The fact was simply this: That 
the British people were standing and looking with newly-opened 
eyes at the spectre of Defeat looming up through 
the channel mists; a spectre unlike the traditions of our 
dreams, sleeping or waking, in that it refused to disappear, 
and wore a shiny helmet. That spectre, unless conditions 



were changed, could not be laid, but would take 
on a reality of hideousness and permanency for their 
children to contemplate for successive generations. There 
are people doubtless reading this line who pause to say 
'Rot.' But the British people are not saying 'Rot' any 
more, and did not say 'Rot' when their eyes were opened 
some two months and a half ago. Then the British 
people sat up broad awake, and with that superb cool 
courage that faces men up to unpleasant and terrible 
facts, looked the situation in the eye and began forthwith 
to change things. 

"ASQUITH MET THINGS IN CHARACTERISTIC WAY 

"The Government showed the way. With that fine 
power of sacrifice which is the characteristic of the 
British statesman Asquith met the crisis, for crisis it was. 
It was a bitter, hard day for the Premier, the bitterest 
and hardest day of his whole career, but he was equal 
to the demand made upon his patriotism. A coalition 
government was formed. Then the housecleaning began. 
Among other things the War Office was reorganized. A 
new department was created with Lloyd-George, that 
wonderful, great, little man at its head. Up to this time 
the call had been for men, men, and more men. Now to 
the nation's ears came a new cry: 'Munitions, munitions 
and more munitions.' That 'wonder-working little Welshman' 
was onto his job. 

"One question still remains to be answered: What 
is to be the issue of this serious war?' The answer is 
plain, so plain that even the erstwhile Cheerful Optimist 
can see it. And the answer is this: If the change in 
conditions so splendidly initiated be not continued, and 
with ever-increasing acceleration, the issue is, DEFEAT. 

"APPEAL FOR MUNITIONS 

"What then is the immediate duty of Canadians? To 
raise large sums of money? Not so much. Old John 

R5765 : page 276 

Bull may be safely trusted to look after the financing 
of this war. But for Canada two things lie in her hand. 
Listen to the insistent iteration of Lloyd-George: 
'Munitions and machine guns, munitions and machine 
guns!' Let every Canadian wheel that can turn on a 
shell be set a-going. Let every Canadian workman and 
workwoman that can get to a munition factory or gun 
factory get there and with all speed. Shells and more 
shells! Machine guns and more machine guns! 

"Where British soldiers have two machine guns Germans 
have forty. Shells spent with prodigality— even 
wasted— mean battalions saved. We have tried fighting 
machine guns with men, and have learned our bitter 
lesson. Canadian shells and Canadian machine guns 



mean the saving of Canadian men. Seriously, soberly, 
solemnly let it be said, that unless the Empire can furnish 
in overwhelming quantities munitions of war, and in 
overwhelming numbers men of war, the bitterness and 
humiliation of defeat will be our portion, and the shame 
and slavery of an infamous and tyrannous militarism will 
be the portion of our children." 

SORRY PLIGHT OF THE CLERGY 

Ministers of the nominal churches are finding themselves 
in a tight place. They are expected to be faithful 
to their country, right or wrong. They are expected to 
preach the War as the will of God and the going to war 
as a meritorious matter that will have Divine reward 
and blessing. They must encourage recruiting, in obedience 
to the commands of their earthly king, and in violation 
of the commands of the Heavenly King, who has 
directed them to be peacemakers, and to follow peace 
with all men and to do no murder, either under legal 
sanction or otherwise. 

WHEN THE MISTAKE WAS MADE 

Long centuries ago a wrong step was taken by the 
bishops of the Church in claiming that they were 
Apostolic Bishops— with apostolic powers, the same as 
the original Twelve. Later these self-styled "Apostolic 
Bishops" (Revelation 2:2) concluded that the people 
need not have the Bible, and that they could simplify 
matters for the masses by giving them the creeds. They 
made their first creed in A.D. 325, and afterwards they 
continued to make "worse and more of it," until the 
Sixteenth Century. Meantime the Bible was tabooed. At 
one time it was almost a sure sign of heresy to be found 
reading the Bible; for this implied that the reader was 
not fully satisfied with the creeds which the "Apostolic 
Bishops" had made for the world. It was during this 
time that the horrible doctrines of the Dark Ages were 
introduced by our great Adversary. 

Then came a change, when the people began to demand 
the Bible and to doubt the infallibility of the 
"Apostolic Bishops" and their creeds. Early editions of 
the Bible were burned publicly, by both Protestant 
bishops and Catholic bishops, until the Bible triumphed 
and became too thoroughly entrenched in the minds of 
the people for this. The period of darkness lasted over 
twelve hundred years, the Lamp of God's Word being 
absent. Then came various attempts at Bible Study, all 
more or less handicapped by the insistence of the bishops 
that the Bible must be interpreted by the creeds they had 
made. Nor are many out of the darkness yet. We all 
feel like saying, with Cardinal Newman: 

"Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom, 
Lead Thou me on; 



The night is dark and I am far from Home, 
Lead Thou me on!" 

Only within the past forty years are Bible students 
really ignoring all creeds and going straight to the Bible 
itself for the light of Divine Truth; and correspondingly 
their blessing is increasing. The present great war, as 
everybody knows, has been held back for forty years. 
The Lord's object in holding it back in the past has 
been to favor Bible study. Thus we read: "I saw four 
angels standing on the four corners of the earth, holding 
the four winds of the earth. ..and another angel... 
cried with a loud voice to the four angels, to whom it was 
given to hurt the earth and the sea, saying, Hurt not the 
earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed 
the servants of God in their foreheads."— Rev. 7:1-3. 

It was during that long period of darkness, when the 
Lamp of Truth was hidden from the people, that the 
"Apostolic Bishops" exalted themselves and separated 
from the remainder of the Church— calling themselves 
the Church, the Hierarchy, the Clergy, and denominating 
the masses the Laity, contrary to the Master's words, 
"All ye are brethren," and to St. Peter's words to the 
whole Church, "Ye are a Royal Priesthood." 

The clergy, having exalted themselves, took another 
step, claiming power as well as authority. The claim 
went forth that the time had come for the Church to 
reign. Accordingly, a chief bishop was named Pontiff, 
or Pope, and he and all of his successors were decreed to 
be Christ's vicegerents— reigning over the kingdoms of 
the world as Christ's representatives. As such, they 
commissioned the various kings to rule their people in 
Christ's name, thus identifying the various governments 
of the world with the Church and making a combined 
reign, spiritual and temporal— two parts of God's Empire 
on earth, they claimed. 

For centuries the Popes had such power that kings 
dared not dissent, but found it to their advantage to uphold 
the claim of Papacy, submitting everything to Papal 
direction. A king might not divorce a wife and marry 
another without a special dispensation from the Pope. 
The Pope did not respond quickly enough to the wishes 
of King Henry VIII. of England in respect to approval 
of his marriage to his second wife. Then the king broke 
off relations with the Papacy and started a church of 
his own— himself the head— authorizing and sanctioning 
his bishops, and giving them places in the House of 
Lords; they authorizing and sanctioning him, in return, 
as the head of the Church of England. Luther did a 
similar work for German kings and princes, for the 
Swedish, Danish, Finnish, etc. The Greek Catholics, 
also dissenting from the Papacy, sanctioned the Russian 
Government. 

Thus we have the fact that present governments of 
Europe have been told by the religious systems that they 
are God's kingdoms— sanctioned by the Almighty through 



His earthly representatives— in some cases the Papacy; 
in some, Lutheranism; in some, the Church of England; 
in some, the Greek Church. 

WHAT A TERRIBLE MUDDLE! 

"But," we are told, "that is ancient history. No 
educated people believe those things now!" We agree 
to this. We doubt if King George really thinks of himself 
as the head of Christ's Church on earth and the 
Divinely-appointed Defender of the Faith. We doubt if 
Kaiser Wilhelm seriously thinks that he is God's special 
representative to Lutherans. We doubt if the Czar takes 
seriously his claimed relationship to Messiah's Kingdom. 
We doubt if Francis Joseph of Hungary takes seriously 
the thought that he is the representative of Christ's Kingdom 

R5765 : page 277 

under Papal appointment. Nevertheless the theory is 
there. It is in the mind of the people. 

The preachers of all denominations, in tacitly accepting 
these conditions and not reproving them and not 
denying them, have in fact approved them; and they have 
not told the people that a great mistake was made— that 
Christ's Kingdom has never been established in the earth, 
but that it is the next thing in order to be expected. 
Hence the people are in perplexity. German Christians 
are fighting as a part of Christ's Kingdom against Russian 
Christians as a part of Christ's Kingdom and against 
British Christians as a part of Christ's Kingdom. What 
a terrible muddle! And who is responsible, if the preachers 
are not, for such ignorance, blindness, superstition? 

Meantime, God's Kingdom is coming, just as the 
Bible has foretold. The great Time of Trouble is about 
to inaugurate the new Reign— Messiah's Reign of Righteousness. 
But is not this latter coming as a thief and 
as a snare upon the whole world? Is it not true that as 
the Apostle foretold, only "Ye, brethren, are not in darkness, 
that that Day should overtake you as a thief"? 

Meantime also, are not the preachers of the world, 
Catholic and Protestant, in a terrible plight? Their 
forefathers told humanity that the present governments 
are Christ's Kingdoms. These learned men, knowing 
well the fallacy of that teaching, have not corrected it. 
Now they are in the position of hypocrites. These earthly 
kingdoms call upon them to raise the money and the 
troops to defend what they have told the people is 
Christ's Kingdom. But the Word of God calls upon them 
to be peacemakers instead, and to so teach the people. 

The people themselves are perplexed. But we may be 
sure that when they come to their senses— and they soon 
will, in the terrible trouble coming— they will not only 
feel incensed against the earthly princes who got them 
into the war, but they will doubtless also feel incensed 
against the spiritual princes who deceived them into 



thinking that they were fighting for Messiah's Kingdom 
—when in point of fact, they are opposing it. 

The spirit of war and contention seems to be in the 
very air that we breathe. The attitude of all Christian 
people, and especially of all Bible students, should be 
that of peacemakers, in the home, in the shop, in the 
store. Let us keep our own heads cool, and thus be 
able to assist others to think and act coolly, calmly, in 
accord with the Lord's Word. Everything akin to wrath, 
anger, evil-speaking and bitterness should, as the Apostle 

R5766 : page 277 

says, be put far away from us who seek to be followers 
of the Lamb. These same principles apply in very 
marked degree to our relationship with brethren in the 
Church of Christ. With the brethren, especially, we 
should be very long-suffering and willing to surrender 
our preferences in the interests of peace, particularly 
where no vital principles are involved. 



RESULTS OF ONE YEAR OF WAR 

In the New York American (August 2nd) B. C. 
Forbes summarizes the effects of the present European 
War as follows: 

"Look on these two pictures— what one year of war 
has done for Europe and what one year of peace has 
done for the United States: 

"One year of war has cost Europe 2,600,000 of her 
best human stock, has maimed over 5,000,000 more and 
has entailed over 10,000,000 casualties among the men in 
the field— the 'casualties' among homes are beyond computation. 

"One year of war has added $18,900,000,000 to national 
debts, actually, though not admittedly, bankrupting 
every belligerent. 

"One year of war has paralyzed Europe's trade and 
turned some twenty millions of productive workers into 
twenty millions of destructive workers, while the greater 
part of each warring population is engaged in catering 
directly or indirectly to the war gods— devils, rather. 

"EUROPE PROSTRATED 

"One year of war has laid waste vast territories of 
Europe and ruined and rendered homeless perhaps fifty 
million human beings, to say nothing of the destruction 
of much of the world's most hallowed architecture. 

"One year of war, in short, has prostrated and bankrupted 
Europe. 

"One year of domestic peace amid the horrors of 
Europe's war has raised the United States to the forefront 
of the nations of the earth. 

"One year of peace has won for us first place in 



moral influence. 

"One year of peace has won for us first place in 
financial power. 

"One year of peace has won for us first place among 
the industrial nations of the world. 

"One year of peace has transformed us from a borrowing 
into a lending nation. 

"One year of peace has sped us along the path toward 
becoming the financial centre of the world. 

"One year of peace has enabled us to feed and succor 
millions and millions of innocent, helpless victims of the 
war— this last not the least notable of America's achievements 
during the blackest year the earth has ever known. 
One year of peace, in short, has brought the United 
States an infinity of blessings, just as one year of war 
has brought Europe an infinity of horrors and disasters." 

WILL THE UNITED STATES BECOME INVOLVED? 

The article proceeds to query the future and the possibility 
of the United States becoming involved. How 
strange that such a possibility should be even considered, 
in the light of the fact that all of the nations now at war 
would be glad to get out of it honorably at almost any 
price! The danger is seen along the lines of international 
laws and the rights of neutrals. Armed air 
craft and submarines have brought new factors into this 
war not considered in the laying down of rules of warfare, 
not dealt with in the international laws. International 
law provides that neutral nations and their commerce 
shall not be disturbed, except in the case of blockaded 
ports. Any ship entering such a port may be examined. 
If owned by the enemy, the vessel and cargo are subject 
to confiscation. If owned by a neutral nation, they should 
be exempt as respects munitions of war. 

Great Britain has violated the rights of the United 
States and other neutral nations in respect to these matters. 
She has not blockaded the ports actually, but has 
declared them blockaded and has seized neutral vessels 
anywhere on the high seas and taken them into British 
ports, regardless of their cargo not being contraband of 
war. American shippers have complained greatly of detention 
and loss. They are sure, however, that ultimately 
they will get justice— probably when the war is ended. 

Great Britain excuses these violations of international 
law and agreement by declaring that conditions have 
changed, and that it is to her interest to change her 
mode of operation. When in the arrangement of international 
law she agreed to the provision that food-stuffs 
would be free, she had in mind the fact that she needed 
to import food-stuffs herself. But later, perceiving that 

R5766 : page 278 

the Germans might be starved if free shipments were not 
permitted, she concluded that her warfare against the 



Germans might be more effective if food supplies were 
stopped and the Germans were partly starved. 

In the international agreement, cotton is not included 
as war material and is not subject to seizure as such. 
Great Britain and Germany both agreed to this, because 
neither produces cotton. Both purchase it from America 
for manufacture of clothing, hosiery, etc. However, conditions 
have changed to such an extent that a large portion 
of the ammunition used in this war is made of 
cotton. Hence the British refuse to allow American 
shipments of cotton to go to Germany, either directly or 
through neutral countries, and have seized cargoes of it 
—contrary to international law, claiming the right to do 
this because she has the might— the most powerful navy 
—and because she considers it to be necessary to her 
speedier crushing of Germany. 

The Germans also have violated international law, to 
which they agreed. They have announced a blockade of 
British ports without having their navy blockading these 
ports. This is called a "paper blockade," in the sense 
that it is merely announced in print, just as the British 
have announced the German blockade in print, without 
having vessels actually blockading the German ports. 
Germany declares that new conditions (submarines and 
air-craft) justify her in violating the laws of nations 
and destroying vessels which her submarines cannot take 
as prizes into her ports. Her attention has been called 
to the fact that this jeopardizes the lives of non-combatants 
and neutrals and their proper pursuits. She has 
been asked by the United States Government to desist 
from this violation of law. 

Germany declares that circumstances have altered 
cases; that it is necessary for her success and self-preservation 
that she shall establish a blockade against 
Great Britain as nearly parallel as possible to the one 
Great Britain has established against her; and that her 
only means of accomplishing this end is in the destruction 
of British vessels, which are carrying volunteers, 
arms and war munitions of various kinds to Great 
Britain, intended for the destruction of Germans and 
their homes. Germany regrets her inability, under the 
circumstances, to follow international law, to which she 
has agreed, and claims justification in the fact that the 
British have violated the same law. Germany has agreed, 
however, to respect the vessels of neutrals, if assured 
that they do not carry munitions of war. She calls attention 
to the fact that she notified vessels of neutrals 
(in her paper blockade) to keep out of the war zone; 
and says that if neutrals travel on ships of the Allies 
their lives and property must be at their own risk. 

PROPER COURSE OF UNITED STATES 

Regardless of where our sympathies would naturally 
rest, either by our parentage or by association in life, 
all must admit that both parties in this great struggle 



are in dire straits, and therefore under great temptation 
to violate, as they have done, international law. But how 
should the United States meet the situation? Would it 
be the wise, the proper, thing to get into an altercation 
with any of these nations because of their violation of 
the law? If not, how can we protest effectively? 

We reply that a dignified and proper course would be 
to refuse to have any commercial dealings with the 
nations at war so long as they violate the international 
law to which they have agreed. We believe that this 
would bring both of the great powers to time and put a 
stop to the interference with neutrals and their affairs. 
Why should the portion of the world that is at peace be 
upset and inconvenienced by those at war? It would be 
permitted only because the nations at war are powerful. 
If the breaking off of commercial dealings with the entire 
war zone were accomplished, and Americans and their 
goods were kept outside those zones, trouble would be 
saved, even if the warring nations did not acquiesce and 
give guarantee of the observance of international laws. 

Business interests cry out against such a dignified 
course, such a fair policy. They exclaim, "This would 
spoil the whole business!" We have orders for hundreds 
of millions of dollars worth of war materials at splendid 
prices, and we would lose all this. Therefore the suggested 
policy would never do." 

We admit that according to international law the 
people of a neutral country may privately manufacture 
for warring nations. We admit that such trade is profitable. 
Nevertheless it is a permission, and not an obligation, 
that subjects of neutral nations may, according to 
international law, thus deal with belligerent nations. But 
that there is no compulsion in the matter is evident from 
the fact that our Government has already exercised its 
discretion in stopping the sale of war materials to 

R5767 : page 278 

Mexico, for instance. It has the same right, and without 
infringing neutrality, to stop the sale of war materials 
to every nation at war. Such a penalty upon the 
violation of international law would be, apparently, the 
only way of bringing belligerents to time. 

Besides, our overtures to the warring nations and the 
prayers of many on their behalf and the sending of supplies, 
physicians, nurses, etc., to assist in caring for their 
wounded, all have the appearance of pitiable mockery in 
the light of the assistance we are rendering for the continuation 
of the war through permitting American manufacturers 
to sell war munitions to the warring nations, 
which are interfering with the rights of all neutrals and 
violating international law. 

In any event, how foolish it would be that these 
United States should get into a controversy with any of 
the warring powers, when the whole world is witness to 
their folly and when they themselves are wishing most 



earnestly that they had kept out of the war. 

We cannot appeal to our nation as a nation of Christians, 
along the lines of the commands of Jesus; but all 
consecrated children of God should remember that there 
are but two sides, two banners, two captains. Christians 
have enlisted under the banner of the Prince of Peace, 
who is opposing the Prince of Darkness, whose fall will 
be accomplished in the great time of revolution and 
anarchy which the Bible predicts will follow this war, 
and which, thank God! will be the doorway to the Millennial 
Kingdom and the great blessing which will then 
come to the world through it. "For the Elect's sake, 
those days [of strife and anarchy] shall be shortened"— 
interrupted (Matthew 24:22); for when men shall have 
learned the great lesson of what the outcome of selfishness 
would be without Divine interposition, God's Power 
through Messiah's Kingdom will promptly take control; 
and the blessing of the Lord will cause the winds of 
strife to cease, as did the Master's words on Galilee 
cause a great calm when the storm was at its height. 

Meantime, regardless of the course of the world, it 
is the duty of the Lord's consecrated people to preserve 
unbiased, neutral minds— to look at matters from God's 
viewpoint, as far as possible— to sympathize with all and 
to join with none— to stand for peace in action, in word, 
in thought. "Blessed are the peacemakers; for they 
shall be called the children of God." 



R5767 : page 279 

THE MIRACULOUS BIRTH OF JESUS 

IT IS not strange that men should question 
the teaching of the Bible respecting the 
miraculous birth of Jesus. Voltaire, Paine, 
Ingersoll and others have denied it. Nor 
do we question the right of Rev. Dr. Aked 
and others of today to take up the same 
arguments. We live in a free country. 
Candor in our day need not lead anybody 
to the stake. We rejoice in these liberties. 

But we are surprised that Dr. Aked 
should still claim to be a Christian, and still retain the 
pastorate of a Christian Church, while denying the very 
foundation of the Christian religion. Our amazement 
grows when we learn that after he had frankly acknowledged 
his unbelief he was elected to be the head of the 
Church Federation in San Francisco. 

Think of the meaning of the votes of more than 
three-fourths of that Federation (78), agreeing that 
Jesus was not supernaturally born! Less than one-fourth 
of these Federationists (22) believe the fundamental 
doctrine of Christianity! 

We can hear these learned gentlemen remonstrate, 



saying, Pastor Russell, you should realize that there are 

two Christianities in our day. We belong to the newer 

and larger one, which has the backing of all the colleges. 

We therefore have first right to the name Christian. The 

old view, which you uphold, has doctrines of human depravity 

—of a Divine sentence, which must be met by the 

death of a perfect, sinless Savior. We "Modernists" 

still hold to Christ, but as a great Teacher— not a Redeemer. 

Your old view deals with personal sin. Our 

newer, broader view deals with national and civic sins 

and their cure and a gradual evolution of the race to perfection 

and everlasting life— only the fittest surviving. 

A RESPONSIBILITY UPON THE MINISTRY 

Were numbers and influence the sole criterion by 
which Christianity is to be discerned, we might be forced 
to concede the point. But they are not. Christianity 
was established by Jesus and His Apostles. The unbelief 
of few or many cannot change Christianity. If we shall 
prove our points, we shall hope that the seventy-eight 
believers in the Christianity (?) of the colleges will 
realize that in retaining the name of Christian and holding 
pastorates in Christian churches, they are sailing 
under false colors; and they should resign or induce 
their congregations to unite with them in some new 
name, such as "Humanitarians." 

Merely to endorse a few of Jesus' teachings, such as 
the Golden Rule, while rejecting His other teachings, 
would not give any one the right to the name Christian. 
Plato, Confucius and other sages uttered some teachings 
which we approve. Why not adopt their names? Is it 
because they are less popular in our day? 



Dr. Aked admits that St. Matthew gives the line of 
Joseph, who adopted Jesus as his foster-child— the son 
of his virgin wife by Divine Power. He admits that St. 
Luke gives the genealogy of Mary, the mother of Jesus. 
He admits, also, that St. John's Gospel tells of the pre-human 
existence of Jesus. 

But Dr. Aked challenges proof that Jesus Himself 
claimed a supernatural birth. He boldly declares that 
St. Peter never refers to it. He exultingly points us to 
the Epistles of St. Paul, as not teaching that Jesus was 
a supernatural Person. One might suppose, when reading 
Dr. Aked's statement, that he fully believes and endorses 
all the teachings of Jesus, St. Peter and St. Paul; 
and that if they had told of the miraculous birth he would 
be a hearty believer in it and an advocate of it. Let us 
see! Let us give Dr. Aked and his seventy -eight supporters 
the proof of their error and accept the Bible. 
"Charity hopeth all things!" 

The Bible stands or falls as a whole. Its Plan of 
salvation, made up of the teachings of Jesus, the Apostles 



and the Prophets, cannot be accepted in part and rejected 
in part. If Jesus and His Apostles taught that He had a 
special birth for a special purpose, and this were not 
true, they were wicked deceivers. Then not one word of 
theirs should be accepted or trusted. To call Jesus the 
Great Teacher and then to say that the basis of His 
teaching is falsehood, is inconsistent, would imply sympathy 
with falsehood. 

ST. PETER'S TESTIMONY 

The teaching of Jesus was chiefly by induction. He 
had been with His disciples working miracles for probably 
two years before He asked them, "Whom say ye 
that I am?" When St. Peter declared, "Thou art the 
Christ, the Son of the living God," Jesus replied, "Flesh 
and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but My Father 
which is in Heaven."— Matthew 16:15-17. 

Did not St. Peter thus declare his faith that Jesus 
was the Son of God— not the son of Joseph? And did 
not Jesus approve this, and refer to the Heavenly and 
not to an earthly father? 

What did Jesus mean when He declared, "Before 
Abraham was, I am?" By induction He told of a pre-human 
existence— or He deceived! Similarly He prayed 
to the Father, "Glorify Thou Me with Thine own Self 
with the glory which I had with Thee before the world 
was." (John 8:58; 17:5.) If He had no previous existence, 
but was born like others, His words were deceptive. 
Was the great Teacher the great Deceiver? 

Again Jesus told His disciples about His ascending 
up where He was before. If He had no previous existence, 
if He had not a special birth, how could we 
understand these words except as deceptive? Similarly 
Jesus referred to Himself as "the Bread which came 
down from Heaven."— John 6:62,32-35,41. 

Surely Jesus was miraculously born, or else He was 
the greatest and most successful of all deceivers, and 
therefore the worst of all deceivers. Let each take his 
choice. There is no middle ground. 

ST. PAUL'S VIEW OF THE SUBJECT 

Having heard from Jesus and from St. Peter, let us 
hear from St. Paul. What is the force, or significance 
of St. Paul's statement that Jesus is "the Firstborn of 
every creature," and that "by Him were all things created, 
that are in Heaven, and that are in earth, visible 
and invisible. ..all things were created by Him and 
for Him; and He is before all things, and by Him all 
things consist"? (Colossians 1:15-17.) These words by 
the Apostle are surely not in accord with the theory that 
Jesus began His existence the same as others— that He 
was the son of Joseph. 

Again St. Paul writes, "Our Lord Jesus, though He 
was rich, for our sakes became poor." (2 Corinthians 8:9.) 



Again he declares, "Who, existing in a form of 
God, counted not equality with God a thing to be grasped, 
but emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant, being 
made in the likeness of men."— Philippians 2:6,7. 

Again, what is the meaning of St. Paul's declaration 
that Jesus was "Holy, guileless, undefiled and separate 
from sinners"? (Hebrews 7:26.) If Jesus was the son 
of Joseph, He was not separate from sinners, but belonged 

R5768 : page 280 

to the same stock with all others and would also 
have needed a Redeemer. 

ST. JOHN'S STATEMENTS 

The early Church all believed Jesus' declaration that 
He was the Son of God, whom the Father had sent into 
the world to be the Savior of men. (John 3:17.) Indeed, 
this feature of the Master's teachings especially 
angered the Jews; for they declared that in claiming to 
be the Son of God He was establishing Himself upon a 
pedestal of honor, dignity, glory, in competition with 
Jehovah. To this Jesus replied, "Say ye of Him whom 
the Father hath sanctified and sent into the world, Thou 
blasphemest! because I said, I am the Son of God?"— 
John 10:36. 

The Gospel by St. John was written later than the 
other Gospels; hence it was not necessary that the 
writer should take up the miraculous birth of Jesus. But 
it was eminently proper that through him God should 
give us a glimpse into the pre-human condition of the 
Savior. Mark well the particularity of the Apostle's 
words: "In the beginning was the Logos, and the Logos 
was with the God, and the Logos was a God. The same 
was in the beginning with the God. All things were 
made by Him, and without Him was not one thing made 
that was made. ..And the Logos was made flesh and 
dwelt among us, and we beheld His glory, the glory as 
of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and 
truth. "-John 1:1-14. 

BASIS OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE RANSOM 

Separated from the doctrine of the virgin birth of 
Jesus, the theology of the Bible would not hold together 
for one moment. Its claim is that the Divine sentence 
following Adam's sin was a death sentence. The basis 
of that Divine judgment is that no sinner is worthy of 
life everlasting. The six thousand years of the world's 
history, from Adam's time until now, demonstrate that 
man is unable to regain perfection, and unable to resist 
the curse of sin and the sentence of death— "Dying, 
thou shalt die."— Genesis 2:17, margin. 

The teaching of the Bible is that God arranged this 
death sentence purposely, so as to make necessary the 



death of Jesus. St. Paul so declares, saying, "As by a 

man came death, by a man also came the resurrection 

of the dead; for as all in Adam die, even so all in Christ 

shall be made alive, every man in his own order." (1 Corinthians 15:21-23.) 

In other words, if God had not 

provided a sinless Redeemer, and if that Redeemer had 

not died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and 

risen from the dead for our justification, then there 

would have been no future life for humanity— the death 

of mankind would have been like that of the brute, a 

hopeless one. There would have been no resurrection. 

Death would have been an eternal sleep. 

St. Paul emphasizes this thought, declaring that if 
there be no resurrection of the dead, then all faith is 
vain, all hope is vain, all preaching is vain. (1 Corinthians 15:13,14.) 
No one will question the declaration of 
the Scriptures that all humanity are misshapen in iniquity, 
and that in sin did our mothers conceive us. 
Father Adam and Mother Eve gave us, as their children, 
a legacy of imperfection of mind and body and of sinful 
tendencies. God's provision is that Christ shall make 
good for the transgression of the first Adam, and that 
eventually He shall be the Second Adam, who will be 
successful, who will give life everlasting to all those 
who will exercise obedient faith in Him. 

BASIS OF THE DOCTRINE OF RESTITUTION 

The first offer of everlasting life through Christ has 
been going out for nineteen centuries; but few have 
hearing ears and understanding hearts. It is to these 
few that the call now comes to leave the world and to 
become associates with Jesus in the glory, honor and immortality 
to which He has attained. He attained the 
glorious station which He now occupies, "far above 
angels, principalities and powers," at the right hand of 
the Majesty on High, as a reward for His obedience to 
the Father's will— obedience in coming into the world, 
in enduring faithfully the trials of His earthly ministry, 
and finally in dying a sacrificial death. St. Paul writes 
of Him, "Who for the joy that was set before Him, endured 
the cross, despising the shame and is set down at 
the right hand of the Throne of God." (Hebrews 12:2.) 
The invitation of this Gospel Age to all who 
have the hearing ear is to follow in the steps of Jesus, 
to become join t-sacrificers with Him, and to be sharers 
of His Heavenly glory and His Messianic Kingdom. 

When the Church shall all have been gathered, then 
Messiah's Kingdom will be established, for which we 
pray, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth 
as it is in Heaven." For a thousand years Christ and 
His glorified Church will bless mankind, uplifting them 
to human perfection, mental, moral, physical. Whosoever 
will may then attain to the everlasting life secured 
for all by the sacrificial death of Him who was "holy, 
harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners," by virtue 



of His special birth. 



R5768 : page 280 

APOSTOLIC INJUNCTION NEVER SO SIGNIFICANT 

"The night is far spent, the day is at hand. Let us therefore 
cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor 
of light."— Romans 13:12. 

FROM a careful study of Bible chronology it 

seems very evident that each of the six 

great Days in which Jehovah prepared the 

earth for man, ending with man's own 

creation, was a period of seven thousand 

years. After man was created, God "rested 

from all His work"— as related to the earth. 

His rest period began with the commencement 

of the great Seventh Day, and has 

continued ever since. This Seventh Day 

is also to be a period of seven thousand years, ushering 

in at its close the glorious Jubilee of Earth, 49,000 years 

after the beginning of the ordering of Earth. 

This great Rest Day of Jehovah has been man's Work 
Week, each Day of which has been a thousand years 
long. When the Apostle Paul wrote the words of our 
text, more than four of these thousand-year Days were 
in the past; they were then in the Fifth Day. Practically 
all of this time had been a reign of sin, darkness and 
death, due to man's fall. So St. Paul could truly say, 
as he looked back, that this great night of darkness was 
then far spent and the day was at hand. From the Old 
Testament prophecies and from the wonderful revelations 
which he himself had received from the Lord he 
was assured that, through the sacrifice for man which 
had been made by the Lord Jesus Christ, a glorious Day 

R5768 : page 281 

of emancipation from the bondage of Sin and Death was 

to come— the Seventh Day of man's great Week. It is 

of this glorious Sabbath Day that the Apostle here speaks. 

For one-half of the long period since the fall of our 
first parents, there had been but a very obscure light as 
regarded any deliverance of man from the curse of 
death pronounced upon the father of the race for his 
disobedience. There was the mere glimmer of a promise 
that God would at some future time do something for 
mankind. First there had been a declaration to the 
serpent who had brought about man's downfall, that the 
Seed of the woman should bruise, or crush, his head, 
while he would but bruise the heel of this Seed. Then 
the clothing by the Lord of the nakedness of Adam and 
Eve with the skins of slain animals suggested a future 



covering provided by the death of some unknown Redeemer - 

the Seed of the Woman. Later, God manifested 

His acceptance of the animal-sacrifice of Abel. 

A little later came a suggestion to Enoch (Jude 14-16), 

and still later, a promise to Abraham, that God would 

yet bless all the families of the earth through his Seed. 

Then came a gradual working out of a feature of 
that Promise to Abraham, through the Hebrew people, 
to make of them, if they would prove worthy, a nation 
who would be light-bearers to all other nations and 
peoples. Still with all the disciplinary experiences which 
Israel received, when our Lord Jesus came, those who 
had been under such special Divine instruction were, as 
a nation, totally unready to receive Him as the Messiah 
of God. And they crucified Him. Yet they were in 
advance of other nations. God had not given instructions 
to other nations, but had given Prophets, Laws, etc., 
to the people of Israel. (Amos 3:2.) But while this 
especially favored nation was quite unready for the light, 
as represented in the Lord Jesus and His teachings, 
there were some among them who were ready to receive 
Him as the Sent of God, Israel's long-looked-for Messiah. 
These were the "Israelites indeed." 

THE CALL OF THE "BRIDE" CLASS 

"He came unto His own [nation], and His own received 
Him not." At the time of the crucifixion of 
Christ, after John the Baptist had done his work and 
after our Lord's three and a half years of ministry 
among them, only a little more than five hundred had 
become Jesus' disciples and had remained true. Yet at 
Pentecost and onward a considerable number were 
awakened, and came into the light of Truth and accepted 
the Gospel Message and received the Holy Spirit. About 
twenty-five thousand, so far as we are able to estimate, 
received this transformation of heart. It is a wonderful 
thing that so many of that little nation were found to 
accept Messiah! No other nation would have made so 
good a showing. As history has proven, more than 1800 

R5769 : page 281 

years have been required to select the remainder of the 
144,000 Elect from among the Gentiles. 

At that time the Message was given forth that the 
Gospel Call was designed to select a "Bride" class, to be 
associated with the Messiah in His glorious Kingdom. 
It was not designed for all, but only for those who had 
the ears to hear and the heart to respond. If we place 
ourselves back in the days of the Apostles, we can think 
of them as preparing themselves for their great, coming 
glory and as thinking that the foreordained number to 
constitute this honored company would soon be completed. 
They probably thought that these thousands 
gathered from all the Jews in Palestine and other countries, 



and especially when augmented by some from the 
Gentiles whom they perceived were later received, would 
make up the "little flock" which would compose the 
"Bride" of Christ. Hence the Apostles were continually 
speaking as if the Kingdom was at hand. They thought 
it imminent— were expecting it every day. 

NO CLEAR CHRONOLOGY UNTIL OUR DAY 

But the Apostle Paul pointed out that certain Scriptures 
had not yet been fulfilled, and that there must be a 
great falling away in the Church before the great Day 
of the Lord could come. The early Church probably 
had no particular method in which they could have 
reckoned definitely the number of years since Adam. 
The matter of counting years, as we have it, is comparatively 
a modern affair. In olden times each nation 
had its own chronology. They merely reckoned that it 
was so many years since this dynasty or that dynasty 
began; so many years from a certain notable event to the 
first year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, of Cyrus, etc. 

And so with the Israelites. They would say, In such 
a year of the reign of David, or of Hezekiah, etc., such 
and such an event took place. But it was not easy to get 
these things connected up so as to have any accurate 
chain of chronology. There were certain broken links, 
which our Lord has since supplied for us in the New 
Testament, to be noted and connected up "in due time." 
Today we have more advantage every way than they had. 
The Hebrew Scriptures were written on parchment and 
kept in certain places. And it was difficult to handle 
them because they were written on great rolls. One 
had to roll the parchment this way and that way to get 
to the place where he wished to read certain prophecies, 
etc. Today, not only have we Bibles neatly printed, but 
many of them have convenient marks of reference by 
which we can turn from page to page. We have suggestions, 
also, as to chronology which enable us to get a 
clear, connected chain from the creation of Adam to the 
present year. 

It is true also that the Jews have a chronology that 
is called Anno Mundi— the year of the world. But it 
was not arranged until long after the days of the Apostles. 
They thought it was a long, long way back to the 
time of Adam. The Apostle Peter declares that a day 
with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand 
years as one day. The Jews had no means by which they 
could accurately reckon chronology from the beginning; 
no means for availing themselves of information on the 
subject. It is not surprising, then, that they were not 
clearly informed. The Lord, undoubtedly by design, left 
matters in this uncertain condition until His own "due 
time" for their revealment. 

THE DAY OF CHRIST NOW ON HAND 



In the days of the Apostles it was truly declared by 
them that the Day of the Lord was "at hand." The 
Apostles perceived that a great Light had come into the 
world, that a turning-point in the history of the world 
had arrived. But it was not the shining of the Sunlight 
of the great Millennial Day. St. Paul declared that the 
darkness still covered the earth and gross darkness the 
people. The Lord Jesus Himself had explained that the 
light that then shone from Him was not the great "Sun 
of Righteousness," which would later shine out upon the 
whole world. Neither did the disciples of Christ shed a 
light as the light of the sun upon the world of mankind. 
Our Lord told His disciples that they should put their 
light upon a candlestick, that it might give light to those 
in the House.-Matthew 5:14-16. 

But it would require the light of the "Sun of Righteousness" 

R5769 : page 282 

to enlighten the whole world— Christ and His 

Church in glory. Our Lord pointed out that this would 

come at the conclusion of the Age then just begun— the 

Gospel Age, as it is generally called, the Christian Dispensation. 

At the beginning of this Age He sowed the 

seed which would produce the "Bride" class, the class 

which was to reign with Him over the world in the Age 

to follow. But He forewarned that the enemy, Satan, 

would sow the seeds of error in the Lord's wheat-field, 

and that he would be successful in producing a large 

crop of tares. Our Lord also declared that at the end 

of this Gospel Age He would Himself be present and 

would, as the great Chief Reaper, gather the tares in 

bundles to be burned, and would gather the wheat into 

the garner. Speaking of that time the Master says, 

"Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the 

Kingdom of their Father."— Matthew 13:43. 

That time has not yet fully come. But this glorious 
Day is now breaking. The majority of the members of 
Christ are now with their Lord on the other side of the 
veil, and the dawning light is increasing, and the Day 
will soon be here in all its glorious effulgence. This 
dawning light draws our attention more particularly to 
the chronology, and helps us to see mistakes that were 
made in the past by those who attempted to arrange a 
chronology before the time was ripe for it to be seen 
clearly. It shows us that a mistake of a hundred and 
twenty years was made, and still later lesser mistakes. 

Tracing the Scriptural chronology down to our day, 
we find that we are now living in the very dawn of the 
great Seventh Day of man's great Week. This is 
abundantly corroborated by the events now taking place 
about us on every hand. The Millennial Age has already 
begun, the Day of the Lord is now on hand— now present. 
So we should not sleep, but should be wide awake. 
Some terrible things were to occur as the Day of Christ 
drew on, before the full shining forth of the Sun. For 



instance, this present mighty war, which is truly a terrible 
thing, was long ago foretold. (Jeremiah 25:15-38; 
Joel 3:2,9-16.) Daily is it increasing in volume and 
intensity, and will soon merge into revolution, to be 
swiftly followed by the chaos of anarchy. The great 
Adversary is able to put darkness for light— and these 
warring nations verily think they are doing God service 
by killing one another. 

Now the question is, Will the United States become 
involved? This may come, or this country may receive 
its share of retribution in the coming revolution and 
anarchy. We attribute all this terrible condition to the 
darkness that is upon the world through the Adversary's 
blinding delusions. But God will overrule human affairs 
to His own glory and to the ultimate good of man in the 
overthrow of the Rule of Selfishness and the establishment 
of His glorious Kingdom of Righteousness and Love. 

"Cast off the works of darkness," urges the Apostle. 
This injunction was appropriate in St. Paul's day. Those 
who saw Jesus to be the Light of the world, those who 
became enlightened with His Light, and themselves became 
burning and shining lights, were able to realize 
that the great darkness prevailing around them was 
largely the result of ignorance, superstition, misunderstanding 
The whole heathen world were in gross darkness. 
The Jewish nation were in darkness, except the 
minority who received the light. What darkness were 
the Jews in? They were in darkness in respect to God's 
Plan and the meaning of the Promise to Abraham and 
his Seed respecting the blessing of the world. 

"THE WHOLE WORLD LIETH IN THE WICKED ONE" 

All those who became children of the light, who received 
the light from the Master's teachings or from 
His chosen Apostles and came into Covenant relationship 
with God through the begetting of the Holy Spirit, 
became members of the special Seed of Abraham, who 
are to bless the world during the incoming Age. But 
the nation of Israel was set aside, as respects the chief 
favor. In the year 70 A.D., their national polity was 
entirely destroyed, and the Jews were scattered far and 
wide. What was the condition of other nations at that 
time? We perceive that while Israel had been in darkness, 
the other nations were in still deeper darkness, 
though many of them were "feeling after God, if haply 
they might find Him." The god of this world has blinded 
the minds of those who see not. Consequently he has 
blinded the minds of the majority of all nations with 
ignorance, superstition and "doctrines of devils." 

The Devil has men in such a condition that they 
cannot think of God as being good. "The whole world 
lieth in the Wicked One." The only ones who are not 
in the Wicked One are the true Church of God, the 
Church of Christ. The children of the light are the only 
exceptions. It is from the Word of God that His true 



people get their light. They are to have oil in themselves 
—the oil of the Holy Spirit. But many of these 
have not been faithful to the light and are in confusion; 
some are merely babes in Christ; some are weak in 
various ways for lack of the spiritual food which the 
Lord has provided. 

It is God's people who have been addressed in the 
Scriptures all the way down these nineteen hundred 
years. We come down to our day and see that the light 
of the Word is fully corroborated by the work of the 
New Dispensation now beginning. The light of the 
Dawn is fully corroborating the Bible. St. Paul says 
that we should "cast off the works of darkness" and "put 
on the armor of light." The works of darkness are 
those things which are done in the dark. The works of 
darkness are the works of sin. These works are not 

R5770 : page 282 

done out in the open, as a rule. They generally hide 
away from the revealment which the light brings. If 
they are done in the open, it is when they are posing as 
works of light. Wherever the true light of Jesus Christ 
comes it reproves these works of darkness. 

The Scribes and the Pharisees of Jesus' day were 
money-lovers. Jesus condemned their works because 
these were mere pretense. While they prayed in street 
corners, etc., they privately devoured widows' houses- 
took advantage of widows and swallowed up their property. 
But it was true of the public in general— of the 
Gentiles as well as the Jews. The Apostles enumerated 
a number of the evils that were generally practised in 
his day— adultery, lasciviousness, covetousness, witchcraft, 
hatred, wrath, strife, heresies, evil-speaking, idolatry, 
etc. All these things are works of darkness, works 
of the flesh and of the Devil; and they are still practised 
everywhere today. 

THE ARMOR OVER THE ROBE 

We are to put on the "armor of light." Consider the 
light you have now received— the light of the knowledge 
of God, of His will, of what to live for, and of what 
kind of characters they are to whom the Lord will be 
pleased to grant the reward of eternal life, even the 
highest form of life. Having all this knowledge, put it 
on as an armor to protect you. Knowing what God requires, 
put all this on, not as a robe, but as an armor 

R5770 : page 283 

over the robe. Put on the breastplate of righteousness 
covering the heart. Realize that nothing but heart-purity 
and absolute loyalty to God may be considered. Realize 
that God is for us. Take the Sword of the Spirit, the 
Word of God, and all the various pieces enumerated by 



the Apostle. These constitute the "armor of light," so 
called because it is obtained from the light of Truth. 

In this our day it is surely as important that we 
should put on this armor and should put off the works 
of darkness as for the Church of the Apostle's day. 
Surely if ever the whole armor was needed, it is needed 
now. The Lord's dealing with us is individual— both as 
to the putting off of the works of darkness and as to the 
putting on of the armor of light. All who put on this 
armor will find themselves in accord with the Lord and 
with those who are truly His. As God's faithful children 
get farther and farther into this Day of the Lord, 
more and more will they see eye to eye. We believe 
there never was a time when so many of the Lord's 
people have seen eye to eye regarding the things to put 
off and the things to put on. We believe there never 
was a time when so many of the children of the light 
were wearing the whole Armor of Light. Therefore we 
have so much the more responsibility to "walk as children 
of light" and not as of the night. 

DANGER TO EVEN THE FULLY CONSECRATED 

It is possible that some, even of the fully consecrated 
children of God, surrounded with the cares of this life, 
or weary of the struggle against sin and evil, or somewhat 
beguiled by the present things of time and sense, 
may have become more or less drowsy, and so stand in 
special need of the stirring exhortation which the Apostle 
in this connection gives to the Church— particularly appropriate 
today: "It is now high time to awake out of 
sleep!" It is time for earnest, searching self-examination, 
for a more diligent watching to see that we do not 
allow the things of this "present evil world" to absorb 
our thoughts and energies to the imperiling of our 
Heavenly hopes, so soon to be realized if we remain 
wholly faithful to the end. It is highly important that 
we seek for a still closer walk with God, a more intimate 
fellowship with Him, a more thorough self-abnegation, 
a more diligent cross-bearing, a more faithful conformity 
in every respect to the whole will of the Lord concerning 
us. And this will of the Lord, we know, is not unreasonable, 
and His grace sufficient is promised for every day, 
every hour, every moment! 

A careful, prayerful searching of our hearts will 
make plain wherein we lack in conformity to the perfect 
will of God. And if we discover in ourselves any perverse 
way, we shall correct it. Thus we more and more 
"put on the Lord Jesus Christ"— the mind or disposition 
of Christ, the spirit of love and loyalty which characterized 
Him. How important it is, in the very short time 
which yet remains to us, that we fully awake and apply 
ourselves most diligently to the cultivation of the Godlike, 
Christlike disposition of Love, the love which seeks 
above all else the glory of God, which is kindly-affectioned 
toward the brethren, which rests in the precious 



promises, which trusts fully in the dark as well as in the 
light, and which has no shadow of doubt that all the good 
things promised in God's Word shall be fulfilled! 

LET US "WALK AS BECOMETH SAINTS" 

In the context St. Paul urges, "Let us walk honestly, 
as in the day." He was speaking of certain vile practises 
then common— drunkenness, rioting, chambering, 
wantonness. We are not necessarily to suppose that he 
meant this as a reproof to the Christian believers at 
Rome, but as a pastoral exhortation that they should be 
on guard against these sins, and as a reminder that the 
principles which they had adopted as Christians were in 
direct contrast to those which generally prevailed. Very 
different standards of morality were current among the 
heathen. Quite a large number of the believers at Rome 
had been heathen and accustomed to immoralities. Hence 
the Apostle's words were words of caution; for we would 
not suppose that saints would be guilty of these things. 

The Apostle's words above shed a warning light in 
saying, "Let us walk honestly, as in the day." Most of 
the rioting and drunkenness is done at night— such is 
the custom even to this day. Works of darkness and sin 
thrive best at night, for some reason. People have other 
things to attend to in the day-time, and evil-doers take 
the night for frivolity or carousing or crime. Vice then 
stalks abroad. Darkness seems to favor such works, by 
hiding them more or less. The Apostle points out that 
this is the great night of darkness, sin, but that those in 
Christ are not in darkness; for they have been brought 
into the light of God. We are looking for the full dawning 
of the Morning of the New Dispensation— we are 
seeking to live in harmony with it. So here he says, 
Let us walk honestly, above-board, so that everybody will 
see and know our lives— let us be honest in every way, 
not be preaching one thing and practising another. 

Considering the day here mentioned to be the Millennial 
Day, we may well say that nothing in the nature 
of sin will then be allowed. "For out of Zion shall go 
forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem." 
(Micah 4:2.) "Judgment also will I lay to the 
line," says Jehovah, "and righteousness to the plummet; 
and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the 
water shall overflow the hiding-place." (Isaiah 28:17.) 
Whoever in that Day shall attempt to live riotously and 
in drunkenness or in any sin will be promptly punished. 
The Apostle's exhortation is that we, as saints of the 
Lord, should live as those will be living when the Day 
shall have fully come— when the Sun of Righteousness 
will be shedding its beams over the whole earth. 

It is a part of our overcoming to live as though the 
Day were fully ushered in, as though everything had 
been fully manifested. Whoever will take the Apostle's 
advice in this matter will certainly have a rich blessing. 
In fact any other course would be sure to be disastrous 



to us as New Creatures in Christ! 

page 283 

ONLY A LITTLE WHILE 

"Only a little while to walk with weary feet, 
Only a little while the storms of life to meet, 
Only a little while to tread the thorny way, 
Only a little while, then comes the perfect Day. 

"Only a little while to spread the truth abroad. 
Only a little while to testify for God, 
Only a little while, the time is fleeting fast, 
Only a little while, earth's sorrows all are past. 

"Only a little while, then let us do our best, 
Only a little while, then comes the promised rest. 
Only a little while, oh, what a word is this! 
Only a little while, then comes the perfect bliss." 



R5770 : page 284 

AHAB'S SIN-COVETOUSNESS, MURDER 

-OCTOBER 3.-1 KINGS 21.- 

KING AHAB'S IVORY PALACE-HE COVETED LARGER GARDENS 
-NABOTH REFUSED LARGE MONEY-AHAB WAS VEXED-HIS 

QUEEN EFFECTED NABOTH'S MURDER-GOD THROUGH 
ELIJAH REPROVED KING AHAB, PROMISING 

PUNISHMENT-MODERN APPLICATIONS AND LESSONS. 

"Be sure your sin will find you out."— Numbers 32:23. 

KING AHAB had concluded a great war victoriously, 

defeating the Syrians, who had 

attempted an invasion of Israel's land. The 

fame of the king had gone abroad. He was 

feeling his own greatness, perhaps. Indeed, 

Ahab is rated as one of the great kings of 

Israel. Although not truly great, he had 

certain progressive elements of character. 

While King Solomon had the distinction of 

being the first king to have a throne of 

ivory, for King Ahab has been claimed the distinction of 

having a palace of ivory. His gorgeous palace needed a 

large and handsome garden. His neighbor Naboth had 

a vineyard adjoining, which would make the surroundings 

of the palace ideal. 

Messengers were sent to Naboth to negotiate the purchase; 
and a goodly sum of money was offered for the 
vineyard. Naboth, within his rights, refused to sell. As 
the sequel shows, however, he would have been the wiser 



not to have stood for his full rights. The Jewish Law 
forbade, indeed, the selling of family inheritances; but 
he could have given a lease for a time to the king's 
pleasement and to his own profit. 

The Bible suggests to Christians the wisdom of being 
accommodating in every manner not in violation of conscience. 
While they have as great rights as others (or 
greater, perhaps, on account of being God's children), 
nevertheless it is part of their covenant with the Lord that 

R5771 : page 284 

they will not live for themselves merely, but chiefly for 

the service of the Lord and their fellows. They are forewarned 

also not to expect full justice— although always 

to seek to give justice, in harmony with the Golden Rule, 

full measure pressed down. They are to realize that in 

taking this course they will have more and more the 

Lord's blessing, and that the experiences of character 

development under such conditions will be helpful to 

them as respects the coming Kingdom. 

QUEEN JEZEBEL FEARED NOT GOD 

Of all the characters on the pages of history Queen 
Jezebel, Ahab's wife, stands out prominently as one of 
the most conscienceless. Noting that King Ahab appeared 
despondent, she asked the cause. On learning it she 
promised the king that she would give him Naboth's 
vineyard, and advised that he should, therefore, cheer up. 
Immediately she wrote letters in King Ahab's name, 
using his royal seal. She instructed some of the officials 
that on an appointed fast-day, on which the people would 
be in mourning to the Lord for their sins, Naboth should 
be given a seat of great honor. Two men were to be 
bribed to rise up then, suddenly in the midst of the meeting, 
and denounce Naboth as a slanderer of God and of 
the king. The rulers thereupon were to hear the evidence 
and to put the penalty promptly into execution. 
The Jewish Law provided that any blasphemy against 
God's name should be punished by stoning. The hired 
witnesses promptly denounced Naboth and corroborated 
each other's testimony. Forthwith a company arose, and 
stoned the man to death outside the city. 

The hypocrisy of the proceedings astounds one. The 
proclaiming of the fast was seemingly in honor of God's 
laws and His justice. The Queen's perfidy matches anything 
on the pages of history. The servility of the governors 
to her behests evidences what a low state of morals 
prevailed. 

King Ahab seems to have been the passive beneficiary 
of all this wickedness. He was, nevertheless, the accountable 
person. His course proves that he was not truly 
great. Riches and station cannot make greatness, but 
character only can do so. The king was very willing to 
profit by his wife's shameful course. Upon hearing 



through her that Naboth was dead, he went over to look 
at Naboth's vineyard and to consider how it might be 
adapted to his purposes as a part of the palace garden. 

Just as he was entering the garden he was met by 
Elijah, who had been sent by the Lord with a message 
of reproof. The king saluted the Prophet, saying, "Hast 
thou found me, O mine enemy?" Elijah answered, "I 
have found thee; because thou hast sold thyself to work 
evil in the sight of the Lord." Then he informed the 
king that Divine judgment was that in the same place 
that the dogs had licked the blood of Naboth, dogs should 
also lick the king's blood, and that Queen Jezebel would 
have a similar fate. 

PRESENT WAR RESULT OF SELFISHNESS 

It should be remarked that at present, as in the past, 
God is not serving as a policeman to safeguard the world 
against its own fallen conditions, appetites, covetousness, 
etc. For six thousand years the Lord seems to have contented 
Himself with letting mankind learn their own 
lessons, except so far as their course of sin might interfere 
with the outworking of God's great plans. In such 
cases the sentiment of the Lord seems to have been, 
"Thus far shalt thou go and no farther." 

Undoubtedly the permission to mankind to do great 
injury to themselves is a very practical way of inculcating 
important lessons. God seems to be bidding the angels to 
no longer restrain, but to let loose the four winds of 
heaven— to allow mankind to engage in universal strife- 
unhindered. The result is the most stupendous of wars, 
impoverishing all nations engaged therein, costing millions 
of lives in the flower of manhood, and entailing 
debts, to pay interest on which will impoverish the people 
for long years to come— debts which probably never can 
be paid. The Bible indicates that following the war will 
come a great revolution and that following it may be expected 
anarchy. The winds of strife, now let loose, may 
be expected to injure the world unrestrained by the 
Almighty until, in man's extremity, God's opportunity will 
come, and the Kingdom of Messiah will be established for 
the blessing of the world. 

With the establishment of God's Kingdom everything 
will be changed. No longer will sins be permitted and 
the punishments follow; but instead, punishments will be 
inflicted upon those who attempt to do evil— before they 
shall have done the evil. For the Lord has promised, 
saying, "They shall not hurt nor destroy in all My Holy 
Mountain [Kingdom]." (Isaiah 11:9.) In that glorious 
time all good intentions and good endeavors will have 
God's blessing and will bring uplift mentally, morally 
and physically to those participating. Thus will be fulfilled 
a Scripture which declares, "When the judgments 
of the Lord are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of 
the world will learn righteousness."— Isaiah 26:9. 



THE SIN OF COVETOUSNESS 

Sin and selfishness are, practically, synonymous terms. 
When Adam was perfect, in the image and likeness of 
God, he was unselfish, just, generous, kind, benevolent; 

R5771 : page 285 

for these are elements of the Divine disposition, and man 
must have had these when in God's likeness. The first of 
all sins was committed by Satan. It was to forward his 
ambitious, selfish designs that he misrepresented the 
Divine message, contradicted the Almighty, became the 
father of lies and the murderer of Adam and his race. 
Mother Eve's course also was prompted by an acquired 
selfishness. She thirsted for knowledge, which, the 
serpent told her, she could get by disobeying God. Father 
Adam's disobedience was not of ignorance, but because 
he believed that his life would be happier by disobeying 
and sharing Mother Eve's experiences. 

Today, wherever we look, we can clearly trace all sin 
back to its fountain, selfishness. Covetousness is selfishness 
—sin. It is very prevalent because all are sinners. 
Our laws indeed seek to protect us in our just rights, yet 
how unsuccessful we often are in securing our rights, 
and in defending ourselves against those who would unjustly 
violate the Golden Rule. 

The lesson for all is that nothing short of the Golden 
Rule is acceptable in God's sight from any professing 
to be of His children. A second lesson is that while we 
are to render justice and the Golden Rule's requirement to 
all, without exception, we are not always to demand 
justice, the Golden Rule, etc., from others. Rather, 
God's people are to consider themselves His representatives 
and ambassadors in a land and amongst people 
alienated from Him and His Government. The Lord's 
children, always just, are to be also generous and to 
"show forth the praises of Him who hath called them 
out of darkness into His marvelous light." As their 
Heavenly Father is generous as well as just, so are His 
children to be partakers of His character-likeness and to 
be helpers in everything that makes for righteousness. 



R5771 : page 285 

ELIJAH'S FIERY CHARIOT 
-OCTOBER 10.-2 KINGS 2:1-12. 



ELIJAH, ELISHA AND SCHOOLS OF PROPHETS-ELIJAH'S CHARIOT 
AND ASCENT TYPICAL-ELIJAH AND ALL THE PROPHETS 
STILL SLEEP -THEY CANNOT RECEIVE THEIR REWARD 
UNTIL AFTER THE CHURCH HAS BEEN GLORIFIED IN THE 
FIRST RESURRECTION-THE TRANSFIGURATION SCENE 



--THE SIGNIFICANCE OF ELIJAH'S JOURNEY AND FOUR STOPS 
-THE TYPICAL LESSON INTERESTING, PROFITABLE. 

"In Thy presence is fulness of joy; at Thy right hand 
there are pleasures forevermore."— Psalm 16:11. 

SINCE Bible students have recognized that 

Elijah's life was a prophecy— that he typed, 

or represented, the entire Church in his 

earthly experiences— his history has become 

the more interesting and the more 

intelligible. He was a faithful servant of 

God; but his greatest prophecy, that of his 

life, was not understood, even though the 

Lord declared, subsequently, "I will send 

you Elijah the Prophet before the coming 

of the great and terrible Day of the Lord." (Malachi 4:5.) 

This antitypical Elijah, beginning with Jesus in 

the flesh, has been coming and giving his message to the 

world for now more than eighteen centuries. We believe 

that the taking away of Elijah in the chariot of fire, 

narrated in today's lesson, is about to be fulfilled as respects 

the Church of Christ in the flesh. Soon they shall 

be no more in the flesh; for the Lord will take them, will 

glorify them with Himself. As the Apostle explains, they 

will meet the Lord in the air, in the realm of spiritual 

control of the earth— in Kingdom power and great glory. 

— 1 Thessalonians 4:17. 

Elisha had the opportunity of becoming Elijah's successor, 
and appears to have been guided by a proper spirit 
of zeal in his desire to accompany Elijah and to serve 
him. When Elijah was taken in the fiery chariot, his 
mantle bequeathed to Elisha represented that the latter 
had become Elijah's successor, to receive a special blessing 
of the Elijah spirit. While we are certain that Elijah 
typed the Church of God in the flesh, we may not be quite 
so positive that Elisha was also a type and represented 

R5772 : page 285 

a secondary class of God's people, referred to in the Bible 
sometimes as the "foolish virgin" class, sometimes as the 
servants of the Bride class who will follow her, sometimes 
as a Great Company whose number no man knows, 
who will come through great tribulation and attain a 
place before the Throne, failing to attain with the Elijah 
class a place in the Throne as joint-heirs of Christ- 
Matthew 25:1-13; Psalm 45:14,15; Revelation 7:9-17. 

The sons of the prophets may also be types. If so, 
they would seem to represent a third class, acquainted 
with Elijah and Elisha, yet not particularly associated 
with them. The fact that the sons of the prophets discussed 
with Elisha the going of Elijah does not necessarily 
signify that they believed the matter. They knew 
that Elijah expected to go, but their own doubts on the 
subject are intimated by the fact that they subsequently 



made a search of the land to see if Elijah had not really 
fallen somewhere, dropped by the whirlwind. Their search 
and final conviction represent that for some time certain 
classes of Christian people may doubt that the Church 
has really gone to glory, but that afterwards they are 
thoroughly convinced. Possibly the three days of search 
may be symbolic, representing three years. 

ELIJAH NOT IN HEAVEN 

Much of the Bible study of the past has been superficial. 
Certain teaching and creeds of the past being accepted 
as true, the Bible has been studied with a view to 
confirming the traditions of the past rather than to challenging 
their accuracy. Careful study now brings to light 
the fact that throughout the entire Old Testament not a 
word is said about anybody going to Heaven— except in 
this case of Elijah and in the statement that "Enoch 
walked with God, and was not for God took him"— somewhere. 
The Bible indicates distinctly that no offer of 
Heavenly life was possible until after Jesus had died as 
man's Redeemer. Thus the Scriptures assure us that life 
and immortality were brought to light through Jesus' 
Message— nothing clear or definite was known on these 
subjects previously.— 2 Timothy 1:10. 

Jesus Himself was the first to pass from earthly condition 
to Heavenly condition by His resurrection change 
—"put to death in flesh, He was made alive in spirit." (1 Peter 3:18.) 
The Church has the promise of a similar 
glorious change, awaiting all the faithful who walk in the 
Master's footsteps. Their change is to come at Jesus' 
Second Advent. They as the wise virgins, as the Elijah 
class, will pass beyond the veil from earthly conditions to 
Heavenly conditions. The change will be necessary to 
their entrance into the Kingdom, for "Flesh and blood 
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." (1 Corinthians 15:50.) 
A little later, tribulations will develop the Great 
Company class, represented by Elisha. Later still, the 
blessing of the Lord will come upon all the human family 
through Messiah's Kingdom. 

R5772 : page 286 

While the Old Testament says nothing about any invitation 
for anybody to go to Heaven, the New Testament 
does assure the Church of a "High Calling," a 
"Heavenly Calling." (Philippians 3:14; Hebrews 3:1.) 
St. Paul points out that a different blessing has been provided 
by the Lord for the Gospel Church than for others. 
Even the Ancient Worthies, including Abraham, the 
Prophet David, Elijah, Elisha, Moses, etc., cannot be of 
the Church class, even as they could not follow in the 
footsteps of Jesus. Their loyalty to God and to righteousness 
is to be abundantly rewarded, but theirs is to be an 
earthly blessing in the Paradise to be established by 
Messiah's Kingdom throughout the entire earth. 



St. Paul, after enumerating the worthy characters of 
the past, declares, "All these died in faith, not having received 
the things promised them, God having provided 
some better thing for us, that they apart from us should 
not be made perfect." (Heb. 1 1:38-40.) In other words, 
the Church must receive her Heavenly inheritance first; 
for she, as St. James declares, is the First-fruits unto 
God of His creatures.— James 1:18. 

Jesus very positively declares that Elijah did not go 
to Heaven when he said, "No man hath ascended unto 
Heaven." (John 3:13.) St. Peter corroborates this, declaring 
that the Prophet David had not gone to Heaven, 
but was still in his sepulchre at Jerusalem. St. Peter thus 
implied that none of the Prophets had gone to Heaven. 
(Acts 2:34.) Our great interest, therefore, in Elijah's 
experiences, lies in the fact that his literal ascent into the 
skies was a part of his general typical career as a prefigure 
of the Church in the flesh.* 

ON MOUNT OF TRANSFIGURATION 

Jesus gave to three of His Apostles, Peter, James and 
John, a special vision of His coming glory. What they 
saw was not actuality, but a vision, as Jesus subsequently 
declared. (Matthew 17:9.) The persons in glory were 
no more actual than the glories and voices and persons 
seen by John the Revelator. St. Peter, one of the three, 
declares that what they saw was a representation of 
Christ's coming glory. Nevertheless, he declares that the 
word of prophecy was still more sure than the vision. 
(2 Peter 1:16-21.) In the vision Jesus was the central 
figure, Moses representing the Law Dispensation, which 
ended with Christ, and Elijah representing the Gospel 
Dispensation, which began with Christ. 

GILGAL, BETHEL, JERICHO, JORDAN 

Elisha knew of Elijah's expectation of translation; 
and, with that in view, they had traveled to Gilgal. But 
the Lord did not take Elijah there, but sent him on to 
Bethel. Elijah's suggestion that Elisha should tarry at 
Gilgal implied that Elisha was discouraged and had lost 
faith in the journey. But no! he went on. The same 
thing occurred at Bethel, and they went on to Jericho. 
The same thing occurred at Jericho, and they went on 
to Jordan. Crossing the Jordan they still went on, but 
thereafter with no definite place in view. However, from 
the time they came to Jordan a multitude of the sons of 
the prophets, deeply interested, watched them. 

Let us apply these matters antitypically to the Church. 
Gilgal would seem to represent the beginning of the 
Harvest time— October, 1874. That date, prominently 
marked in the Bible (Daniel 12:12) was looked forward 
to by many Bible students with deep interest as the possible 
time when the Church would be completed— although 
nothing in the Bible so declares. The inference was 



clearly deducible, but there was no positive statement as 
to the Church's change being accomplished then. Some 
measure of disappointment was felt when expectations 
were not realized. Nevertheless, the Elijah class started 
to the next point, accompanied by so many others as were 
worthy of being accounted of the antitypical Elisha class. 

The experiences at Bethel were very similar. The 
Spring of 1878 corresponded to Bethel. It was clearly 
seen to be the time parallel to the Lord's assuming His 
kingly office in the end of the Jewish Age and saying to 
the Jewish nation, "Your house is left unto you desolate." 
(Luke 13:34,35.) It was not unreasonable to think of 
that Scripturally-marked date as the time for the Church's 
glorification, although the Lord did not directly promise 
this. Nevertheless, a blessing came to all those who received 
their disappointment in a proper spirit. 

On they went to the next date, which corresponded to 
Jericho; namely, 1881. Considerable interest attached to 
that date on the part of many Bible students because it 
was the parallel date to the time when the door was 
thrown open to the Gentiles, and Cornelius, the first 
Gentile convert, was received into the family of God. We 
assumed that this might mean a change of dispensation 
here, and that the glorification of the Church was typed. 
We were mistaken in that supposition, but received great 
blessing and went on. 

The next point of time Scripturally marked was 
October, 1914— the close of the Times of the Gentiles, corresponding 
to Jordan. Many Bible students are thoroughly 
convinced that the 2520 years from Zedekiah's 
day to October, 1914, ended there— that that date marked 
the end of God's lease of world power to the Gentile 
nations. They are convinced that the present war is the 
result, and that its ultimate conclusion will be the complete 
overthrow of all the kingdoms of the world and the 
full establishment of Messiah's Kingdom in the control 
of earth. 

The Lord did not say that the Church would be 
glorified before the conclusion of the Gentile Times; yet 
such a thought was not an unreasonable one, in view of 
many Scriptures. Not disconcerted, Bible students are 
going on, even as Elijah and Elisha went on after crossing 
the Jordan. They are not, however, headed for any 
particular date, even as Elijah was not directed to go to 
any other place. Simply they went on, waiting for the 
Lord to fulfil His promise of taking Elijah in His own 
time and in His own way. 

CHARIOT OF FIRE AND WHIRLWIND 

It was while the two went on, with no knowledge of 
how far they would go, that Elijah said to Elisha, "What 
would you like as a reward for your faithfulness in journeying 
with me?" Elisha responded that he would most 
prefer a large measure of the Spirit of the Lord, which 
so notably was manifest in Elijah. The reply was that 



he could get this great blessing only under special conditions; 
namely, that he would continue faithful in cooperation 
until the last— until Elijah would be taken. This 
would be a hard matter; for, if Elisha's attention were 
permitted to wander, he would not get so rich a blessing. 

As they two went on, behold, a chariot of fire parted 
them asunder! In symbolic language, this seems to signify 
that the Elijah class will be involved in very fiery 
trouble, persecutions, and will thus be separated from 
their fellows. The next symbol of a whirlwind taking 
Elijah to Heaven also implies further trouble. Prophecies 
are generally understood after their fulfilment— and only 
vaguely before. It was thus at our Lord's First Advent 
in respect to the prophecies then being fulfilled. 

We may not hope to clearly understand in advance the 



*For a detailed explanation of the Bible proofs that Elijah was a type 
of the Church, address "Bible Students' Monthly, Brooklyn, N.Y." 

R5773 : page 287 

full import of the fiery chariot nor of the whirlwind. To 
some the thought of being taken away from the present 
life suddenly, violently, in fiery troubles, etc., would be a 
terrible prospect; not so will it be with the members of 
the Elijah class. Waiting for their change, and living in 
daily readiness of heart, therefore, they go on without 
trepidation. On the contrary, in whatever way they shall 
be taken, it will be the culmination of their hopes for 
which they so long have waited and prayed— their 
deliverance. 



R5773 : page 287 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
FROM THE BATTLEFIELD OF FRANCE 

BELOVED IN THE LORD:- 

Grace be unto you and peace from God our Father and 
our Lord Jesus Christ. Often has it been my desire to write 
you of my experiences at the front, but the time has always 
been very limited, especially in the last weeks. 

My first experience was in France, where I had copies of 
the French BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY sent to me. I distributed 
these as I had opportunity and they were received 
with gladness. At first the people were very much surprised 
that a Prussian soldier should hand them these papers, 
but hearing my brief explanation and after a perusal of the 
literature, they received it joyfully, many even offering to 
pay for it, which I declined. 

My supply of literature having been exhausted, I was 



about to order more when we received instructions to break 
camp for transfer to the Eastern frontier— Galicia. 

Sunday I was on night duty [baking dept.], therefore 
utilized the afternoon for a trip to the city. There I experienced 
much joy, for I met many Jews, to whom I could 
speak of their hope. I asked them if they believed all that 
I was telling them. "Yes," said they, "we believe it." One 
replied, "I thank you. We believe in a Messiah, also that the 
time of redemption is near at hand." Another remarked, 
"God will help, and it will all come about." I called on a 
third in his shop, where two others joined us. Much joy 
has come to my heart through calling on interested people, 
but I have never witnessed such joy as these Jews manifested. 
With tears in their eyes they declared, "May God 
grant it; may God grant it! We have already heard of it." 
All were rejoicing, but one who was made specially glad 
invited me to visit him soon again. I would have been only 
too glad to have done so, but on the next day our superior 
officer forbade us to enter the city. 

A great battle is raging here; many Russians were taken 
prisoners. Six thousand have passed through here. Oh, 
what misery! One could see wounded refugees from all 
parts; wagons with women and children, and men driving 
cattle. I never saw such a sight. I am often reminded of 
the Second Psalm. And with all these things we know it is 
only the beginning. Yes, thanks be unto God that these days 
are to be shortened! I have distributed many BIBLE 
STUDENTS MONTHLIES amongst our troops. May the Lord 
add His blessing! 

On our next march we passed through a battlefield. The 
pitiful sight reminded me of the many promises and I 
thanked our Heavenly Father that I did not have to take 
an active part. What sorrow and misery sin has brought 
into the world, but what a blessing awaits humanity! All 
long for peace, and how they will rejoice when Micah 4:1-5 
and Isaiah 2:4 are fulfilled! We often hear it asked, "Why is 
this war?" 

I thank you very much for the last WATCH TOWER. The 
first article, "The Ministry of Angels," was a special blessing 
tome. The grace of our Lord be with you. Remembering 
you and all in fervent love before the throne of Grace, I am 

Your faithful brother, W H 

Carpathian Mts., May, 1915. 



SOLDIERS ENTREATING FOR THE TRUTH 

BELOVED IN THE LORD:- 

Thank you for your letter to the brethren in the field, and 
for THE WATCH TOWER. 

I also wish to inform you that I have repeated opportunities 
to discourse to my comrades. Out of 1 1 or 12 men 
there are six especially who, as often as time permits, come 
to me of their own accord and entreat me to give them another 
little discourse. When I want to close after talking 



two or three hours they plead, "Please continue; it is so 
grand." Often do I hear them say, "Why do not our 
preachers tell us these things? Why do they mislead us so?" 

I am also frequently asked for literature. I give them 
THE WATCH TOWER and the sermons. 

With hearty greetings, from 

Your brother in Christ, F K 

France, June, 1915. 



THINGS ONCE DARK NOW CLEAR 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I hesitate in consuming any of your time, but I have long 
wished to write you of the great change in my life since being 
led into the Truth by a close study of your writings. How 
earnestly I had sought to understand God's Word and to love 
the Savior for His great sacrifice for mankind! I felt it was 
my duty to do so, but could not with the fervency I desired. 
Since coming to a better understanding of God's wonderful 
Plan of Salvation, and laying hold of the "exceeding great 
and precious promises" in His Word and appropriating them 
unto myself, in my heart I am constantly exclaiming, "Hallelujah, 
what a Savior!" 

I began reading your SCRIPTURE STUDIES some six months 
ago and they have been my constant companions ever since. 
Daily the Light has been breaking; things that were once so 
dark to me have now become very clear. 

I began with the "Hell Pamphlet" and was "caught" by 
it. I concluded that if so noted a place as a "burning Hell" 
could be reasonably and Scripturally done away with, and my 
mind be satisfied about the matter, I would pursue the same 
studies further. Next came TABERNACLE SHADOWS. Portions 
of the Bible that in my reading I had hitherto skipped over 
as too dry for anything were made just beautiful to me! I 
could verily say with the poet: 

'"Tis the Song of the Lamb once by Moses foretold 

In the symbols and types of God's Law, 
As the dawn of the Day doth those symbols unfold, 

We behold what we ne'er before saw." 

What a wonderful privilege to be living at this time, and 
still more wonderful to be favored with even a partial understanding 
of God's great Plan; surely, by far the greater 
portion of the world is in darkness! 

I have just read your discourse on "Love of the Father 
and the Son our Pattern." It was indeed a feast, and has 
strengthened me in several points where I am sure I was 
weak. May the Lord continue to use you until He shall say, 
"It is enough, come up higher." MARY HOOVER.— Georgia. 



A WONDERFUL DELIVERANCE 



DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I wish to let you know of the great deliverance I have 
obtained, by God's grace, through the PHOTO-DRAMA OF 
CREATION, which was shown here last fall. At that time I 
was a believer in Theosophy and was possessed by evil 
spirits, being both "clairaudient" and a "writing medium"; 
but, thank God, I am now free. 

I thought I had the Gift of the Holy Spirit, but the sight 
of the picture of the Witch of Endor convinced me that I 
had a "familiar spirit," and when I prayed God to release 
me and make me His child again, He did so at once. 

My husband went with me afterward to see the pictures, 
and we then obtained the six volumes of SCRIPTURE STUDIES. 
We are now fully consecrated and are rejoicing in the Truth. 

We feel we can never express our thankfulness, dear 
Brother, but we daily pray our Heavenly Father to bless and 
guide you. It was such a wonderful deliverance that I can 
never forget the wonder of it, and my heart rises in gratitude 
to God, who could seek me when I had gone so far astray! 

With best wishes from my husband and myself, 
ELIZABETH PEARSON. -Eng. 



B.S.M. IN A LETTER-BOX DID IT 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

As I am changing my place of residence and should be 
sorry to miss a copy of THE WATCH TOWER, I am enclosing 
my new address. A few months ago I was so fortunate as 
to find one of your papers in my letter-box, and I thank 
God I was interested enough to read it. 

In view of the many creeds I had often asked myself, 
Which is the Truth? Surely they cannot all be right! I 
thank God today that I am enjoying your STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES and THE TOWER. They seem more reasonable than 
anything I have seen. I have said to myself, At last I have 
found the Truth, and I have not changed my mind. 
E. COLBY HARRIMAN.-Mass. 



page 288 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 289 

VOL. XXXVI OCTOBER 1 No. 19 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

"As Deceivers and Yet True" 291 

Concessions for the Sake of Others 291 

Justification— Reckoned and Actual 292 

Present Object of Consecration 293 

All the World are Yet Heathen 294 

"The Saints Shall Judge the World" 294 

The Two Great Intercessions 295 

Overcoming Desires for Earthly Things 296 

Primary Battle is With Self 296 

Victory or Death! 297 

The Christ Perfected by Suffering 297 

God's Purpose in Testing Us 297 

The Fire to Burn Among Us 297 

Tortures of Today More Refined 298 

Elisha's Restitution Ministry 299 

Pure Water— Pure Truth 299 

Other Restitution Types 301 

Awakening the Shunammite's Son 301 

Interesting Letters 302 

News from French Bible Students 302 

page 290 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



"CREATION" SCENARIO IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES 

In the Lord's providence the SCENARIO of THE PHOTO-DRAMA 
OF CREATION has been translated into several foreign 
languages, and we now have it in stock in goodly quantity, 
as follows: 

IN SPANISH, ITALIAN, GREEK, POLISH, ARMENIAN: 

Cloth bound, complete $0.25 postpaid 

Paper " " 15 " 

Newspaper edition, 3 Parts, 2c ea.; per set. .05 " 

IN GERMAN AND FINNISH (glossed paper, embossed, 
like English Ed.): 

De Luxe, gold edge (Finnish only) 1.00 " 

Cloth, red edge (German and Finnish) 50 " 

Paper, 3 Parts (German and Finnish) per set. .25 " 
Newspaper edition, 4 Parts, 2c ea.; per set. .05 " 

IN SWEDISH: Newspaper ed. only, 2c ea.; per set .05 " 
Colporteurs and Class Secretaries may deduct one-half 

from above prices if shipment is ordered charges collect. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR NOVEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
November follow: (1) 154; (2) 7; (3) 321; (4) 281; (5) 333; 
(6) 265; (7) 102; (8) 98; (9) 155; (10) 106; (11) 129; (12) 165; 
(13) 45; (14) 303; (15) 144; (16) 62; (17) 60; (18) 325; (19) 299; 
(20) 258; (21) 87; (22) 261; (23) 107; (24) 267; (25) 38; (26) 14; 
(27) 193; (28) 145; (29) Vow; (30) 227. 



PRICE OF DIAGLOTT REDUCED 

Hereafter we will have the Diaglott only in leather binding, 
and at the reduced price of $2. We have filled all back 
orders. If you have ordered the Diaglott and have not received 
it, please notify us at once. If you paid the former 



price of $2.50 within the last two months, please take a credit 
of 50 cents on your next remittance for THE WATCH TOWER. 
We still offer THE WATCH TOWER for a year, as a premium, 
to any one not a TOWER subscriber, who orders the Diaglott; 
this introduces to him THE WATCH TOWER literature. 



R5773 : page 291 

"AS DECEIVERS AND YET TRUE" 

"Giving no offense in any thing, that the ministry be not blamed; 
...by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report; 
as deceivers, and yet true."— 2 Corinthians 6:3,8. 

HOW varied are the experiences of an active 

Christian— experiences of honor and of dishonor, 

of being well reported and evil reported, 

of suffering for righteousness' sake, 

of being called deceivers, etc. ! Some may 

have a greater amount of publicity than do 

others and thus attract more attention. 

Some may have a wider field of service and 

greater opportunities than do others. But 

every faithful disciple of Christ will have 

more or less of these experiences enumerated in our text 

and in its context. Some will speak well of us and others 

will speak ill. Throughout the entire Gospel Age it has 

ever been true that "all who will live godly in Christ 

Jesus shall suffer persecution." (2 Timothy 3:12.) 

Especially has this been true of these last days. 

Amongst the brethren of Christ all of the Lord's 
saints should have honor. While none should seek for 
honor of the brethren, nevertheless a great deal of esteem 
should attach to every one who has taken the great step 
of full consecration to God— no matter how ignoble the 
person may be according to the flesh. The fact that God 
has begotten any one of His Holy Spirit should make us 
wish to respect those whom the Lord has thus honored. 
Each of the saints, however humble, is greatly loved of 
our Lord Jesus; and therefore all of the children of God 
should take heed how they treat even the least of His 
little ones— their brethren. 

"As deceivers, and yet true." On many occasions the 
great Apostle Paul was dishonored; at other times he 
was honored. He had evil reports spread abroad concerning 

R5774: page 291 

him, as well as good reports. He was considered 
a deceiver by many who professed to be the people of 
God. Yet all the while he was true to the Lord and to 
His people. He was considered a renegade Jew, because 
he was not teaching obedience to the Law Covenant as 
the only hope of everlasting life. He was teaching 



what was far superior— salvation through faith in the 
merit of the sacrifice of Christ; and this doctrine made 
the Law look inferior. Therefore his fellow Jews accused 
him of being unfaithful to the Law of their 
fathers. To a Jew this was considered a great dishonor. 

As a result, very evil reports of St. Paul went broadcast 
among the unbelieving Jews everywhere. He was 
branded as one of the greatest deceivers ever known. 
Everybody was warned against him— "Watch out for 
that man Paul; he is coming ! Whoever will kill that 
fellow will do God a service and glorify His name!" 
"Why?" might be asked by some. "Because he is deceiving 
the people by telling them that Jesus of Nazareth 
is the Messiah— telling them that when they die to the 
Law they become alive through this man Jesus- 
telling them that the Law which we have had for sixteen 
hundred years is of no account! He is trying to draw 
people after that Nazarene!" 

Then St. Paul was also accused of trying to draw 
followers after himself. Yet he was true to God in every 
sense of the word. He was true to the nation of Israel, 
to the Law, and to the Prophets. He was true to God 
and to the Lord Jesus Christ. He was no deceiver in 
any sense; he was merely called a deceiver by those who 
were blinded by the god of this world. He seemed "as 
a deceiver" to his blinded Jewish brethren and to those 
who served false gods. 

CONCESSIONS FOR THE SAKE OF OTHERS 

The Apostle's earnest desire and endeavor was to 
give "no offense in anything, that the ministry be not 
blamed." The word ministry is frequently used today in 
reference to the clergy as a whole. The ministers, or 
preachers, of the churches are spoken of as the ministry; 
such as the Presbyterian ministry, the Methodist ministry, 
etc. But we think St. Paul had a broader thought; 
namely, that of proclaiming the true Gospel of Christ 
or of serving the Lord in whatever manner. He used 
the word in the sense of service. A minister is a 
servant. All who serve the Lord, whether publicly or 
privately, are ministers, and should endeavor to live so 
true a life, so honorable a life, that even though they 
may be called deceivers, nevertheless others will take 
note of their exemplary walk. Each should try to live 
in so inoffensive a manner that the world will call it 
good, proper living. Live above reproach. Give no just 
cause for offense. This is the Apostle's thought, that we 
should not give any one just reason to be offended at us. 

Among the Jews, for any one to eat pork would be 
an offense. He would be looked down upon and not 
considered properly religious. In our day, the eating of 
pork is not condemned by many. But failure to observe 
Sunday as the Sabbath would be considered a violation 
of a Divine command. We might, so far as our own 
consciences are concerned, do certain things; yet the 



ministry, the service of the Truth, might be blamed for 
our so doing. Many are very scrupulous as to Sunday 
observance as the Sabbath. So, as the Apostle enjoins, 

R5774 : page 292 

we should, as children of God, be so careful in our conduct 
as to go to the extreme of faithfulness, wherever 
possible. The conscientious scruples of an individual 
are not to be treated lightly. 

In some parts of the world it is the custom to remove 
the shoes before entering the house. If we were in such 
a locality we should conform ourselves to the general 
custom. We should ever be willing to adapt ourselves to 
the custom of those around us where we can do so without 
violating our conscience, if by conforming to their 
ways we would avoid offense or increase our influence 
for good. To fail to do this would be a lack of love and 
consideration, and hence in some manner, an injury to 
the Lord's Cause. 



R5774 : page 292 

JUSTIFICATION-RECKONED AND ACTUAL 

TO GET the right focus upon the word "justification," 

our minds should go back to ascertain 

what is the difficulty with man, and 

why there is any need of justification by 

faith or any other way. We find that the 

necessity for justification before any man 

could be in accord with God lies in the fact 

that man had become a sinner, and that a 

death sentence had been pronounced upon 

him by God, the great Judge of the Universe. 

Before his fall, Adam was called the son of God; 

but no man since Adam had been called by that name, 

until Jesus came. Jesus was called the Son of God because 

He was so born, and because He was such in His 

pre-human condition, before He came into the world. 

Adam and his children were condemned to death because 
they were unworthy of life, under the sentence, 
"Dying, thou shalt die." Not only so, but sickness and 
mental imperfection accompanied the fulfilment of the 
sentence. A further part of the sentence was separation 
from God, alienation from God. In order for man to 
come back into God's favor and blessing, a sacrifice for 
sins was required. Until that sacrifice would be made 
there could be no justification, in the full sense. 

The Apostle Paul pointed out that under the terms of 
the Mosaic Law given to Israel, the people were promised 
harmony with God, forgiveness of past sins, justification, 
if they would keep the Law. But after trying for fifteen 
hundred years and more, they found that they were unable 



to keep it; "for by the works of the Law shall no 

flesh be justified" in God's sight. (Gal. 2:16.) But meantime, 

while none were justified under the Law, because 

unable to keep that Law, there were some who commended 

themselves to God by the manifestation of a proper spirit, 

a spirit of faith and obedience. These we speak of as 

belonging to the Ancient Worthy class. This class includes 

Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Job, Moses and all 

the Prophets, besides others not so notable. See 

Hebrews 1 1 . 

But the justification which came to the Ancient 
Worthies was not a justification to life. No real justification 
to life could come until the Redeemer had laid 
down the Redemption-price for sin— until Christ had died, 
"the Just for the unjust, that He might bring us to God." 
(1 Peter 3:18.) Since Christ died for this purpose, it 
follows that none were brought to God until after Christ 
had died; for if, according to God's arrangement of "like 
for like," it had been possible to justify mankind by any 
other means, then Christ had not died. If these Ancient 
Worthies could have been justified to life by some other 
method, so could other people have been; and the death 
of Christ would not have been necessary. 

JUSTIFICATION TO LIFE 

What then was the particular difference between the 
relationship to God which was granted to Abraham and 
all the other Worthies of olden time and that which comes 
to us who in this Age exercise faith? For the word 
"justification" is used of both classes; Abraham was justified 
by faith, and so are we— "Being justified by faith, we 
have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ." 
But Abraham and others of previous ages, could not in 
a legal sense, have peace with God; for Christ had not yet 
come to earth and died for the sins of the world. And so 
the record is that Abraham was justified to friendship 
with God. Friendship with the Creator was one of the 
things which were lost when Adam sinned. Therefore 
man was a stranger to God, an "alien through wicked 
works." But God counted Abraham as His friend. 

Abraham's faith was manifested by his works. His 
was not an empty profession of loyalty to God; he demonstrated 
his faith in a practical way— by his works of 
obedience. After his faith had been tested, he received 
certain promises from God. He was no longer dealt 
with as an enemy. But being justified to friendship with 
God is a different thing from being justified to life. If 
Abraham had been justified to life, without Christ, then 
neither he nor the remainder of the world would have 
needed a Savior at all. All could have been alike justified. 

But the Scriptures assure us that there is no other 
name given under Heaven by which we must be saved 
except the name of Jesus. Therefore if we cannot be 
saved except through faith in Jesus' name and in His 
blood, by being brought into relationship with God 



through Him, neither could Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, 
Moses, the Prophets and other Worthies have been otherwise 
justified. As they could not exercise faith in a 
Savior who had not yet come, and whose work had not 
been accomplished, it follows that they were never legally 
justified; i.e., justified to life. However, their obedience 
to God was tested and demonstrated, and they were 
treated as God's friends and made acquainted to some 
extent with certain features of the Divine Program. God 
said that He would not hide these things from Abraham, 
because he was His friend. 

But there has been a curse resting upon the human 
race ever since the fall of Adam. There could not be a 
blessing of God and a curse of God upon the world at 
the same time; and the blessing has not yet come. Only 
those who are in Christ Jesus have as yet come legally 
from under this curse. These alone have been justified 
to life. Abraham was informed by the Lord that this 
blessing would come to mankind through his posterity, because 
of his great faith and implicit obedience. But 
Abraham was never invited to present his body a living 
sacrifice, as believers of this Gospel Age have been invited 
to do. There was none prior to Jesus' time, manifestly, 
who could have been granted the opportunity to 
"follow in His steps."— 1 Peter 2:21. 

R5775 : page 292 

Jesus referred to this when He said, "there hath not 
arisen a greater Prophet than John the Baptist; nevertheless, 
I say unto you that the least in the Kingdom of 
Heaven is greater than he."— Luke 7:28. 

GOD'S SERVANTS AND HIS SONS 

If all in the Kingdom of Heaven are greater than John 
the Baptist, they are greater also than Enoch, Abraham, 
etc. Why is this? The answer is that it is not that the 

R5775 : page 293 

followers of Jesus are more worthy than John the Baptist 
or these others, but that the opportunity of becoming 
members of the House of Sons has been granted only 
since Pentecost, and is granted to those alone who take 
up their cross and follow Jesus. Since He was the Forerunner 
of this class, none could precede Him. Those who 
may become sons are pointed out in the Gospel of St. 
John: "To as many as received Him [Jesus], to them 
gave He power [liberty, privilege] to become sons of God, 
even to them that believe on His name, who are begotten, 
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will 
of man, but of God." This class are the favored ones, 
they have lived in the appointed time, "The acceptable 
time"; and the Message of the Gospel has gone to these. 
The Gospel did not go to Abraham in the same sense, 



although St. Paul says that the Gospel was preached 

beforehand to Abraham. We see that God first proclaimed 

His purpose to him. But that feature of the 

Gospel which is preeminently the preferential feature, 

Abraham did not know; for the Sacrifice for sins had 

not yet been given. God could not justify any to life 

and make of them sons until after Jesus had come and 

prepared the way. The privilege of becoming sons of 

God was, then, given first in Jesus' day, to those who received 

Him. All who had previously exercised faith 

were friends or servants. Israel was called a "House of 

Servants." "Moses verily was faithful as a servant over 

his House, but Christ as a Son over His own House, 

whose House are we, if we hold fast the confidence and 

the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end."— Heb. 3:1-6. 

So we see the contrast between the House of Servants 
and the House of Sons, and the reason why. We are not 
to think of the Church as being better intentioned or as 
being less sinful by nature than were Abraham, Isaac, 
Moses and the Prophets; but this opportunity of sonship 
has come to us, and it did not come to the others, because 
their day was not God's "due time." It is for us, then, 
to avail ourselves of the great opportunity of entering 
the House of Sons and thus become heirs of God. 

JUSTIFICATION TO LIFE FOLLOWS CONSECRATION 

So, then, the Church were justified to life, through the 
merit of Christ's sacrifice. Hence they had something 
which God could accept. And day by day they offer 
themselves to God. Abraham had no merit by which he 
could be an acceptable offering to God; for, being a 
member of the fallen Adamic race, he was a sinner, and 
the Divine arrangement was that nothing blemished 
could come to God's altar. But now since Christ has died, 
has risen again, has ascended up on High, has entered 
into the presence of God and made satisfaction for the 
Church, He imputes His righteousness to us at our consecration, 
and our justification is made complete— we are 
freely justified from all things— made alive from the dead. 
It is ours then to present our bodies a living sacrifice, 
holy, acceptable to God, and receive the begetting to the 
new nature— the Divine. 

Not having this full justification, neither Abraham nor 
any one else, up to the time of our Lord, could present 
his body to God as a sacrifice. So we find no preaching 
of this message prior to Jesus' day. We read that Christ 
"brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel." 
These were not brought to light before He came. The 
way to life had not been opened up. To Abraham there 
was a dim, shadowy promise that there would some time 
be a blessing for all mankind; but neither life everlasting 
nor immortality, the highest form of life, was made clear 
to him. He knew simply that a blessing was coming; 
and he had the faith to seek to walk in harmony with God. 

Seeing how wonderful are the opportunities afforded 



the Gospel Church, "How shall we escape, if we neglect 
so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken 
by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that 
heard Him?" (Hebrews 2:3.) Here the Apostle is distinctly 
declaring where this "great salvation" began to be 
proclaimed. It was never made clear before. The 
Apostles of our Lord could proclaim a salvation from 
death, a salvation unto life, then offered; but those who 
lived prior to their time could not have proclaimed it. 
Jesus was the first who brought the Message of Salvation 
to us, and His words on the subject were corroborated 
by His Apostles, who heard Him. 

Justification to life follows, never precedes, consecration. 
Consecration is the devotion of one's being to the 
Lord, the surrender of one's will and all to God. In connection 
with the Church, it signifies not only the giving 
of one's self to God, but also His acceptance of the one 
thus offering himself. As it is written, "Sanctify [consecrate] 
yourselves, and I will sanctify [consecrate] you." 
During the Gospel Age it has been our privilege to offer 
ourselves to God through Christ, who, as the great High 
Priest, accepts these offerings until the predestinated 
number is complete. Whoever is thus justified and accepted 
by Him is acceptable to the Father; and to such 
a one comes the Holy Spirit of the Father, begetting him 
to the Divine nature. 

During the three and a half years of our Lord's ministry, 
He declared to His disciples that if they would 
abide in Him, the blessing of life should be their portion. 
But they had no legal standing before the Father until 
first Jesus had finished His sacrifice, had been raised from 
the dead and had ascended up to Heaven, there to appear 
in the presence of the Father for them. Then they received 
the Holy Spirit in begetting power, with outward 
demonstration. This came to them at Pentecost. They 
had consecrated themselves before, and Jesus had accepted 
them. Everything was done that could be done 
at that time; but everything was not up to the standard 
required after Jesus had appeared before God and made 
satisfaction for those who were to constitute His Church. 
At Pentecost, and not until then, they were anointed of 
the Spirit and recognized as sons of God. This was the 
completion of their consecration— its result. 

THE PRESENT OBJECT OF CONSECRATION 

So the Scriptures inform us that God is pleased to 
accept in the same way all who come unto Him through 
Christ, until the time when the last member of the foreordained 
number of the Elect has been chosen. After 
that the door will be shut— not the door of mercy, but the 
door to the High Calling to joint-heirship with Christ, 
offered only during the Gospel Age. This is what consecration 
is for during the Gospel Dispensation. The 
Father has ordained that before He will impute the merit 
of Christ to us, we must do our part by the dedication of 



ourselves to God. Only those who do this will be justified 
to life through Christ's imputed merit. 

"If any man will be My disciple, let him deny himself 
and take up his cross and follow Me." This is the condition. 
In no other way will Jesus become our Advocate. 
"We [the Spirit-begotten] have an Advocate with the 
Father." He is not the world's Advocate in any sense. 
He is our Advocate, the Advocate of all who come unto 
the Father by Him. The great Divine Court may not be 
approached except by those who are authorized. 

Jesus became the great High Priest by the offering up 
of Himself. And having become the great High Priest 
over the House of God, He is the Advocate of all those 

R5775 : page 294 

who come into harmony with the Father. He is their 
Surety. As such, He has a right to make His own terms; 
and the terms that He has made are that He will accept as 
disciples only those who renounce self, and take up their 
cross and follow Him. 

We see the great mass of professed Christian people- 
four hundred millions of them— some of them in jail, some 
of them in the army, on one side or the other. The most 
of them are striving for wealth or for the pleasures of 
sense. Few are justified to life. Some may be justified partially 
as was Abraham. In proportion as any are trying to 
do right, they are justified. But in order to have life, it 
is necessary to have this full justification, which can come 
to us only after we have made a complete consecration to 
the Lord.— Romans 12:1. 

ALL THE WORLD ARE YET HEATHEN 

The heathen were not justified in Abraham's day, nor 
in Jesus' day; in fact, the heathen are not justified yet; 
and all the world are heathen, except those who have 
come into covenant relationship with God. The Israelites 
spoke of the remainder of the world sometimes as heathen, 
sometimes as Gentiles, sometimes as people— three different 
terms meaning all who were not children of Israel. 

Since Christ has come among us and inaugurated the 
way to life through His blood, we are privileged to enter 
into a special Covenant with God. The New Covenant is 
reserved for Israel and the world by and by. The special 
Covenant which God has for the Church is shown in His 
command, "Gather My saints together unto Me, those 
who have made a Covenant with Me by sacrifice." (Psalm 50:5.) 
Only by sacrifice— only by the giving up of our 
will, our all— can we come into this Covenant, and none 
can come except through the great Advocate. It is a 
Covenant of Sacrifice. The heathen, the world, have entered 
into no such Covenant of Sacrifice; therefore they 
cannot come into the position of sons of God. None can 
enter into this position without a definite knowledge of 
its terms and conditions. 



When the Jewish Epoch had terminated and the 
Gospel Call was extended to the Gentiles, Cornelius the 
Roman centurion was the first to enter. We read that 

R5776 : page 294 

before Cornelius had received this Call he was a just 
man, who feared God, who prayed always, and who gave 
much alms to the people. We would say that he was a 
very fine character. But he was a Gentile, and so had 
not been able to come in under the Call. But now the 
time had come for the Gospel Message to go to the 
Gentiles. Did the Father receive Cornelius at once? No. 
The Lord sent an angel to him, who said, "Thy prayers 
and alms have come up before Jehovah." They had been 
noted before, but God could not receive them until now. 

And did this message to Cornelius bring him into 
covenant relationship to God? Oh, no! The angel of the 
Lord merely directed him what to do. He said, "Send 
men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose surname is 
Peter. He lodgeth with one Simon a tanner. He shall 
tell thee words to the saving of thyself and thy house." 
These words were necessary; the knowledge was indispensable. 
There can be no justification in ignorance. 
Such is not God's Plan. Cornelius and his family were 
ready; for he had previously been a consecrated man to 
the best of his knowledge. St. Peter would not have 
known how to deal with the Gentiles; therefore God 
gave him a vision, a special manifestation of His will. 

The case of Cornelius gives us the clue to the fact that 
God does not justify any Gentiles except those who come 
into Covenant relationship with Him, and that there is no 
way of coming into such relationship except that way 
which He has appointed. The one special way for the 
Jew was through Moses and the Law Covenant, and 
thence into Christ. The method by which the Gentile may 
come into covenant relationship with God is by being engrafted 
into the "good olive tree," whose root is the 
Abrahamic Covenant. (Romans 11:16-22.) Whoever 
would belong to Christ must become an Israelite, a member 
of the true Seed of Abraham. This we do by faith in 
Christ, the Seed, and baptism into His death. Hence we 
are no longer of the world. The whole world are heathen; 
for they are not in covenant relationship with God. They 
are Gentiles; and Gentiles are heathen, from the standpoint 
of the Scriptures. 

"THE SAINTS SHALL JUDGE THE WORLD" 

All the families of the earth shall yet be blessed and 
enlightened, through Abraham's Seed, which Seed is 
Christ. "And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's 
Seed, and heirs according to the Promise." We have not 
yet blessed the world; we have not yet judged the world; 
for we are not yet instructed to do so. But the Apostle 
Paul said, "Know ye not that the saints shall judge the 



world? Know ye not that we shall judge angels?" (1 Corinthians 6:2,3.) 

It is not while we are in the flesh, 

but after our glorification in the First Resurrection, that 

we are to be judges. 

So, then, God has appointed a great Day of Judgment 
for the world (Acts 17:31; Psalm 96:9-13; 98:1-9; Acts 15:13-18); 
and the saints are to be the judges with Christ. 
The world are still condemned in Adam. They are yet to 
have justification— "whosoever will"— and the groundwork 
of that justification is to be laid, first of all, in that 
New Covenant which Christ will make with Israel as the 
result of His sacrifice on Calvary. It will be exactly like 
the old Law Covenant, except that it will have a better 
Mediator— The Christ, Head and Body. As the old Law 
Covenant was established on the basis of the typical sacrifices, 
so the New Covenant is to be established on the 
basis of the "better sacrifices." The work of the Gospel 
Age has been the offering of the better sacrifices than bulls 
and goats— Jesus, the Head, and the Church, His Body 
members, associated with Him as parts of these "better 
sacrifices." He will have completed all the sacrificing 
when the last member of His Body shall have passed 
"within the Veil." Then the opportunity to follow in 
Jesus' steps will no longer be given; for there is only a 
definite number to become the Priesthood. These will 
have part in His resurrection, the Chief Resurrection. 
Speaking of these the Apostle says, "We must all be 
changed"; for "flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom 
of God." (1 Corinthians 15:50-54.) When this 
class shall have inherited the Kingdom, they will be prepared 
to do the work of judging the world. 

THE WORK OF THE NEXT AGE 

Immediately after satisfaction is made to Justice for 
the sins of the world, all mankind will be turned over to 
the One who bought them. Then Justice will have no 
more to do with them; for they will be in the hands of 
Christ. He will then be the Life-giver, the Judge, the 
King. During His Millennial Reign His work will be the 
awakening and the uplifting of all for whom He died. 
The opportunity will be given to all to come into harmony 
with the Lord, of devoting themselves to His service. The 
reward for their so doing will be everlasting life and full 
perfection of being on the human plane. Those who thus 
devote themselves will rise out of degradation to full perfection. 
Their perfecting will be their justification; for 
this means to be made right. 

The difference between the justification to which the 
world will attain and that of the Church now, is that with 

R5776 : page 295 

the Church it is a justification by faith, a reckoned justification, 

attained instantly, by the imputation of the merit 

of Christ; while the justification of the world will be by 



works— it will be a making right actually, an actual perfection. 
But there will be no justification without faith 
and heart loyalty, either now or then. Under the Lord's 
present arrangement also it is important that there shall 
be perfect works. The New Creature is actually just, 
perfect; and the Father imputes to our imperfect bodies 
the merit of Jesus and counts us dead according to the 
imperfect flesh. Thus our imperfect works are counted, 
through Christ, as perfect. The perfect New Creature, 
from its small beginning, is gradually to grow and develop 
to maturity, using the fleshly body as its servant. 

With the world it will be different. Theirs will be a 
work of gradually coming to a condition of justification, 
of perfection of mind and body, under the cover of the 
New Covenant, sealed with the blood of Christ. They 
will be coming nearer to this perfection day by day and 
year by year, rising toward perfection. When they shall 
have reached that pinnacle, they will be fully justified, or 
fully made just; and if they pass faithfully their final test, 
after the close of the Millennial Age, the reward of everlasting 
life will be given them. But the dead of the world 
will not live, from God's standpoint, until the close of that 
Age, when Christ shall have finished His Mediatorial 
work. Meantime, those who will not come into accord 
with God's arrangement will die the Second Death; they 
will be destroyed as "natural brute beasts."— 2 Peter 2:12. 

The Second Death is like the first death, only that it 
will be instantaneous; it will not be for the father's sin, 
but for the individual's own sin; and it will be eternal. 
There will be no redemption from it, as from the first 
death. "Christ dieth no more." The reward of the 
righteous will be everlasting life; none will be granted it 
until they have been fully tested and proven. Therefore 
God can guarantee that thenceforth there will be no more 
crying or sighing or dying forever; for all will be fully 
in accord with Him. 

We believe that the time for the world's trial will soon 
come; but we do not think that the door of the Kingdom 
is yet closed. Of course we have no special information 
on the subject; for the Lord does not say that the door to 
the High Calling will close as soon as the Times of the 
Gentiles are ended. The door will be closed when the 
last member of the Body of Christ shall have been 
gathered, shall have been found faithful, shall have finished 
his course and passed beyond the Veil. "Those who 
were ready went in with Him to the marriage, and the 
door was shut." It will be closed then; for none thereafter 
can be added to that elect number. We believe that 
this time is not far distant. 



R5776 : page 295 

THE TWO GREAT INTERCESSIONS 



"Wherefore He is able also to save them to the uttermost that 
come unto God by Him, seeing He ever liveth to make intercession 
for them."— Hebrews 7:25. 

ST. PAUL is here contrasting the great Priesthood 

of our Lord Jesus Christ with that of 

the Aaronic Order— the typical priesthood 

under the Mosaic Law. He is pointing out 

to the believing Hebrews the difference between 

these two priesthoods; for the Jews 

had difficulty in understanding how there 

could be a change of priesthood. Their 

priesthood had stood for sixteen hundred 

years. It seemed neither right nor reasonable 

that any should say that God's institution of the Law 

arrangement was not designed to be lasting. It was necessary, 

therefore, that St. Paul should deal with the matter 

extensively. Throughout the entire book of Hebrews he is 

seeking to point out that the Aaronic priesthood was merely 

typical, merely a one-sided priesthood. The great antitypical 

Priest was to be not only a sacrificing, but also a 

reigning Priest. He was to have a great work beyond the 

time of sacrificing. He was the antitype of Aaron, but 

His Priesthood was of an Order entirely different— much 

superior every way. 

This great Priest, when enthroned in glory, was designed 
to be after the Order of Melchizedek. He was not 
to be after the Order of Aaron. The Apostle pointed out 
that of this glorious Priest it was prophesied (Psalm 1 10:4), 
"Jehovah hath sworn and will not repent, Thou 
art a Priest forever after the Order of Melchizedek"— a 
Priest upon His Throne. 

R5777 : page 295 

Those various sacrifices which the Aaronic Order offered 
year by year were only types of the "better sacrifices." 
(Hebrews 9:23.) The typical priest offered first 
for his own sins, then for the sins of all the people. 
(Leviticus 9:7,8,15; 16:11,14,15.) So the great antitypical 
Priest offers first a sacrifice for Himself (the 
members of His Body), then for the sins of the whole 
world. The blood which was offered in the typical sacrifices 
was the blood of bulls and goats; the blood of the 
"better sacrifices" is the blood of The Christ, Head and 
Body, which has been in process of shedding all down 
through the Gospel Age. But it is the merit of the blood 
of Jesus, the Head of the Body, which gives virtue to the 
sacrifices of the Body. 

"ABLE TO SAVE TO THE UTTERMOST" 

The Apostle shows that the sacrifices of the typical 
priests were efficacious for only a year; that they needed 
to be offered every year; and that the priests of the 
Aaronic Order were not suffered to continue in their office, 



by reason of their death. But the great antitypical Priest 
is to continue always. He will never have a successor; 
for He "ever liveth." He is to accomplish all His great 
work and then sit down on the right hand of the Majesty 
on high. He will never again need to sacrifice, to die for 
sin; for He will have done this effectually, once for all. 

Furthermore, the Apostle, in considering the work accomplished 
by this great Priest for all the people, shows 
how much more efficient His work is than that of the 
earthly priest. The priests of the Aaronic Order, the 
Levitical priesthood, could not properly sympathize with 
the people, nor were their sacrifices able to really take 
away sin. (Hebrews 2:17,18; 4:15; 10:4.) But this 
great antitypical Priest, whose Priesthood is continual, is 
not only able to take away sin, but is able to sympathize 
fully with those for whom His "better sacrifices" have 
been made. "He is able also to save them to the uttermost 
that come unto God by Him, seeing He ever liveth to 
make intercession for them." He is able to save fully, 
completely, eternally. 

This text may be understood to apply to the Church 
now, that the Lord not only saves us from the sins that 
are past— when first we accepted Christ, had our sins forgiven 
and were accepted by Him— but throughout our 
course He also covers with the Robe of His merit those 
blemishes and weaknesses which result from the imperfection 
of our human body. Whatever could be shown to be 
unintentional would be canceled by the merit of His sacrifice, 
stripes being administered for the expiation of any 
measure of wilfulness. So He is able to save, not only 
from sins past and present, but from sins future— save to 

R5777 : page 296 

the uttermost, and bring us to the Divine favor which God 
has promised to the faithful footstep followers of Jesus. 

INTERCESSION FOR THE WORLD OF MANKIND 

But this work for the Church is not all that was meant, 
we think, by the Apostle. If the intercession of Jesus, 
the great High Priest, were all in the past, and if only 
the Church of the First-borns were to be benefited by this 
intercession, all the remainder of the world would be left 
out. We are not to think of Jesus as interceding for His 
people over and over every day; but there are two general 
intercessions. The first He made when He presented the 
merit of His sacrifice in the Most Holy (Heaven itself) 
for those who would become His during the Gospel Age, 
and its effects have been applicable throughout the entire 
Age. All who become of the Church class come in under 
the efficacy of this intercession which was provided for 
at the beginning of the Age. His merit ever avails for 
them before the Father. He ever lives as our great Advocate, 
because of the work done for us when atonement 
was made in the presence of God.— Hebrews 9:24. 



But Jesus is to make another intercession. This is 
pointed out in the 2d Psalm: "Ask of Me [Jehovah], and 
I will give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance, and 
the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession." 
Jesus is to intercede for the heathen, the Gentiles, all who 
are not now members of the Household of Faith. See also 
Romans 11:17-24. 

The same merit which has all through the present Age 
been efficacious for the Church class is to be efficacious 
for the whole world, those in their graves as well as those 
now having a measure of life. It will be a final or complete 
intercession, an intercession to the uttermost. It 
will not leave out even one human being. 

During the Millennium our Lord Jesus will not be 
making intercession for the world; for He will do this at 
its beginning, when He applies His merit for "all the 
people," when the New Covenant is sealed. The Father 
will have no direct dealings with mankind until the close 
of the thousand years, but will deal with them only 
through the Son. During the Messianic Reign, Christ and 
the Church will do a Restitution work for all mankind. 
Because of the presentation of our Lord's merit on their 
behalf, the whole world will be in Christ's hands to be 
dealt with to a completion, to the uttermost, to leave 
nothing undone that can be done. At the close of that 
Age, all the incorrigible will have been destroyed, and 
those brought to perfection will be turned over to the 
Father for a thorough testing. All who then fail, who 
prove not to be fully loyal at heart, will likewise be destroyed, 
"cut off from amongst the people." 



R5777 : page 296 

OVERCOMING DESIRES FOR EARTHLY THINGS 

"But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest 
that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself 
should be a castaway."— 1 Cor. 9:27. 

THE Apostle Paul is here using the illustration 

of a race-course. In certain races there are 

what are called handicaps; that is, one who 

is weaker is given a certain allowance of 

time in starting, and is granted a victory if 

he gets in on time. That would be an accommodation 

for only a few. It is called a 

handicap from the standpoint of the others. 

But in the Christian race there is accommodation 

granted to all; for there is none 

perfect— all come short of the glory of God, and we could 

never gain any reward that God has offered, had it not 

been for the satisfaction which the Redeemer has made. 

Yet it is also true in this race that some have more 
allowance than others. Those who have many weaknesses 



have a corresponding allowance of grace made for them; 
and those who have fewer weaknesses have a less allowance. 
"I therefore so run, not as uncertainly," said St. 
Paul. He was fully determined. He had a definite goal 
in view, and meant to win. This is the only attitude, if 
we would gain the prize that God has offered us; and the 
whole matter is dependent upon our zeal, our faithfulness 
and our earnestness. 

The Greek games had other exhibitions of strength 
and agility besides racing. There were contests with wild 
animals, in which a man would attempt to slay an animal. 
Then there were others between men, in which a man 
would attempt to deal his antagonist a vital blow, if possible, 
with his brass knuckles. In preparation for this contest, 
the contestants had a wind bag to practise on. But 
this was not the real battle, it was merely the preparation. 

So the Apostle says that he was not using his strength 
merely in practise. He was trying to do something. He 
was fighting a real battle. What battle was it? The 
answer of the Bible is that a great battle began away back 
in the days when Satan became the Adversary of God. 
Our first parents came into slavery to Satan, and later 
some of the angels fell. Now many are fighting, and 
some are thoroughly ignorant of whose side they are 
fighting for. Those who are fighting for unrighteousness 
are on Satan's side. Whoever is fighting for moral reforms, 
etc., is on God's side, rather than the side of the 
Enemy of mankind. 

The world are fighting more or less— some more intelligently, 
some less intelligently. There are in every 
army some who could not tell you what the fight is about. 
So now, many do not know that a battle is being waged 
between Righteousness and Sin. The millionaires have 
their own battles and contentions; and the little store-keepers 
have their battles, in competition with the larger 
merchants. The attorney has his battles. He may sometimes 
take a case that is on the side of justice, and defend 
it with zeal; and again he may take a case that is on the 
side of injustice, and prosecute it with equal zeal. But 
the world do not recognize the real battle. The same man 
may be on the right side one day, and on the wrong side 
the next day. 

The Apostle had enlisted under the true banner. 
Christ lifted up a standard in opposition to Satan, and He 
will yet win a glorious victory on the very field where 
Sin has reigned for six thousand years. He had a personal 
conflict with the powers of darkness, in which He 
was Victor. And His victory was gained by His overcoming 
His own natural desires, and fully submitting 
Himself to the will of God. This was the only condition 
on which He could be exalted from the earthly state, to 
the glories of the Divine nature. He has met the required 
condition, of dying the Just for the unjust, and 
has gotten the great victory over Satan. 

The Heavenly Father, in harmony with His own arrangement, 
has empowered the Lord Jesus to take out 



from the world a company to lay down their lives with 
Himself, during a time when everything seems contrary, 
when evil seems to triumph more frequently than do 
righteousness and justice. These, walking by faith, and 
not by sight, are to lay down their lives for the sake of 
righteousness, to carry out the purposes of God. 

OUR PRIMARY BATTLE IS WITH SELF 

Do we ask, Whom, or what, shall we fight? The 
answer is that one would not enter the real conflict at all, 

R5778 : page 297 

if he should follow the impulses of his own mind. In 
such case he would not have any part in this fight. He 
might engage in the ordinary battling of the world— 
sometimes in the right, sometimes in the wrong. But if 
he would get into this company which is being guided by 
Jesus, he must come unto God by Him, and must sacrifice 
earthly hopes, aims and ambitions, and walk in 
Jesus' footsteps— steps of suffering unto death. "For it 
became Him, for whom are all things, and by whom are 
all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the 
Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings." 
(Heb. 2:10.) Thus the battle begins in our mind, our 
will. We submit our mind to the mind of Christ. 

In the typical Day of Atonement sacrifices, the Body 
of Christ is represented by the Lord's goat. And as the 
high priest killed the goat in the type, so in the antitype 
the animal nature is to be killed, slaughtered, sacrificed. 
It is not to be yielded up to sin, but to be overcome. The 
New Creature is in mortal combat with entrenched sin, 
and the cravings of the human nature. He has made a 
consecration of himself to God. And as a result, the 
Advocate has placed His own merit upon the consecrated 
one. When this is done, the battle immediately begins, 
that the New Creature may keep down the old creature, 
the old will.— Galatians 5:17. 

The Apostle says, "I keep my body under,. ..lest, 
when I have preached to others, I myself should become 
a castaway." It must be a real battle, a real conflict; 
for the victory is only to those who overcome. "To him 
that overcometh...will I give power over the nations"; 
"To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in 
My Throne."-Rev. 2:26,27; 3:21. 

VICTORY OR DEATH! 

This battle, then, that begins at the time of our consecration, 
continues until the end— our death. It will be 
the death either of the New Creature or of the old 
creature. So far as our earthly interests are concerned, 
we sacrifice them fully— we exchange them for the opportunity 
of gaining glory, honor, immortality, joint-heirship 
with the Lord, participation in the Divine nature. 



So, as the Apostle suggests, we are not to be expending 
our strength merely on a bag of wind, but we are to fight 
to some purpose. 

"For me to live is Christ," says the Apostle; and for 
me to lose in this battle is for me to perish as a New 
Creature, and this means that the Second Death would 
be mine. We should realize that in our position as 
Christians our eternal interests are at stake. We fear 
of losing the eternal life, which we shall surely lose if 
we fail to be overcomers. 

The Apostle Peter writes, "Seeing, then, that all these 
things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought 
ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness;. ..that 
ye may be found of Him in peace, without spot, and 
blameless!" (2 Peter 3:11,14.) With this anticipation, 
how serious life should be! 

The Christian who knows about these things of the 
future, and who lives in anticipation of them, has a joy 
and a peace of which the world knows nothing. One 
week of such living is worth more than an entire lifetime 
with only such things as the world has to offer. And if 
now we enjoy living the new life, and entering by faith 
into the things that the Lord has in reservation for us, 
what will be the realization! If we would lose much in 
the present time by losing our hope and faith, what would 
it be to lose these things eternally! 

As we realize this, we see that we cannot afford one 
moment of carelessness. The man engaged in combat 
with the animal knows that the bruised and wounded 
animal seeks to kill him. So the Apostle tells us, the 
old nature strives to kill the New Nature. Therefore the 
New Nature must see to it that it uses all its strength to 
gain the victory. The Lord has promised us grace sufficient 
for every time of need. If we are overcome by the 
old nature, it will not be because we have not strength 
sufficient for the victory; for if we call upon the Lord, 
He will sustain us. But the Lord will test our loyalty, 
our faith, our strength of character, our alertness of 
mind. And the victory is sure, so long as our trust is 
in Him! 



R5778 : page 297 

THE CHRIST PERFECTED BY SUFFERING 

"Rejoice, inasmuch as ye are made partakers of Christ's sufferings; 
that when His glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad 
also with exceeding joy."— 1 Pet. 4:13. 

IT MIGHT at first seem strange to God's 
people that they should suffer special trials 
and difficulties as a result of becoming children 
of God and doers of that which is 
good. The natural expectation would be 



that he who sins shall suffer, and he who 

seeks to avoid sin shall be blessed. This is 

a natural law, and it will operate in due 

time— during the Millennial reign of our 

Lord. Evil-doers shall suffer stripes, and if 

found persistent, shall be cut off in the Second Death. 

But all well-doers shall be rewarded with everlasting life 

and blessing forever. 

This is not true now, however, for the reign of the 
Prince of Righteousness has not yet begun. We are 
under the reign of the Prince of Darkness. And the 
evil-doers often have great success, while the right-doers 
suffer. David says of the wicked, "Their eyes stand out 
with fatness; they have more than heart could wish." 
(Psa. 73:7.) Nevertheless he took his stand with those 
who would please God— and so also do we. 

GOD'S PURPOSE IN TESTING US 

St. Paul, speaking concerning the Church of the 
Gospel Age, says, "All that will live godly in Christ 
Jesus, shall suffer persecution." (2 Tim. 3:12.) There 
is no exception to this rule; and the knowledge and expectation 
of this should make us stand fast, having on 
the breastplate of righteousness, and having our feet 
shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace. 

God allows His people to have these experiences and 
to suffer for right-doing. In the present time He is 
calling out a saintly company. This company will be the 
Royal Priesthood of the future, to bless all the world 
during Messiah's Reign. And the Bible explains to us 
that these need trials to prove and test their characters. 

God wishes to see how loyal we are to the principles 
of righteousness. How much are we willing to suffer? 
It is a saying with the world, "Every man has his price." 
And so in the Church there are some who would endure 
a certain amount, and then back down. Others will 
endure a little more, and others still a little more. The 
Lord declares that He is seeking those who will give up 
everything in order to prove faithful to their Covenant 
with Him. This faithfulness means entire loyalty to 
God, to His laws, which are the laws of righteousness. 

THE FIRE TO BURN AMONGST YOU 

The intimation that these fiery trials will try the 
Church, will burn amongst God's people, does not necessarily 

R5778 : page 298 

mean that all the fiery trials will come from the 
Church; but that these trials constitute a fire that is to 
do a purifying work amongst them, burning in their 
midst. It is an experience that must be endured by each 
one individually. It will be a general experience, because 
each one must have a share in this matter. It is not 



merely that the company as a whole will have opposition 
against them, but that each individual will be personally 
exposed to the fiery trials. Therefore this fire burns in 
our midst and will burn to the end. 

It is a different kind of trial from what could come 
to any other body of people. The explanation of this 
difference is in our text— "inasmuch as we are made partakers 
of Christ's sufferings." When we know that each 
member of the Body of Christ must be tried, we can 
rejoice when some of this fire touches us. We say, "I 
am having a share in the sufferings of Christ. I am 
glad that in God's providence I have a share in these 
trials; for if I had no share in them, how could I know 
that I am one of the Body members?" 

THE PRIMARY SOURCE OF TROUBLE 

So we all rejoice, knowing that these fiery trials are 
of the Lord. Not that the Lord is the cause of these 
fiery trials; for usually it is the Adversary. But we 
have put ourselves into the Lord's hands, and He has 
promised to supervise all that concerns us. Therefore, 
whatever comes to us, we may be sure that it is of the 
Father's purpose, or permission for our good. If, therefore, 
we recognize that this is something that the Lord's 
providence has arranged for us, it is all right, no matter 
how frequently we have to go to the Throne of Grace 
for help in time of need. 

God has revealed to us that He purposes to give to 
The Christ very great exaltation, great glory, honor and 
immortality. Therefore we are looking forward to the 
time when this Body shall be perfected, and we shall 
share in the glory of our Head. When the glory shall 
be revealed, we shall be glad with a great joy! These 
trials that come to us are from a variety of sources. In 
our context they are spoken of as the one trial of the 
Church, but that one trial is made up of a variety of 
experiences. If these difficulties and trials came all at 
once, they might be too severe for us. Therefore the 
Lord permits us to be taken out of the fire for a little 
while. "He knoweth our frame; He remembereth that 
we are dust."— Psa. 103:14. 

R5779 : page 298 

TORTURES OF TODAY MORE REFINED 

And so the Father has arranged that we shall have 
little seasons of refreshment between times, so that when 
the next trying experience comes, it will find us a little 
stronger and more ready to profit by it. Some of these 
trials come from the Adversary himself. Apparently the 
things that have been done to the Church could come 
from none other. Think of the devilish disposition manifested 
toward our Lord, and reflect upon His sufferings. 
We cannot think that mankind under any ordinary conditions 



could ever have had so malicious a spirit as that 
manifested against Him. The Devil had to do with all 
the wicked persecutions of the saints— the cutting out 
of tongues, the racking of their poor bodies, and the 
shooting out of bitter words from the tongue. 

We are more used to this latter form of persecution 
today than in olden times; for the world— the average 
man— would not permit the things done in the Dark 
Ages. But the wicked feelings are still there— the animosity, 
the gall. As the Apostle James says, the 
tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity, and it sets on fire 
the course of nature. (James 3:6.) And so in our day 
the tongue and the pen are often used as weapons of evil. 

We have all noticed, perhaps, how willing the world 
is to speak evil and to believe evil— how willing to say 
that which they do not know. This is all because they 
are obsessed, besieged by the Adversary. But we are 
living in a more civilized day than were our brethren of 
the past. We think the individual who does these wicked 
things today— who slanders and vilifies God's people— is 
under some malevolent influence. And then the temptation 
comes to us to speak evil of them in return— to do 
all the harm we can against them. If we find this disposition 
to speak evil arising within us, we are to resist 
it, to allow the fire of this time to burn up these elements 
of our old nature. And the fire will have this purifying 
effect upon us, if we receive it aright, making us meet 
for the Heavenly Kingdom. 

SECONDARY SOURCE OF TRIAL 

Not only from the Adversary do these trials come, 
but they come from the weaknesses and the imperfections 
of others. And perhaps those that come from the 
brethren are the most difficult to bear. We know that 
"the god of this world hath blinded the eyes of them 
that believe not." But when it comes to those who have 
made a profession of loyalty to God, and who have 
named the name of Christ, whether they be Presbyterians 
or Episcopalians, Baptists or Congregationalists, or those 
who are Bible Students— if in any of these we find the 
persecuting spirit, we are more discouraged and less 
likely to have the proper sympathy for them. 

We are to remember, however, that nothing can 
happen to us unless the Father permits it. If we did not 
get the trials from Methodists or Presbyterians or Bible 
Students, we would get them from somewhere else, in 
order to burn up our dross and strengthen the elements of 
our character which need development. We are to take 
all of these things patiently, knowing that they are working 
out for us a "far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory." We are to look away from these things and 
to recognize the grand purpose of God. We are to reflect 
that this is the way in which God is chiseling us 
and polishing us to make us ready for the grand Temple 
of Glory. And when we think of this, we can look with 



fortitude and patience on these fiery trials, recognizing 
that we shall get a blessing out of them. 

"Through many a thorny path He leads 

My tired feet; 
Through many a path of tears I go, 

But it is sweet 
To know that He is close to me— 

My God, my Guide; 
He leadeth me, and so I walk 

Quite satisfied." 

Thus we learn as people of God to glory. We may 
glory in all the things which He has done for us and in 
us. The things that naturally would be least likely to be 
gloried in are tribulations, persecutions. But we may 
glory also in these. We may rejoice in them— not that 
we enjoy the tribulations, the persecutions, but we 
realize that these are working for us characters pleasing 
to God. The Lord will see to it that we get enough, 
and not too much, tribulation. 

The word tribulation has the thought of serious 
trouble— a combination of troubles that makes the 
experiences serious. It would not mean that we would 
fall into some difficulty and soon get out of it again, 
but it would mean severe and continued trouble. 
Sometimes we cannot see why we have the troubles that 
come to us. They may come in the form of sickness, or 
death, or financial trouble, or humiliation of our unrecognized 
pride and self-love; or we may have a combination 

R5779 : page 299 

of trouble. There is no difference whether it 
is one kind or another kind— they are tribulations. But 
it is for us to recognize that in all these trials the Lord 
supervises and makes them work for our good. 

The world has persecutions of a certain sort. People 
in business will sometimes persecute one another. Sometimes 
persecutions are in a political way. The Lord 
indicates to the Church that we may rejoice in any persecution, 
especially if we are in no way blame-worthy. "If 
any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed 
[feel disgraced]," said the Apostle. (1 Pet. 4:14-16.) 
He is suffering because the "darkness hateth the light," 
and slanders the Truth. This has been so from Jesus' 
time all the way down. 

BLESSING RESULTING FROM PERSECUTION 

Shall we say that we will not be reconciled to any 
certain experience? No; we have committed all to the 
Lord, and it is for us to bow in full submission, knowing 
by faith and from the assurance of God's Word that all 
things are working together for good to us. No matter 
what the trouble may be, it will bring patience if we are 



rightly exercised. Some of the Lord's people may have 
patience well developed, and thus not need so many of 
these experiences. But whatever we need, we should desire. 

We remind you again of the story of a certain 
brother who took account of his qualities, and decided 
that he was most lacking in patience. Then he prayed 
most earnestly to the Lord to give him more patience. 
He kept on praying; and the more he prayed, the more 
difficulties he seemed to have, the greater trials of 
patience. Then it occurred to him that this was the 
answer to his prayer; for that was the way to get 
patience. And when he began to see the matter aright, 
it encouraged him and made a great change. He saw 
that the Lord was answering his prayer by giving him 
the very experiences he needed to develop in his character 
this grace of the Spirit. 

"Tribulation worketh patience; and patience, experience; 
and experience, hope." This does not mean that 
we get all of our patience first, then all of our experience, 
and then all of our hope; but that they are all developing 
together. We have a good courage and are desirous of 
pleasing the Lord; we are not ashamed to be His children. 
And the reason why we are not ashamed is that 
with this hope, we have the realization of God's love; 
and we are able to say, "If I had tribulation, I now have 
more hope and more patience. I am getting the results 
in these tribulations, in the fruits of the Spirit." Whoever 
escapes experiences that would develop the fruits 
of the Holy Spirit will never gain a place in the Kingdom. 

Patience can be gained only by trials. Faith can be 
developed only by necessities. We have need of preparation 
for our future work. This can be gained only by 
those experiences which will touch us with a feeling of 
the infirmities and difficulties and trials of the groaning 
creation to whom we shall be ministers and representatives 
when we reach the Throne. For us, then, the lesson 
of present experiences is to resist evil; not with evil, but 
with good. "Be not overcome of evil; but resist evil 
with good."— Romans 12:21. 



R5779 : page 299 

ELISHA'S RESTITUTION MINISTRY 

-OCTOBER 17.-2 KINGS 4, 5.- 

ELISHA SUCCEEDS ELIJAH-THE TYPICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THIS 
-HEALS THE SPRING OF WATER-ENCOUNTERS YOUNG 
HOODLUMS-PRONOUNCES SENTENCE AGAINST THEM 
-THEIR PENALTY-REWARDS FAITH OF A WIDOW -HEALS 
GENERAL NAAMAN'S LEPROSY-IS CONSULTED RESPECTING 
NAAMAN'S FUTURE. 

"I am Jehovah that healeth thee."— Exodus 15:26. 



FOR more than six thousand years our earth 

has been under a Divine condemnation because 

of Father Adam's sin and its propagation 

through his posterity, and because of 

God's sentence against sin. For these 

reasons, as the Apostle declares, our world 

has been under a "reign of Sin and Death." 

(Romans 5:14-19.) And it still is; for the 

curse, or penalty, has not yet been lifted. 

Thank God, the Bible abounds with precious 

promises that a better Day is soon to dawn! That 

glorious Epoch is to be inaugurated by Messiah's Kingdom, 

for which Jesus taught His people to pray, "Thy 

Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth, even as it is 

done in Heaven." Then will come a glorious change to 

the world. Satan shall be bound for a thousand years. 

R5780 : page 299 

The reign of Sin and Death will cease, and a Reign of 
Righteousness and Life will begin. 

That Reign is to last a thousand years. We have the 
words of Jesus Himself that its result will be the entire 
removal of the curse— the freeing of mankind from every 
difficulty and ailment which came upon the world as a 
penalty for Father Adam's sin, etc. From the very beginning 
of Messiah's Reign God's blessing will begin to 
come to the world through Him, and correspondingly the 
curse will begin to fade away; but the full blessing will 
not be here, and the curse will not be entirely removed, 
until about the close of the Millennium. It will be a 
grand work. The promise of Jesus is that eventually 
there shall be no more sighing, no more crying, no more 
dying; for the former things of sin and death will have 
passed away and He will have made all things new, as 
the great King of kings and Lord of lords.— Revelation 21:4,5; 
19:16; 1 Corinthians 15:26,54. 

ELISHA'S WORK A TYPE OF RESTITUTION BLESSINGS 

In a previous lesson we pointed out that Bible students 
understand Elijah's career to have been typical of the experiences 
of the Church in the flesh, ending with glorification. 
Appropriately we might expect that Elisha, the 
companion of Elijah, upon whom fell Elijah's mantle of 
power and authority as the Lord's representative, prefigured 
a class. Our thought is that he typified two 
classes: first, that he typified those who now are associated 
with the Elijah class; and that, after the taking of 
Elijah and his recrossing Jordan, he became a type of 
those in whose charge will be the dispensing of Restitution 
blessings during the Millennium. Let us notice a 
few of his figurative doings. 

PURE WATER-PURE TRUTH 



(1) A certain stream carried brackish water through 
an otherwise favored district. Elisha took a handful of 
salt, went to the head of the brook and poured it in 
there, commanding in the name of the Lord that it should 
henceforth be pure water. Looking for a typical significance 
of this in the Millennium, we remember that a 

stream of water represents a stream of Truth, and that 

brackish water would represent impure doctrines. A purification 

of the stream at its fountain would well represent 

what the Lord has promised through the Prophet respecting 

Messiah's Day: "Then will I turn unto the people a 

R5780 : page 300 

pure Message, that they may all call upon the name of 
the Lord, to serve Him with one consent."— Zeph. 3:9. 

The salt cast into the spring reminds us of the Master's 
words respecting His true followers, "Ye are the 
salt of the earth." (Matthew 5:13.) It will be in and 
through the glorified Salt of the Earth that the blessing 
will come, the streams of Truth for human refreshment 
for a thousand years. The light of the knowledge of the 
glory of God will be made to fill the whole earth, as the 
waters cover the great deep.— Isaiah 11:9; Hab. 2:14. 

HURT FIGHTING BEARS 

(2) As Elisha proceeded on his journey, some young 
hoodlums accosted him, saying, "Go up, thou bald head!" 
These were youths— not children, not babies. Elisha 
turned and pronounced upon them a punishment, translated 
in our text a curse. He denounced their conduct as 
wrong and declared that it would have a punishment. 

The punishment came speedily. Two she-bears came upon 
them and tore them, wounded them. There is no suggestion 
that the bears ate them or killed them; but the forty-two 
young ruffians all experienced wounds from their 
conflict with the bears, and this apparently was the punishment 
for their wrong-doing. 

After some such manner there will be judgments in 
the world during the Millennium— punishments for every 
wrong course, rewards for every right deed. Thus, 
through chastisements, called in the Bible judgments, the 
world will be taught right and wrong for a thousand 
years. As it is written, "When the judgments of the Lord 
are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will 
learn righteousness." (Isaiah 26:9.) It is for this reason 
that the Millennial Age is called the world's Day of 
Judgment. St. Peter explains that a Day with the Lord 
is as a thousand years. (2 Peter 3:8.) St. Paul tells 
us that "God hath appointed a Day [a thousand years], 
in the which He will judge the world in righteousness." 
(Acts 17:31.) The judgment will be in the nature of 
rewards and punishments wisely administered, that the 
people may learn righteousness and abhor sin. 



OIL ACCORDING TO HER FAITH 

(3) A poor widow in distress because of debt appealed 
to the Prophet Elisha for aid. She found that her resources 
were exhausted, except that she had some olive 

oil. He directed her to take all the vessels that she had 
and to borrow from her neighbors and to pour the oil 
into these until they were filled, then to sell the oil for 
money wherewith to pay her debts and to use the remainder 
for the wherewithal to live. 

This story may illustrate for us the blessed rewards 
of faith that the Lord will grant during the Millennium. 
Indeed, it illustrates the general principle on which the 
Lord operates. The debt was to be paid. Justice was not 
to be violated, and any miracle to be performed would be 
preferably by the blessing of something already possessed. 
Thus doubtless it will be during the Millennium. The 
Lord will bless what people may have according to their 
faith in using it in harmony with His will; and it will 
increase with that for the full supply of all their needs. 

Our Lord Jesus illustrated this in some of His miracles; 
and we should not forget that He made it plain 
that His miracles typified, or foreshadowed, His coming 
in the glory and the majesty of His Kingdom work. 
(John 2: 1 1.) One of these was the feeding of the five 
thousand people from the small quantity of fish already 
at hand. Every person has something of a talent, or possession. 
The lesson to us would be: Use what you have, 
asking God's blessing, and seek to use it in harmony with 
His Word, nothing doubting. The Lord always rewards 
faith. In the case of this widow the oil was quite sufficient 
to fill all the vessels she had borrowed, as well as 
all of her own vessels. Then it stopped. 

SYRIAN GENERAL CURED OF LEPROSY 

(4) In the Far East leprosy is one of the most dreaded 
diseases and is generally accepted as incurable. The 
Bible seems to refer to leprosy as a figure, or type, of 
sin because it is incurable, except by Divine miracle. 
Naaman, the chief commander of the Syrian king's 
forces, was a leper. In his family was a little Hebrew 
housemaid, who had been captured in one of the battles 
between the Syrians and the Israelites. She noted her 
master's plight, and remarked to her mistress about the 
great Prophet in Israel, Elisha, who could do anything, 
she believed. She suggested that he be applied to. 

What seemed like idle talk was seized upon by General 
Naaman as a last and only hope. From his king he 
obtained a letter of introduction to the King of Israel, 
which in substance said: "I am sending this letter by 
the hand of my chief general, Naaman, who is a leper; 
and I desire you to see that he is healed." The king of 
Israel was appalled. He knew that he had no power over 
such a disease, and that it was ranked as incurable. He 



concluded that the Syrian king was trying to pick a 
quarrel with him, and that this meant war, great trouble. 
He rent his outer garment, as was the custom of the time, 
in indication of his great distress. The matter was told 
to the Prophet Elisha, who immediately sent the king 
word not to be disturbed, but to send the general to him. 
This was done. 

When the general arrived at the Prophet's home with 
quite a caravan of servants, costly presents, etc., he sent 
word to the Prophet respecting his errand and that he 
had been sent by the king to him. Elisha curtly sent him 
word to go to the River Jordan and wash seven times. 
Naaman was angry. He said, "This man does not even 
treat me civilly. Why did he not come down to see me 
and make some kind of recognition of my rank and of 
the nation which I represent?" He then declared that 
there were rivers in Syria of much better water than the 
Jordan, and that Elisha was trifling with him. 

While Elisha's conduct undoubtedly was proper and 
directed of God and turned out well, nevertheless it would 
not be a wise course for the Lord's people generally to 
follow. In the New Testament the Apostles urge that 
the servants of God should be courteous toward all and 
render honor to whom honor is due. However, the matter 
worked out well. The servants of the general suggested 
to him that he had to go by Jordan any way on 
his return home, and why not try, as the Prophet of 
Israel had said. It could do no harm and might do some 
good. Any way the Prophet evidently had not been trying 
to make money out of him, nor to get the costly presents 
which he had brought, and which he knew he would gladly 
give for such a cure. The anger of the general cooled. 
He bathed seven times in Jordan, as directed. The result 
was a miraculous cure. 

Naaman was not thankless. He returned to the home 
of the Prophet to thank him and to urge him to accept 
the presents he had brought; but the Prophet would accept 
nothing. He was merely acting as a Divine representative. 
His powers were not for sale. They were Divine 
blessings. Let the General acknowledge them to God! 
And this General Naaman did. He confessed that no 
other God than Jehovah could perform such a miracle. 
He was apparently ready to do the will of God heartily, 
and asked respecting his future course. The Prophet did 
not tell him to become a Jew and to renounce the heathen 

R5781 : page 301 

religion of his own land, but encouraged him to return to 
his home and to continue in his office. 

General Naaman inquired as to his responsibility. If 
he worshiped the true God, what must he do when in 
the company of his king and the latter wished to go to 
the house of a false god? Elisha's answer in substance 
was that if the general made full profession of his faith 
in the true God, it would not be improper for him to 



accompany his master to the house of the false god; for 
his own adherence to Jehovah God would be recognized. 



R5781 : page 301 

OTHER RESTITUTION TYPES 
--OCTOBER 24.-2 KINGS 6:8-23.- 



ELISHA AWAKENS THE SHUNAMMITE'S SON-PUNISHES HIS 
SERVANT GEHAZI-ENTRAPS THE SYRIAN ARMY AND RENDERS 
THEM GOOD FOR EVIL-IMPORTANT LESSONS IN RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them 
that fear Him, and delivereth them."— Psalm 34:7. 

IN TODAY'S Study we note Elisha's awakening 

of the Shunammite's son, his punishment 

of his servant Gehazi with leprosy, and 

his entrapping of the Syrian army. (2 Kings 4:8-37; 

5:20-27.) While these things 

may not find exact counterpart in the events 

of the coming Kingdom, they nevertheless 

represent principles which will be in operation 

then— the principles of reward for 

right doing, of punishment for intentional 

wrong-doing, and of sympathetic restraint and instruction. 

All these principles will operate during Messiah's 

Kingdom; and under these the world will gradually make 

progress. "When the judgments of the Lord are abroad 

in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness." 

—Isaiah 26:9. 

AWAKENING THE SHUNAMMITE'S SON 

Millions of people will long remember a most touching 
scene in the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, representing 
the death of the Shunammite's son, and showing how 
Elisha awakened the lad from the sleep of death and restored 
him to his parents. Perhaps no more touching 
film was ever produced. Few saw it without tears. It 
pictured the coming Restitution work of the Millennium, 
when all the sleeping dead will be awakened, to resume 
their lives and to complete their education in the school 
of experience under more happy and more favorable conditions 
than any enjoy at the present time, except the 
Church— those who during this Age are blessed of the 
Lord with hearing ears, eyes of faith and obedient hearts. 

GEHAZI SMITTEN WITH LEPROSY 

Gehazi had in many respects been a faithful servant to 
Elisha. As a result, he had blessings of knowledge which 
the majority of people did not possess. With the knowledge 



came responsibility; hence the severe punishment 
inflicted upon the man for hypocrisy and deception. We 
are reminded of the text which declares that if a good 
man depart from his well-doing and sin wilfully, his past 
good deeds shall not be remembered, even as it is with 
the evil-doer who, coming to God with full repentance 
and change of heart, is forgiven and received into God's 
family. His past evil is entirely ignored, except as it may 
bear its fruit in certain weaknesses of mind or body.— 
Ezekiel 3:17-21; 18:20-24; 33:10-16. 

When General Naaman perceived the great miracle 
accomplished in his cleansing from leprosy, he returned 
to Elisha, offering thanks to God and desiring the Prophet 
to receive the presents which he had brought. But Elisha 
would receive none of them. In this he manifested what 
we believe is always the Lord's Spirit— never to sell 
spiritual things for money. It is for this reason that 
some ministers now object to taking up collections, holding 
fairs or soliciting money in any manner. Their contention 
is that whatever is given to the Lord's service 
should be given with a free hand and a ready heart. 
"The Father seeketh such to worship Him as worship Him 
in spirit and in truth." (John 4:23.) It is a privilege to 
give to the Lord and His Cause; for the Almighty is not 
poor, that He should need our gifts. All the gold and 
silver are His, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. — 
Haggai 2:8; Psalm 50:10. 

Under such a noble example Gehazi should have 
profited, but did not. He allowed covetousness to come 
into his mind. He had seen the rich Babylonish garments, 
and thought how fine it would be if he could have 
some of these and plenty of changes of linen garments. 
He would be like a prince. He had perceived that General 
Naaman regretted that his presents were not accepted. 
He pursued, and told the general that the Prophet had 
said that while he did not desire any of the garments or 
other things for himself, he had concluded that he might 
use some of these for his servants, and that he would 
accept gifts for them. The ruse was successful. The 
servant was recognized as the one seen at Elisha's place. 
The goods were joyfully given to him. He hid them 
away secretly, until the Prophet called him, told him all 
about the matter and pronounced his punishment— leprosy. 

So will it be in the coming Age. Any disobedience 
will meet with swift punishment. Of the judges of that 
time it is written that they will not judge with the hearing 
of the ear nor with the sight of the eye; they will 
judge righteously.— Isaiah 11:3,4. 

ELISHA'S CAPTURE ATTEMPTED 

It was probably after the death of General Naaman 
that the king of Syria declared war against the Israelites. 
To his surprise he found that every move he made was 
checkmated. If he planned to capture a certain city, it 
seemed as though the Israelitish king knew every detail. 



Thus his endeavors came to naught. He looked for a 
traitor amongst his own people in his own household, or 
for some explanation. Then it was told him by one of 
his servants, "Behold, the Prophet Elisha is in Israel and 
makes known to their king all thy counsels, even those of 
thy bed-chamber." Apparently the knowledge of Jehovah 
and Elisha had spread from General Naaman to some of 
the household of the king. 

Intent upon his conquest, the king sought to capture 
Elisha. If he could not get some profit out of the man 
for himself and his side, he could at least keep him from 
communicating with the king of Israel. He sent spies to 
find where Elisha dwelt, and located him at the little city 
of Dothan. Thereupon he sent a good-sized force, quite 
sufficient to surround the city and make it impossible for 
Elisha to escape— horses, chariots, etc. He would do two 
things— not only capture a city, but capture the Prophet. 

In the morning early, Elisha's servant looked forth and 
beheld the companies of the enemy on every side, barring 
every way of escape. He was terrified and said, "Alas, 
my master! how shall we do?" Promptly came the 
answer, "Fear not; for they that be with us are more than 
they that be with them." The servant did not appreciate 
this; for he had not come to realize fully what Divine 

R5781 : page 302 

powers were with his master. Then Elisha prayed that 
the eyes of the young man might be opened; and he beheld 
angelic hosts, horses and chariots of fire around 
about Elisha. This was sufficient to give the young man 
the needed courage and to assure him of God's Power. 
Just what kind of vision this was makes no particular 
difference. Undoubtedly it was merely a vision, without 
any reality; but it served its purpose. God's Power surrounds 
all of His consecrated people in an unlimited 
measure. These powers are exercised by spirit beings, 
entirely invisible to men. The important thing is to get 
the right thought— that under all conditions Omnipotent 
Power stands behind and completely surrounds those who 
are His. Nothing can befall this special class except in 
accord with the Divine program. Whatever may occur in 
their experience will be of Divine foreknowledge and 
permission; hence the promise to this class is that all 
things shall work together for their good.— Romans 8:28. 

THE SYRIAN HOST CAPTURED 

The Prophet exercised a supernatural power of blinding 
the Syrian host; but just what the power was or how 
it was accomplished we can only conjecture. Doubtless 
their eyes were wide open; and doubtless they saw the 
hills, valleys, roads, etc.; but the eyes of their understanding 
were closed, apparently, in some hypnotic manner. 
Elisha gave them to understand that he would lead them 
to the proper city; and he did so, guiding them straight 



to the city of Samaria, in through its gates. There, surrounded 
by the hosts of the capital, he broke the hypnotic 
spell. Their eyes opened; and they perceived that they 
were in the hands of their enemies, who, with drawn 
swords and leveled spears, offered no opportunity of 
escape. They had been entrapped, but not to their injury 
—for their good, for their instruction. 

The king of Israel inquired of the Prophet whether or 
not he should smite these and destroy them, or what. 
The answer was, "No; feed them and let them return 
peaceably to their own home." The king caught the 
spirit of the proposition, and not merely gave them bread 
and water, such as might be given prisoners, but made 
them a bountiful feast— treated them royally, treated them 
as friends. Then they were set free to go to their own 
land, there to tell the strange experience that had occurred 
and to demonstrate to their king the impossibility 
of successfully fighting against the kingdom of Israel 
under such circumstances. 



R5782 : page 302 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
NEWS FROM FRENCH BIBLE STUDENTS 

I would be very grateful if you would kindly send me 
some tracts for distribution among sorrowing hearts, as the 
poor world is getting disheartened, and this is the right time 
for presenting to them the Gospel Message. I have already 
made several such distributions, for which the people were 
very glad, several of them saying they wished they were 
already living in that glorious Day. God's Word alone can 
bring them comfort. -JULES ROY. 

Soon an era of righteousness shall be established by Christ 
and His Bride, of whom we are invited to become a part. 
What a comfort this thought is to me through all the dangers 
of this hour! Here new opportunities are afforded me 
to bring this precious message to the friends— soldiers of my 
regiment. Now, as soon as I receive the TOWER, some of 
them want to read it ahead of me. They read also Vol. 1 
of the STUDIES from time to time.-ELIE MALINGRAT. 

I wish to inform you of the departure of Brother Louis 
Durieu for the Orient (Dardanelles). Being told to start 
without delay for Marseilles (where he probably still is), 
he was unable to write to you himself of his going, and thus 
to present you his brotherly regards. I was much delighted 
at the real comfort I derived from reading in the last TOWER 
that marvelous page about Love. May the Lord bless it for 
all the Divine Israel I-ELISEE TRULEUX 

I am glad to be able to write to you these lines to express 
my great joy at receiving THE WATCH TOWER 
(French), which is so interesting and comforting in the 
troublous times now upon us! What a peace fills our hearts 



when everything is crashing about us! By the grace of God 
strengthening us, we are enabled to endure with patience 
and perseverance the greatest trials permitted of Him for 
our spiritual welfare. Yes, we can love and praise our good 
Heavenly Father for His many blessings. --M. NONGAILLARD. 

We are very happy here at C (near Dunkirk), being 

able to devote ourselves freely to holy study during the short 
time permitted us here below, and we pray the Lord to 
strengthen our faith upon the solid foundation of Present 
Truth, so as to better resist the tumultuous current beating 
about. -H. ROUSSEL. 

Here in Liege (Belgium) everything is well in a temporal 
way, but God has blessed us still more spiritually. As 
you know, our meetings have never been interrupted. They 
still take place every Sunday in our hall at the Hawirs, and 
every Thursday at home. During the first three months of 
the war we had four meetings a week. Now, work is going 
on again in all the coal mines and we have been abundantly 
blessed. -F. PETRIE. 

We thank the Lord more and more for having raised 
Pastor Russell and his valiant fellow-servants, through whom 
He has so generously and mercifully blessed us. We remember 
daily before the Throne of Heavenly Grace the great help 
you lend to the good "grain" already garnered, as well as 
pray God to strengthen and sustain you by His all-powerful 
arm in the good fight you have undertaken; also for the 
cause of Truth for which you have vowed to be faithful unto 
death, on behalf of all the brethren and sisters.— VICTOR 
RANDOUR. 
The following letters from brethren who are prisoners in 

Germany: 

I have had the opportunity to preside at a meeting participated 
in by more than one hundred people. Helping me 
were some friends who had also studied the first and second 
volumes of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, as well as some 
tracts. With God's assistance, I have been enabled to give 
my experience before all the Protestants in the camp. The 
aforesaid friends left in March, I being sick at the time. 
Since then I have worked to spread the good tidings of the 
Kingdom. "Do as occasion serve thee, for God is with 
thee." (1 Samuel 10:7.) I want to work for the Lord, and 
may His grace be with me!-FREDERIC POLLARD. 

With much joy I have received the books you forwarded 
me. I have read and studied them without ceasing, having 
asked of our brother J. H. his help to that extent. I have 
understood and I am following. What is necessary is to 
win the final victory. The contents of the books, where followed, 
cause a lasting effect. It is a meat that does not 
decay.— L. FLAMME (newly interested). 

I have received news of my wife and relatives in Rouboix 
(invaded territory); they are in good health, and so are 
the dear brethren and sisters there. I see that the Lord 
knows how to keep His own through all their difficulties, 
and I pray Him to give each of His beloved children the 
needed strength to bear every other trial that may still be 
in store in this evil day. Kindly send me some tracts and 



booklets, and also, if possible, some English and German 
tracts for distribution. I thank you for the tracts received 
and the card, "My Morning Resolve. "--JEAN HER. 



SCRIPTURE PRECEDENTS FOLLOWED 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Some time ago I read in THE BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY 
of a suit you had entered against Rev. J. J. Ross in Canada. 

Now, I am only a humble seeker after truth, and I cannot 
criticize you, because I have not sufficient knowledge of the 
Scriptures to do so. There is, however, one point I would 
like to have cleared up; and if you would be so good as to 
take up a few lines in THE WATCH TOWER to answer me, I 
am sure it would do not only me a lot of good, but others also 
who may have given the matter serious thought. 

The question is, dear Pastor, how could you as a follower 
of Jesus bring suit against a fellow creature, no matter how 
vilely he talked about you or your work? 

You know how our Savior was talked about, and aside 
from a rebuke He did nothing. At least, He never sought 
redress through any legal agency. 

R5782 : page 303 

I despise the clerical profession, because I know them to 
be liars and parasites, who suck a fat living from the parish; 
that is, a good part of them. Of course, there are many noble, 
misled men amongst them; and I am sure they will be rewarded 
for whatever good they may have done. 

Please, dear Pastor, will you not answer one who is sorely 
troubled— one who believes your work the grandest ever 
undertaken, and who loves God and His people, although he 
feels himself an unworthy sinner— one who hates to think 
of one who is doing so grand and noble a work for Jesus, as 
not walking in His footsteps in every respect? 

Yours sincerely. A. WOODS. -New York. 

REPLY BY EDITOR 

We are not certain that we did the wisest and best thing 
—the thing most pleasing to the Lord in the matter mentioned. 
However, the suit against Rev. Ross was not 
undertaken without consideration of the Lord's will and of 
the precedents of the Bible. 

Amongst Bible students, informed respecting the Divine 
Word and its requirements, Matthew 18:15-17 is the accepted 
standard of action:— 

(1) Private conference; 

(2) If necessary, taking a couple of brethren in a further 
endeavor to get at the right and to stop what is believed to 
be the wrong; 

(3) In the event of the concurrence of the brethren that 
the wrong is being done, and of the refusal on the part of 



the wrong-doer to desist, the third step is to bring the matter 
before the Church. If the Church agrees, then the wrong-doer, 
if he still refuses to desist from the wrong course, is to 
be disfellowshiped— to be barred from any office or service 
of the Church— treated as an outsider— "like a publican." 

We could not see how this rule could be applied to Rev. 
Ross; for so far as we have knowledge he would have no 
regard whatever for such proceedings and could not be debarred 
finally from fellowship, because he recognizes no such 
fellowship. We felt, therefore, that any proceedings against 
Rev. Ross must be along the lines which he himself would 
recognize. He, like other ministers, recognizes the governments 
of this world as being parts of Christ's Kingdom; and 
their courts, therefore, as being parts of the Divine Institution. 
For this reason we felt that we were approaching the 
subject from a just and Golden Rule standpoint in appealing 
to the courts of justice, which Rev. Ross recognizes as being 
The Divine Institution. In other words, we attempted to 
meet him on his own grounds. 

As for Scriptural precedents: Jesus did not need to take 
His case before the courts, because His enemies did that 
—taking Him before the chief priests and the Sanhedrin. 
They condemned Him in the Jewish courts. When before 
His judges, Jesus offered no resistance, in the sense of 
using His power, either of eloquence or of Divine energy, to 
resist their unjust decisions. He merely submitted Himself 
with the complaint, "If I have spoken evil, bear witness of 
the evil; but if well, why smitest thou Me?"— John 18:23. 

The Apostles, Peter and John, brought before the Sanhedrin 
court, made their defense. So also did St. Paul. On 
one occasion, because he thought he was not getting justice, 
he appealed to Caesar's court for whatever the Roman law 
might provide. Similarly I appealed to the court having 
jurisdiction of Rev. Ross, having in mind to stop him from 
doing evil and from opposing the Message of the Lord, which 
I am seeking to bear to all people. My attorneys, of course, 
were obliged to bring their action in harmony with the laws 
of the land. While the case was still pending, I wrote Rev. 
Ross, assuring him that I had no unkind intention, and proposing 
that I would discontinue the suit if he would promise 
to discontinue his injurious, slanderous course. 



R5783 : page 303 

ENJOYING THE SPIRITUAL FOOD 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am reading about ten pages in the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES daily. Several times I have tried this plan, but 
did not continue. This time I am keeping to my lesson as 
outlined in the Berean Questions. 

I have read the volumes several times, but by this method 
I am surprised at the results. Every day I have a definite 
study before me, and have more desire for the spiritual food 



than for the natural. I find it the best way to cultivate love 
in thought, word and deed. Daily I ask the Father to help 
me, and daily I render my account. I come far short, but 
can see progress. Praise His name! 

I am speeding along in the race, trusting in every promise 
and "looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our 
faith." I am content, and am watching THE WATCH TOWER 
for the "light that shineth more and more unto the perfect 
Day." How it rejoices my heart to know that the time is 
near when the faithful will partake of the best wine and 
earth's festivities begin! Much Christian love to yourself 
and all the family, in which my husband joins. 

Your sister in Christ, 

MRS. W. W. GOODWIN. --Rhode Island. 

EDITOR'S REPLY TO ABOVE 

I rejoice with you, dear Sister, in the blessing you are 
now having from systematic study of the Bible through the 
daily reading of the volumes, STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
and the Scripture references which they bring to your attention. 
With the multitudinous affairs of life pressing us, we 
need to order our lives intelligently in the interest of our new 
natures. Otherwise, the cares of this life and the deceitful 
lure of earthly riches would hinder us from obtaining our 
spiritual food, rest, refreshment and strength— thus incapacitating 
us for our spiritual blessings and development, 
and leaving us unfit for a share in the Kingdom. 

I think the plan you have adopted of taking the Berean 
Questions and the portion which they represent as your daily 
lesson is a good one. As you know, some five years ago many 
of THE WATCH TOWER readers began systematically to read 
twelve pages or more every day. Such as have been following 
this course report splendid success, and show it in their 
spiritual development. However, I think that your plan of 
using the Question Books and taking a special lesson for 
each day is still better. Often the lesson, however, would 
run over only one page or two; and in such event you, of 
course, can readily take in several lessons for one day. 

The advantage of the Question Books is that they promote 
study. One of the most important things for people in every 
walk of life is to learn to think. We have all done very little 
of this in respect to religion in the past. One of the mistakes 
which some of the Brethren make in leading Berean Study 
classes is that they talk too much. The successful Bible 
Class leader is the one who does comparatively little talking, 
except in an emergency, but who stimulates thought in the 
Class through the Questions and through the interrogative 
form of suggesting answers when necessary rather than giving 
the answers directly. Bible classes are specially profitable 
because of the thinking on Bible topics which they arouse. 

You do not mention it, dear Sister, but doubtless yourself 
and husband are getting great blessings from the use of the 
MANNA Book every morning. It surely has brought a great 
deal of blessing to many. The text and the comment are quite 
brief, requiring only a few minutes; then, where there is a 



considerable number at the table, a further discussion of the 
text is often very illuminating. Thus the day is well started 
with helpful thoughts. 

I am glad to know that the Morning Resolve and the evening 
self-examination at the Throne of Grace are also comforting, 
strengthening to you. You do not mention the Vow. 
I remember that you and your husband informed me long 
ago that you had taken it. Nothing that we ever had, I 
think, has accomplished more of blessing for the readers of 
THE WATCH TOWER. We have heard from about fifteen thousand 
that they have taken the Vow, but we doubt not that the 
number is much larger than this, as continually the dear 
friends remark to us that they took the Vow years ago, but 
did not think to mention the fact in writing to us. We are 
always glad to know of your welfare, and believe the Vow is a 
special feature of blessing the Lord has ordained for our day. 
Besides this, it constitutes the most wonderful prayer-circle 
that was ever known in the world— fifteen thousand or more 
pledged to each other and to the Lord that they will remember 
each other and the Harvest work every day in prayer. 



FROM BATTLE-TORN RUSSIA 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

This is to inform you that I fell into Russian captivity, 
and after a long journey was brought here to Jelabuga, 
Russia. I could not bring any religious tracts with me, and 
now I feel their lack very much. Therefore I earnestly request 
you to send me your complete works in the German 
language free of charge. Of course, I will thankfully reimburse 
you for their expense when we, with God's help, 
return. At the same time I would request you to send me 
some Hungarian literature and include with the others. 

Please write me a few lines of comfort, and also something 
regarding conditions existing in the United States. 
With loving greetings, 

Your brother in the Lord, F ALUVEGI DEUES . 



page 304 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 305 

VOL. XXXVI OCTOBER 15 No. 20 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 307 

The Millennium of Peace 307 

Decline to Promote War 307 

Revolution and Anarchy Coming 308 

"God Manifest in the Flesh" 309 

God Manifest in Perfect Humanity 309 

Our Lord's Beauty of Holiness 310 

Incarnation Theory Not Scriptural 311 

Meditations in the Night 311 

To Serve, Not to Be Served 312 

Profitless and Profitable Service 313 

Murders Her Grandchildren 314 

Too Much Money 315 

Scriptural Method of Giving 315 

Eureka Drama— Class Extension 316 

No National Prejudices 317 

Interesting Letters 318 

"Blessed Are They That Trust in Him" 318 

"Beware of Wolves" 319 

As Moments Pass, the Kingdom Nears (poem) 319 

page 306 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



LOCAL CONVENTIONS 

The friends at various places where Brother Russell will 
be addressing the public are arranging for little, quiet, local 
conventions. Places intending such gatherings have sent us 
the particulars named below. 

For information respecting board and lodging at economical 
rates address the class secretaries. 

DETROIT, Mich., October 16, 17. 

Dr. E. A. McCosh, Sec'y, 309 Broadway, Market Bldg. 
ADRIAN, Mich., October 17. 

H. Sillaway, Sec'y, 134-1/2 E. Beecher St. 
BAY CITY, Mich., October 18. 

A. E. Hendricks, Sec'y, 512 Ketchum St. 
ERIE, Pa., October 19. 

O. R. Frederick, Sec'y, R.F.D., No. 5. 
CHICAGO, 111., October 23. 

A. L. Seeley, Sec'y, 7150 Langley Ave. 
DES MOINES, la., October 23, 24. 

J. A. Irving, Sec'y, 1548 11th St. 
DUBUQUE, la., October 24, 25, 26. 

E. C. Mahon, Sec'y, P.O. Box 155. 
DAVENPORT, la., October 24, 25, 26, 27. 

Miss L. M. Albertson, Sec'y, The St. James. 
ROCKFORD, 111., October 26. 

E. A. Gleasman, Sec'y, 413 N. Winnebago St. 
PARSONS, Kans., October 28. 

R. R. Wilson, Sec'y, 2521 Grand Ave. 
JOPLIN, Mo., October 29. 

J. P. Hemphill, Sec'y, 527 N. Wall St. 
WEBB CITY, Mo., October 30. 

Mrs. W. A. Van Sickle, 1018 W. Aylor St. 
ST. LOUIS, Mo., October 31. 

J. H. Hoeveler, Sec'y, 6126 Waterman Ave. 



R5783 : page 307 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

THE MILLENNIUM OF PEACE 

-A PROMINENT NEW YORK BANKER'S OPINION- 

THE cost of the war is now around $50,000,000 
per day, and the amount spent thus far 



for a year of war is estimated to have been 

about $15,500,000,000. The wealth of the 

United States has been computed to be 

something in the neighborhood of $189,000,000,000. 

The first year of war has 

cost about one twelfth of this vast amount. 

At this rate of destruction a sum equal to 

the total wealth of the United States would 

be wiped out in twelve years. 

"But to this money cost of a year's war must be added 
the value of manufacturing and other buildings in villages, 
towns and cities, all or a large part of which have been 
destroyed, of crops devastated, of goods and household 
properties ruined, and of vast further losses sustained in 
the communities, which are being fire-and-shot-swept in 
the path of the contending armies. Nothing is included 
here of the industrial value of human lives which have 
been destroyed by the millions. Not taking into account 
the agony and grief which engulfs all Europe, the contemplation 
of the economic waste of war is appalling. 
And it is no wonder that the minds of many millions turn 
to the problem of how peace can be brought about. It is 
a fact, however, that these problems occupy the thoughts 
of people in this and other neutral countries more than 
they do those of the belligerent nations. The National 
City Bank, in its August circular, says that the appalling 
destructive results of the year of war signify practically 
nothing as to when the conflict will end; that there are 
no signs that either side is running out of men or money 
or that the people of any of the warring countries are 
weakening in resolution or confidence. 

"For many people on this side it is impossible to understand 
this, but when it is thoroughly appreciated that 
a patched-up-peace would mean merely a deferring of further 
fighting until recuperation could be effected and that 
then the whole bloody conflict would have to be fought 
out over again to an even bitterer end, the determination 
of the belligerents will be better understood. There is 
only one result which can now be accepted as an outcome 
of this world war, and that is a result which will mean 
disarmament of the nations and a peace of a thousand 
years. With every country stripped of its fighting organizations, 
and safety in the keeping of an international 
police force, the vast sums wrung by taxation from the 
various people for keeping up prodigious armies and 
navies would be turned to the arts of peace and commerce 
and relieved from the terrible burden and anxiety 
which has increasingly oppressed Europe for years, the 
countries of the world would devote themselves individually 
to the winning of prosperity and happiness. 

"The national debts of the warring countries have 
nearly doubled since the war began, and carrying these 
will entail added taxation in the years to come. If a 
peace were now concluded which did not make later conflict 
impossible, this added taxation for paying interest on 
an enormously increased National debt besides the immense 



sums for which the countries would be taxed to 
establish new and larger military organizations, would 
make the life of individuals unbearable. Repudiation of 
National debts might, and would, be very likely to follow. 

"The war must be fought to a conclusion which will 
positively prevent a recurrence of conditions that will 

R5784 : page 307 

make it possible for any nation to attack another. Death 
of militarism is the only hope of peace. And this country 
is as much interested in such a conclusion as are any of 
the combatants. 

"If we look at our own position selfishly, it will be 
seen that any other result would place us in the ring of 
nations which must defend its rights by preponderating 
military and naval power. By the course of events we are 
already placed in that position and must now take up at 
once the task and enormous expense of placing ourselves 
in readiness to meet with powerful equipment of men and 
munitions, near or remote contingencies on land or sea. 

"In the meantime the influence of the United States 
must be used in whatever way may be most efficient to 
bring about world disarmament as the only means of preserving 
civilization, the very existence of which is now 
threatened."— Bache Review. 



DECLINE TO PROMOTE WAR 

Editorially the New York American says: "Very 
soon after the war broke out it became evident that each 
of the belligerents would be short of money before many 
months had elapsed. It was also evident that sooner or 
later loans would be sought in America. The prevailing 
opinion was that Germany and Austria would be first to 
seek loans, since England, France and Russia had piled 
up nearly twice as much gold in preparation for war as 
had the Teutonic empires. 

"In no long time it turned out that a German loan was 
sought to be floated in this country. Under these circumstances 

R5784 : page 308 

—the Germans actually seeking a loan and England 
and France being probable loan seekers— certain 
American bankers inquired of the Administration whether 
the Government would look with tolerance upon the making 
of war-loans by Americans to foreign belligerent powers. 
The answer was an emphatic negative. In the exact words 
of Mr. Wilson these bankers were told that any effort to 
finance loans for belligerents during the war 'WOULD BE 
INCONSISTENT WITH THE SPIRIT OF NEUTRALITY.' 



"The Administration no longer deems it the 'best practise 
of nations in the matter of neutrality' to discourage 
the exportation of arms and munitions to foreign belligerents. 
It believes in encouraging not only the ordinary 
manufacture and sale of weapons and ammunition, but 
the most EXTRAORDINARY efforts to supply belligerents with 
these means of murder in IMMENSE QUANTITIES. It no 
longer believes that floating foreign war loans in the 
United States is 'inconsistent with the spirit of neutrality.' 

"The Administration has just let it be known through 
the Secretary of State that the Government looks with 
favor upon the efforts of the British Commission to 
negotiate in this country the unprecedented war-loan of a 
thousand million dollars. 

"That the Administration is no longer in favor of 
praying for peace we will not affirm. But we do affirm 
that a prayer for peace is an insult to the ear of God 
when the Administration employs its power to promote 
the shipments of arms and the loans of millions which 
alone make the prolongation of war possible and which 
alone prevent the early making of peace. 

"These statements are not partisan political declamation. 
They are plain statements of INDISPUTABLE AND 
UNDISPUTED FACTS.' If the people of the United States 
want the European war prolonged, they can prolong it 
for months, possibly for years. All they need to do is to 
supply the European Governments with ammunition and 
money. The European Governments will supply the men 
to be butchered. They will supply the victims of wholesale 
murder, if we will make the weapons of wholesale 
murder and lend the money to continue the murderous 
use of those weapons in the full force of their destructiveness 
over a sufficiently protracted period. 

"What else can be said of the attempt to borrow one 
thousand millions in this country save that it is an attempt 
to prolong the war, and to make the war even more 
hideously murderous and destructive than it is? 

"The exact truth is that Mr. Morgan and his foreign 
allies ask the neutral people of the United States to supply 
four civilized nations of Europe with the money and 
weapons to destroy two other civilized nations. 

"The people of the United States are asked to do for 
England, France, Italy and Russia exactly what the 
Japanese are doing. The Japanese Premier told the Japanese 
Diet last week that at the peace conference Japan 
would certainly insist on her share of the spoils if the 
allies were victorious, BECAUSE JAPAN HAD RENDERED MORE 
EFFICIENT AID TO HER ALLIES BY MANUFACTURING WEAPONS 
AND AMMUNITION THAN SHE COULD HAVE DONE BY SENDING 
HER ARMY AND NAVY TO THEIR HELP. And what Japan, a 
confessed ally and declared belligerent, is doing is exactly 
what we are told it is our neutral duty to do. 

"A plain-thinking, honest man is hard put to it to distinguish 
the difference between hostility and neutrality, 
WHEN BOTH RENDER EXACTLY THE SAME SERVICE TO THE 



SAME BELLIGERENTS, THOUGH ONE IS A DECLARED ALLY AND 
THE OTHER A PROFESSED NEUTRAL. 

"As things are going, and with no guilt of blood on our 
hands, the financial domination of the world is surely 
within our grasp. The British pound, the French franc, 
the German mark are all falling in value compared with 
the American dollar. Thus a great and favorable exchange 
profit comes to the legitimate manufacturer and 
producer of the United States. 

"Wall Street financiers propose that we shall actually 
strip ourselves of the one huge innocent advantage of the 
war, in order to secure the payment of blood-money to 
the makers of the weapons of murder and to prolong indefinitely 
the grief and guilt of the war. 

"Against this unpatriotic, this unprofitable, this unneutral, 
this inhuman course of proposed conduct we protest 
in the name of neutrality, in the name of patriotism, 
in the name of humanity, and, finally, in the name of 
civilization itself, thus menaced and imperilled and rapidly 
being brought face to face with the destruction of all 
its gains through so many wonderful centuries of the 
white man's struggles and achievements." 



REVOLUTION AND ANARCHY COMING 

In some of the statements following, the Editor of the 
New York American, probably without the slightest 
knowledge of the Editor of THE WATCH TOWER and his 
presentations, has used language that is almost identical 
in respect to the outlook— that, after the present war will 
come the greatest revolution ever known and that it will 
be followed by anarchy. What the Editor of THE WATCH 
TOWER discerns from the teaching of the Bible and has 
expressed for the last forty years the Editor of the 
American now sees without the aid of prophetic information. 
Doubtless before long the entire world will begin 
to see the same thing with the eyes of their understanding 
and, later on, with their natural sight. THE WATCH 
TOWER is not to be understood as endorsing the New York 
American or its presentations, past, present or future, on 
all subjects. We have quoted from it, and are quoting 
again in this issue, matters which show that its Editor is 
awake and approximating facts and experiences that soon 
will be manifest to all. We quote as follows:— 

FROM THE NEW YORK AMERICAN SEPTEMBER 28TH: 

"The Wall Street promoters of the European war loan 
have told the English and French Commissioners that they 
are unwilling to murder the manhood of Europe, to make 
widows of the women, orphans of the children and 
mourners of the mothers for five per cent, BUT THEY WILL 
DO IT FOR FIVE AND ONE -HALF PER CENT. 

"They have said they would not be responsible for the 



protraction of this wicked war, the further destruction of 

inestimable treasures in Europe, the inevitable and possibly 

disastrous complications in our own financial and 

political and diplomatic situation here in America for five 

per cent, BUT THEY WILL FOR ONE -HALF OF ONE PER CENT 

MORE. 

"They have sternly declared that they will not repudiate 
America's high political principles and abandon 
America's lofty humanitarian ideas and imperil America's 
material progress and prosperity for anything less than 
that additional ONE-HALF OF ONE PER CENT. 

"The measure of the conscience, the humanity and 
patriotism of Wall Street is now clearly defined and 
mathematically expressed. 

"The probabilities now are that the loan will be made, 
the additional pound of flesh, or half pound of flesh, having 
been guaranteed, but the punishment for America's 
evil participation in Europe's wicked war will duly and 
deservedly come through the revolution and repudiation 
which are very likely to follow this war. 

R5784 : page 309 

"The first rumblings of revolution are already discernible 
in Russia, and discontent among the working 
classes is beginning to spread to a considerable extent in 
Great Britain. 

"If the war is sufficiently prolonged there will undoubtedly 
be revolution and probably red anarchy in most 
of the nations involved in the war. 

"In the wake of revolution will follow repudiation of 
public obligations or depreciation so great that it will 
amount to repudiation. 

R5785 : page 309 

"If any reader, accustomed to the security of peace, 
imagines that such depreciation is impossible, let him recall 
the fact that in French Revolutionary times assignats 
depreciated to less than three per cent of their value, and 
assignats, too, were better than treasury notes, for they at 
least had the value of the land behind them. 

"Perhaps even FIVE AND ONE-HALF per cent, interest is 
insufficient inducement for a loan which in the eventualities 
of war and revolution may become worth less than 
three cents on the dollar. 

"If any reader, accustomed to the sound and stable 
government of this country, believes that revolution is not 
now possible in any European State, let him ask himself 
frankly how long he believes the strong-bodied, stern-minded, 
plain people of Europe are going to endure the 
immeasurable misery of this unnatural war into the hellish 
depths of which they have been precipitated by the vanities 
and inanities, the enmities and jealousies of their arrogant 
and ambitious rulers. 

"Revolutions are not respectful of royalty, nor of constituted 



authority, nor of the established order. Revolutions 
are not regardful of the financial obligations of a 
deposed and discarded system. Revolutions exhibit no 
such soft and suave consideration for money and the 
money power as calm and conservative governments do. 



"To evade their humanitarian obligations, and avoid 
heavy and harrowing responsibilities, the loan promoters 
of Wall Street say that the particular marked dollars of 
this loan shall not be used for the purchase of arms and 
ammunition. Such a statement, however, is insincere and 
inconclusive. 

"We are increasing the financial resources of the countries 
to which we make this loan by the exact amount of 
the loan, and their additional financial resources enable 
them to buy additional arms and ammunition." 



R5785 : page 309 

"GOD MANIFEST IN THE FLESH" 

"Great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the 
flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of angels."— 1 Timothy 3:16. 

GOD, the great Origin, or Fountain of Life, is 
pleased to manifest Himself in various 
creations. And all of His intelligent creations 
which He recognized as sons, were of 
His likeness. The Logos, the beginning of 
God's creation, was in the Divine likeness. 
Not only was He a spirit Being (and God 
is a Spirit), but more than this, He was a 
spirit Being in the character-likeness of 
His Father, His Creator. 

Moreover, when the Logos became the active Agent of 
the Father in creating the various orders— angels, cherubim, 
seraphim— they were all created in the image of the 
Father. The angel sons of God sang together and 
shouted for joy as they saw the different creations. When 
it came time to make a still different order of creatures, 
an order that had never before existed; namely, human 
beings, God carried out through the Logos, His purpose 
of creating man in His own image, His own likeness. 
And God declared Himself well pleased with man. 

A description of the first man is given us in the Eighth 
Psalm: "Thou hast made him a little lower than the 
angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honor. 
Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of 
Thy hands; Thou has put all things under his feet; all 
sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field, the fowl 
of the air, and the fish of the sea." Adam was the master, 
or king, of all these. He represented something that 



the angels did not represent; for none of them were ever 
set over anything. God Himself is Ruler of all things, 
and Adam and the Logos were the only ones who were in 
any sense of the word set over anything. 

When God made man, He made him like Himself in 
this particular— that he had a dominion. When the 
angels were created, they were God manifest in different 
orders of beings— cherubim, seraphim and the lower 
orders of angels. When it came to the creation of man, 
he also was made in God's image. God was manifest in 
flesh. But we cannot say that God is manifest in the 
flesh now. The original likeness to God has been obliterated 
by sin. The reign of Sin and Death has to a considerable 
extent erased these traces of God's image. And 
the Scriptures plainly show us that we have lost this 
image and likeness of the Creator. 

Adam was called a son of God because he was in 
covenant relationship with God; but when he became a 
sinner, he lost this relationship. None of the Jews were 
sons of God. Abraham was styled a friend of God. 
Although God had approved of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, 
the Prophets and others in Israel, and indicated that a 
great blessing would be theirs, they could not be treated 
as sons. God said, in substance, when speaking to Abraham, 
My friend, I will show to you My Covenant. "In 
thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 

GOD MANIFEST IN PERFECT HUMANITY 

Everything must wait until that great antitypical Seed 
of Abraham should come. We have the record of how 
this One would come who was to be the Deliverer, the 
Antitypical Seed of Abraham. After reasoning about the 
Logos— how He was made flesh and dwelt amongst men 
—St. John declares that Jesus had the glory of the Only 
Begotten of the Father, full of grace, full of truth. This 
was the way above all others in which God was manifest 
in the flesh. 

When the lower animals saw Adam, they saw the 
very best representation of God possible to them. 
Nothing could be made in the flesh that would be more 
like God. And when the time came for God to send His 
Son into the world, He set before Him the great privilege 
of being man's Redeemer. And when He was made 
flesh, all those who beheld Him saw the glory of the Only 
Begotten of the Father. When any looked upon Him, 
they saw the Father in the most absolute sense in which 
it would be possible for them to see Him. 

God said to Moses, "No man shall see My face and 
live." Saul of Tarsus merely had a glimpse of Jesus 
glorified, and yet the glory was so great that if he had 
had a full look he would not have lived. Jesus was the 
express image of the Father. Jesus is the express image 
of the Father. And if no man can see God and live, 
then he cannot see Jesus and live. 



GOD MANIFEST IN THE PRINCES 

But God has made a provision that when Christ's 
Kingdom shall be established amongst men, there will be 

R5785 : page 310 

earthly representatives through whom Messiah will govern 
and uplift mankind during the thousand years. God 
has just such a class prepared and ready for this work- 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and the other Ancient 
Worthies. These are to be counted worthy of an instantaneous 
change to human perfection. These experience 
no change of nature in their resurrection, because they 
were not begotten of the Spirit. There was no one begotten 
of the Spirit until Pentecost, except our Lord at 
Jordan. "The Holy Spirit was not yet given; because 
that Jesus was not yet glorified." Therefore those 
Ancient Worthies had merely the testimony that they 
pleased God. Because of their loyalty to God and the 
principles of righteousness, some of these Ancient 
Worthies were stoned; some were sawn asunder; some 
were tempted; some were slain with the sword; they wandered 
about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, 
afflicted, tormented; of whom the world was not worthy." 
-Hebrews 11:37-40. 

These, although they had received God's Promise, 
received not the things promised them. For instance, 
God had promised Abraham, "All the land which thou 
seest will I give unto thee." Abraham must have a resurrection 
in order for God's Word to come true. He must 
get that land. But there was no suggestion to Abraham 
of glory, honor, and immortality— no suggestion to him 
of becoming a partaker of the Divine nature and a joint-heir 
with Jesus. See Acts 7:5; Hebrews 11:17-19. 

This change of nature began with Jesus. Christ has 
brought to men not only the knowledge of life and immortality, 
but also that there is a privilege of gaining 
this life with Him: "Which salvation began to be spoken 
by our Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that 
heard Him." (Hebrews 2:3.) But the Ancient Worthies 
had the faith to believe God, to trust His Promise and to 
wait for the fulfilment of that Promise. They merely had 
the intimation that God would roll away the curse. And 
Abraham's Seed was to be the glorious channel of God's 
blessing— "In thee and in thy Seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed." So St. Paul tells us that they 
received not the things promised them, "God having provided 
some better thing for us [the Gospel Church], that 
they without us should not be made perfect."— Heb. 1 1 :40. 

The Ancient Worthies cannot get their blessing 
before we get ours. The Bride must be glorified before 
any of the faithful of the past can come in and get their 
blessing. Then forthwith the Kingdom will be established. 
And then Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the 
other Worthies will be the first children of Christ. Instead 



of being the fathers, they will be the children, and 
He will make them princes, rulers, in all the earth. 
(Psalm 45: 16.) Being resurrected perfect men, they will 
be the perfect images of God. In each one of these 
Ancient Worthies God will be manifest in the flesh. 
They will be princes at that time and rule the earth, 
under Christ's Kingdom. 

Jesus corroborated this thought when He said, "Ye 
shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the 
Prophets, in the Kingdom of God." (Luke 13:28.) Of 
Himself He said, "Yet a little while, and the world seeth 
Me no more." (John 14:19.) If we should not be 
changed to spirit-conditions by the power of our resurrection, 
we would not see Him any more than will others 
who will continue on the human plane. The dead in 
Christ rise first (1 Thessa. 4:16,17), and those "who 
are alive and remain," will, at His manifestation, be 
made like Him, be "changed, in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye." At the moment of our change we 
shall see not only our Lord, but all the holy angels, all 
on the spirit plane, who are now invisible to us. They 
can see humanity, but humanity cannot see them. 

God was manifest in the flesh; first, in the case of 
Adam; second, in the case of Jesus; and third, He will 
be manifest in the flesh of those Ancient Worthies, who 
will be reckoned deserving of a better resurrection than 
the rest of the world. 

OUR LORD'S BEAUTY OF HOLINESS 

When in derision the soldiers placed upon the head of 
our Lord a crown of thorns and arrayed Him in a purple 
robe, and led Him into the judgment hall, Pilate looked 
upon Him in admiration, and exclaimed, "Behold the 
Man!" or (see Strong's Concordance) "Behold the countenance!" 
I am a Gentile and not of your race. But 
here you have sent to me for sentence the most glorious 
Jew on earth! None can have a really beautiful character 
without the inner beauty being reflected in the face. 
If a man be a vicious character, he cannot hide it from 
his features. If he be of a loving disposition, it will 
show in his face. What then, shall we think of our 
Lord! His face must have been one of marvelous 
beauty! No wonder the people flocked to see Him because 
of His graciousness of speech and His wonderful 
beauty— the image of God! 

The Psalmist has asked, "What is man, that Thou art 
mindful of him? and the son of man that Thou visitest 
[carest for] him? For Thou hast made him a little lower 
than the angels, Thou hast crowned him with glory and 
honor." (Psalm 8:4,5.) But man has fallen into sin, 
alienation, darkness! The Satanic influence works sin 
and has brought about man's fall from the image of his 
Creator. It is God's great purpose to bring humanity 
back from sin and imperfection. He will uplift all those 
who desire to be righteous. 



"We see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the 
angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory 
and honor [the perfection of human nature]; that He by 
the grace [favor] of God should taste death for every 
man." (Hebrews 2:9.) We see the broad basis of God's 
Plan laid in the redemptive work at Calvary. We see 
that it must be the Redeemer's life that would be the 
price of human redemption. "For since by man came 
death, by man comes also the resurrection of the dead. 
For as all in Adam die, even so all in Christ shall be 
made alive. But every man in his own order; Christ 
[The Anointed, The Messiah], the first fruits; afterwards 
they that are Christ's at His Coming [Greek, during His 
presence]." (1 Corinthians 15:21-23.) Jesus says, "Blessed 
and holy is he that hath part in the First Resurrection." 
Such shall be kings and priests of God and of Christ, 
and shall reign with Him a thousand years. 

So, then, "God manifest in the flesh" was clearly 
exhibited in the Man Christ Jesus in His perfection. 
But God was specially and more particularly manifest in 
the flesh of Jesus when He presented Himself to John at 
Jordan as He reached the period of thirty years of age, 
and there gave Himself sacrificially. "Lo, I come (in 
the volume of the Book it is written of Me) to do Thy 
will, O God." There He offered Himself without spot, 
in harmony with God's will. And the Divine acceptance 
was indicated in the form of a dove coming upon Him— 
not that the Holy Spirit is like a dove, but that God gave 
the outward manifestation so that John would have some 
means of identification of the Messiah, so that he could 
say, "I saw the Spirit descending from Heaven like a 
dove, and it abode upon Him." 

From the time of Jesus' baptism God dwelt in Him in 
a peculiar manner. As the Apostle John says of the 

R5785 : page 311 

Church, God dwelleth in us and we in God. (1 John 4:16.) 

The Father took up His abode in Jesus, and qualified 

Him to make known the Divine Plan. Our Lord 

said, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because He 

hath anointed Me to preach the Gospel to the poor; He 

hath sent Me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance 

to the captives, and recovering of sight to the 

blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach 

the acceptable year of the Lord."— Luke 4:16-21. 

OUR LORD'S TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS 

From the time Jesus received the Holy Spirit, we 
read that the Heavenly things were made known unto 
Him. For as the Apostle says, "the natural man receiveth 
not the things of the Spirit of God. ..neither 
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." 
When Jesus, therefore, received the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit, He received spiritual discernment. 



He came to see how the types of the Old Testament fitted 
to Himself. He saw that the serpent in the wilderness 
represented Himself. 

When He saw these things, we remember that He 
was in the wilderness. He had the entire Scriptures in 
His mind. From childhood He had been in the habit of 
attending the synagogue; and with His perfect mind, the 
Scriptures would be thoroughly engraved there. He 
could quote Scripture ad libitum. And when Satan 
quoted the Scriptures, Jesus understood them. 

At the end of the forty days, when Jesus was weak 
from fasting, was the most favorable time for the 
Adversary to tempt Him. When He had before Him the 
thought of all the shame and ignominy connected with 
His sacrificial death, it would be enough to make any 
one's heart quail! The moment when he realized that 
He was to be counted as a blasphemer, and contrary to 
God, was the most opportune moment for Satan. And 
the Father permitted Him to be tempted— permitted the 
Adversary to tempt Him at this particular time. 

Then Satan addressed himself to the mind of our 
Lord: I know you very well. We had a long acquaintance 
in the past, and I know the mission on which you 
have come. You do not realize, I know, the power that 
came upon You when You were baptized. I beheld how 
the power of God came upon You. You have need only 
to command these stones to be turned into bread. I 
realize that You can do a great work, and I would like 
to join with You in the matter. But first of all, You 
should have something to eat. 

Jesus knew Satan— He knew that Satan was Lucifer, 
who had rebelled against the Divine Government, and 
who was imprisoned on this planet. When Satan appeared 
to Jesus, we may be sure that he tried to appear 
as an angel of light, and to pretend that he wished to be 
on God's side, and that he now wished to cooperate with 
God. But Jesus knew that His power was not given 
Him for the purpose of sustaining His life, and He 
would not yield to the temptation. 

Therefore Satan next took Him to a high mountain— 
this was in the spirit of their minds— and showed Him 
how he— Satan— was "the prince of this world" and all 
the kingdoms thereof. And he said, You see, then, that 
I have the power to help You. Can You afford to be 
without such assistance? I am in sympathy with You. 
You will save mankind and deliver them all from death. 
Instead of Your having to suffer, as God's Plan is, we will 
work together, and You shall not have to suffer. But 
first, You must acknowledge me. That was the way I 
started out. I wanted to show what kind of a kingdom 
I could set up. I said, "I will ascend into Heaven, I will 
exalt my throne above the stars of God; I will sit also 
upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the 
north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I 
will be like the Most High," I will have an empire of my 
own. I advise You to come in and share with me. I 



will give You all the glory You could ask. I intend to 

be the prince of this world. Do You not see that everything 

is in my hands? 

But in these temptations Jesus conquered. And the 
victory was so complete that Satan thought it not worth 
while to tempt Him again! He thought that if he could 
not move Jesus when He was on the verge of starvation, 
it was of no use to try any further. So he never made 
another attempt, so far as the record goes. 

THE INCARNATION THEORY NOT SCRIPTURAL 

After this, as Jesus went about doing good, healing 
the sick, and preaching to the people, everything was in 
perfect conformity to the Father's will. If the Father 
had been there incarnated in a fleshly body, He could not 
have done His own will more perfectly. But Jesus was not 
incarnated. The incarnation of our Lord is only a theory 
invented during the Dark Ages. For He humbled Himself 
to become a man, and "He humbled Himself and 
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. 
Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him, and given 
Him a name which is above every name; that at the name 
of Jesus every knee should bow [both in Heaven and in 
the earth],. ..and every tongue confess that Jesus 
Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father."— 
Philippians 2:8-1 1. 



R5785 : page 311 

MEDITATIONS IN THE NIGHT 

"My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness; and my 
mouth shall praise Thee with joyful lips, when I remember 
Thee upon my bed, and meditate on Thee 
in the night watches."— Psalm 63:5,6. 

BY THE expression as to satisfying his soul 

with marrow and fatness, the Prophet 

David evidently referred to the abundance 

of God's favor and blessing which had 

come to him. He had a large portion, a 

fat portion, and appreciated God's goodness, 

God's favor toward him, taking him 

as a shepherd boy from among the flocks, 

and privileging him to engage in His 

service and finally bringing him to the 

throne as the king of Israel. For all this he was very 

grateful to the Lord. He appreciated all of God's blessings. 

It was appropriate that his mouth should give 

praise, that he should be joyful, that he should speak of 

the Lord's loving-kindness. So we find in the Psalms 

of David many beautiful expressions in which he gives 

great praise and thanksgiving to the Almighty. He 



speaks also of God's majesty, of His wondrous power 
and might, and refers to the heavens as His handiwork. 

The Prophet certainly used his tongue to praise the 
Lord. When we consider that he lived in a time when 
schooling was limited and that he got very little of it, 
we realize that he certainly made good use of what he 
obtained. The fruit of his labor has come down to bless 
the world all through the centuries. He intimates that 
he did this singing or praising God to some extent in 
the night— "when I remember Thee upon my bed and 
meditate upon Thee in the night watches." In ancient 

R5785 : page 312 

times the people were more dependent upon the moon 
and stars for light at night, not having as we have today 
full provision for illumination by means of refined oil, 
gas, electricity, etc. Mr. Rockefeller had not yet been 
born, nor modern inventions dreamed of. They were 
dependent for artificial light upon olive oil, and that was 
not very plentiful. As a consequence, the people went 
to bed early. So King David was thinking upon the 
Almighty as he lay upon his bed, meditating upon God- 
he was not thinking foolish thoughts, not planning foolish 
doings. When we think of this, we are not surprised 
that his mind was full of beautiful thoughts. 

NOBLEST SUBJECT FOR MEDITATION 

Whoever has time for meditation, will receive a great 
blessing if his thoughts shall turn toward the Almighty, 
acknowledging His goodness, seeking to give praise to 
God for all His manifold mercies, meditating upon God 
in the night watches. As far as this verse is concerned, 
we see no reason for thinking it prophetic; yet it represents 
any who are seeking to be in harmony with God. 
There are millions of people in the world who have never 
heard of God's wonderful Plan; therefore our mouths 
should be used in praising God. We should be continually 
remembering the Lord in all of our moments 
of rest, whether upon a bed, or wherever it may be. We 
should cultivate the habit of meditating upon Him. We 
think very few people meditate upon the Lord; and it is 
to their disadvantage that they do not. 

The great and holy Laws of God find expression in 
Him. We should think of God as the personification of 
all that is just, loving, kind, wise, in character and principle. 
This should stimulate us to be like Him. The 
more we appreciate a noble character the more we desire 
to emulate it. The more we see of God's mighty works 
in nature and His mercies toward us, in that same proportion 
our hearts and lips will praise Him. If there is 
a prophetic thought connected with this passage, it is 
that all through the Dark Ages, all through the night 
time of this Age, God's faithful people have been praising 
Him. All of His true people have been praising Him 



and have done so with joyful lips. Those who have not 
been doing this are not of this class. We should, therefore, 
render praise to our God. We should meditate 
more and more upon His Holy will and ways, and strive 
to conform ourselves thereto. Thus shall we become 
more and more like unto our Father in Heaven. 



R5785 : page 312 

TO SERVE, NOT TO BE SERVED 

"The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to 
minister, and to give His life a ransom for many."— 
Matthew 20:28. 

THE Master was impressing upon His hearers 

the difference between Himself and other 

great kings. He had come to be King of 

Israel, in fulfilment of Scripture prophecy. 

Unlike earthly rulers He was not seeking to 

learn how much He could get out of the 

people, but how much He could do for the 

people. He was not selfish. He was not 

trying to see how little He could serve and 

how much others could serve Him; but on 

the contrary, how little others might do for Him and how 

much He could do for others. And this is His expectation 

in respect to His followers. He and His disciples, 

called with a Heavenly Calling, called to a Heavenly Kingdom, 

are not called to be selfish or to appropriate honors 

to themselves for their own gratification; but they are 

called to service— especially to the service of the people 

of God. This is the true meaning of the word minister; 

namely, one who serves. 

It is especially appropriate that all who are followers 
of the Lord Jesus should remember that we have each 
been called to service; and that those who are ministering 
in spiritual things, those who are especially known by the 
name of "minister," should bear in mind that theirs is an 
office which calls for service, not to themselves, but to 
others; and that they have consecrated their lives thus to 
serve. Our Lord entered upon His ministry at His consecration. 
Of His life previous to His baptism at Jordan, 
the Scriptures say very little, so that the more attention 
may be attracted to His three and a half years of ministry 
in the Truth, when He was laying down His life 
for others— for His friends and also for His foes. 

The same is true of all His followers. Our ministry 
begins at the time of our consecration. We are not authorized 
to minister, or serve, in holy things until we 
have entered upon the way which the Lord has pointed 
out to us. We are not today, however, obliged to wait 
until we have reached the age of thirty before we begin 
our ministry; but at as early an age as we can comprehend 



what we are engaging to perform, we may give 
our lives to the Lord and to the service of the Truth and 
of the brethren. This is because we are not under the 
Law covenant— Romans 3:19. 

R5786 : page 312 

ONLY A SON OF MAN COULD SERVE AS RANSOMER OF MAN 

Our Lord speaks of Himself as the Son of Man, who 
came to "minister, and to give His life a Ransom for 
many." He was indeed the Son of God, even while He 
was the Son of Man. The perfect man Adam, before his 
fall into sin, was a son of God. Our Lord in calling Himself 
the Son of Man was emphasizing the fact that He 
was no longer on the spirit plane, but on the human plane. 
He came to earth for a specific purpose— as He explained, 
to minister, to serve. He could not have done the necessary 
service for man as a spirit being. The requirement 
was that He should become a man in order to ransom 
mankind. He could ransom man only by becoming man. 
He could purchase life for the perfect Adam and the race 
who lost life in him only by becoming a perfect man. 

"An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, a man's life 
for a man's life," was the demand of the Divine Law. 
Adam had sinned, and must be redeemed before he could 
be restored, either physically, mentally, or morally, or 
could be returned to God's favor. Jesus had come to make 
possible this full restoration. His life was devoted to 
the service of others, and He completed this great service 
in His death on the cross. Throughout His earthly 
sojourn He gave us a noble example of the proper life of 
those who would be followers in His footsteps. 

OUR SERVICE PARTICULARLY FOR THE NEW CREATION 

Many misunderstand the Bible and think that now is 
the time to save the world. Hence they are spending all 
their time and energies to comfort and uplift humanity. 
They are indeed engaged in laudable efforts; for every 
good work or effort is to be commended. But to those 
who are rightly informed respecting the Divine Plan there 
is another, a far higher work, to be done now. The work 
of God in the present Age has not been the reformation 
of the world, but the development of the New Creation. 
This work is not yet fully completed. If we would work 
the work of God, our works must relate to the New 

R5786 : page 313 

Creation preeminently. We may do good unto all men as 
we have opportunity, as the Apostle says, but especially 
are we to serve the Household of Faith. 

Jesus was in line for this work of ministry. Although 
there were no New Creatures as yet, while He was here 
in the flesh, His work was to prepare for these New 



Creatures. His work was the gathering out of some who 
would be faithful footstep followers of Himself, and the 
laying down of His life on their behalf and on behalf of 
the whole world. 

In the context we note the fact that two of Jesus' 
disciples were especially desirous at this time of sitting 
upon the Throne with the Master in His Kingdom, one 
upon His right and the other upon His left. Jesus did not 
condemn them for this desire, but pointed out to them 
how difficult were the conditions, and asked them whether 
they were able to comply with these conditions. They replied, 
"We are able." They were willing, at least. That 
their answer was pleasing to Jesus was manifested by His 
words, "Ye shall indeed drink of My cup, and be baptized 
with My baptism." They asked for places in the Kingdom 
very near to Him. Jesus informed them that He was 
not Himself able to give them such places— that the places 
would not be given according to favor, but according to 
justice; and that the Father would dispense these. 

ARE WE MEETING THE NECESSARY CONDITIONS? 

The place that we occupy in the Kingdom will depend 
much upon the extent to which we become ministers, or 
servants. And if we simply try to get as much as possible 
out of others and to give as little as possible, we shall not 
be such characters as the Lord is seeking for rulership in 
the Kingdom; in fact, we would not gain the Kingdom at 
all. He is seeking a very choice class. This class will all be 
servants, willing and glad to serve, esteeming it a great 
privilege to lay down their lives in the service of the 
brethren, to the extent of their ability and opportunity; 
for the service of the brethren is the service of God, to 
whom they have rendered themselves in consecration, to 
whom they have professed to devote their lives. 



R5786 : page 313 

PROFITLESS AND PROFITABLE SERVICE 

"Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and have 
not love, it profiteth me nothing."— 1 Corinthians 13:3. 

THE Apostle has been discussing the gifts of 

the Holy Spirit. In chapter 12 he has 

shown that the Lord gave one or more 

miraculous gifts to each one of the early 

Church who accepted the Gospel Message 

and became a follower of Christ. These 

gifts were for two purposes; for the benefit 

of the person himself, and also for a 

testimony to outsiders. The Gospel Message 

was new, and some effective and 

convincing methods were necessary to the starting of 



the infant Church. After pointing out these various 
gifts and intimating that the gift of public teaching, 
oratory, was the most valuable, St. Paul says, "And yet 
I show unto you a more excellent way." He then assures 
them that the fruits of the Spirit are far more 
important; and that Love is the most valuable fruit, 
without which all gifts, all zeal, would be valueless. 

There are Christian people today who greatly lament 
that the Church of our time does not have the gifts possessed 
by the early Church. They feel sure that the 
absence of these gifts of the Spirit at present denotes a 
great lack of faith and faithfulness among God's people. 
But these seem not to have noticed that the Apostle Paul 
assured the Church of his day that these gifts would 
pass away. Hear him: "Love never faileth; but whether 
there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be 
tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge 
[miraculous knowledge or ability to understand], it shall 
vanish away.... And now abideth faith, hope, love, 
these three; but the greatest of these is love." (Vs. 8,13.) 
We see that these miraculous gifts passed away 
gradually. They were conferred only by the Apostles, 
and hence after the death of the Apostles and of those 
upon whom the Apostles had laid their hands in conferring 
the gifts, no others could receive them. The 
possession of one or more of these gifts, however, did 
not signify acceptance in the Kingdom of Heaven. A 
man might have some of those miraculous gifts at that 
time, and still be a castaway. 

To whatever extent the Christian cultivates faith, 
hope, and love, to that extent he is cultivating that which 
will be eternal. Among these three Love stands first. 
There is an important sense in which Faith will fail; 
for when Faith shall be swallowed up in sight, there will 
not be the need of its exercise that now exists. There 
is also an important sense in which Hope will cease. 
For when that which is perfect shall have come, when 
Hope is lost in full fruition, we shall not need to hope 
as now. As St. Paul says, "For what a man seeth, why 
doth he yet hope for?" We shall continue to have hope 
in that we shall always be looking forward to glories to 
come; and we shall exercise Faith in that we shall never 
lose confidence in the Lord and His goodness and faithfulness 
or in one another; but Faith and Hope will not 
be necessary in the same sense as now. Love, however, 
will never fail in any sense or degree, but will only enlarge 
and deepen. "Love never faileth"; it is a characteristic 
of God Himself, and every perfect being will be 
an embodiment of this glorious quality. Those possessing 
the Divine nature will have it to the fullest degree, in 
its highest attainment. 

It is in connection with this contrast between the 
gifts and fruits of the Spirit that the Apostle uses the 
language of the text under consideration. Who would 
give all his goods to feed the poor but from love? We 
reply, There might be less worthy motives for so doing, 



as the Apostle intimates. If there be no love, it profiteth 
nothing. If there be much love, it profiteth much. If 
there be a little love, it profiteth a little. We believe that 
the most of those who give to the poor have some love. 
We believe that many of the benefactions of today are 
prompted by love. To whatever extent an act of benevolence 
is thus prompted it will bring a blessing. To 
whatever extent it is prompted by selfishness and a 
desire for vainglory it will bring no blessing. This is 
true either of the Church or of the world. 

The giving of the goods to feed the poor might be 
done with a view to popularity or to selfish advancement. 
The Pharisees made a great show of their holiness; but 
love was not the mainspring of their actions. Our Lord 
said that they had their reward— which was the praise of 
men. If a politician running for an office were to give 
his goods to feed the poor and those poor voted for him 
at the polls, he would have his reward. Why should he 
have two rewards? He got his votes, and that was his 

R5786 : page 314 

object in his distributions. But the reward which the 
Lord gives is both a present and a future one. 

As to private charities, there are public provisions 
made today which to a large extent make private donations 
to the poor unnecessary and often unwise. But 
there is another way to feed the poor which is still more 
important. We may feed the spiritually hungry, and 
may assist in clothing the spiritually naked. So we may 
spend our money and give our goods to feed the poor in 
the very best way possible, though the feeding and the 

R5787 : page 314 

clothing of the body may not be ignored when necessary. 
But even this spiritual feeding and clothing would not 
be acceptable to the Lord unless we do it from genuine 
love for Him and His and all men. To whatever extent 
any Christian gives to the Lord's Cause for outward 
show or because he thinks it may be expected of him, or 
from any motive save that of love for the Lord, to that 
extent he would receive no reward. If it is done from 
love it will be rewarded in Heaven; and it "profiteth" 
also in his character development for the Kingdom. 



R5787 : page 314 

MURDERS HER GRANDCHILDREN 

-OCTOBER 31.-2 KINGS 11:1-20.- 

JEZEBEL'S DAUGHTER BECAME QUEEN OF JUDAH-HER BANEFUL 
INFLUENCE AS QUEEN DOWAGER-SERIOUS RESULTS OF 



DEVIATION FROM THE DIVINE LAW-POWER OF PRIDE 
-SELFISHNESS LEADING TO MURDER-THE BOY JOASH 
CROWNED KING AT THE AGE OF SEVEN YEARS-THE 
WICKED ATHALIAH SLAIN. 

"The house of the wicked shall be overthrown; but the 
tent of the upright shall flourish."— Proverbs 14:11. 

JEZEBEL'S DAUGHTER, Queen Athaliah, 

on the death of her husband became queen 

dowager of the kingdom of Judah, her son 

Ahaziah becoming king. In oriental lands 

the king's mother is still the highest authority 

in the kingdom; as, for instance, in 

China. This was the custom with the Jews. 

As queen dowager, Athaliah exercised a 

powerful and baneful influence against the 

true God and His worship and in favor of 

Baal worship. This is not the only instance in which the 

intermarriage of the kings of Israel with the daughters 

of foreign royal houses brought great injury. Athaliah's 

mother Jezebel was another notable illustration. We remember 

also that it was King Solomon's foreign wives 

who ensnared him. 

In line with all this we remember that the Divine 
command to all Israelites was that they should not intermarry 
with other nationalities. Every deviation from 
the Divine Law seems to have brought with it serious 
penalties. This is strictly in harmony with God's arrangement 
with that one nation alone, that they should be His 
people in a peculiar sense; that other nations were not 
His people; and that obedience to His Law would bring 
them blessings; but that disobedience would bring them 
adversities. (Deuteronomy 7:6-11.) That Law is still 
binding upon the Jews, but it is not upon others. 

A proper recognition of the antitype, or spiritual 
significance of that item of Jewish Law, should be observed 
by all. It is applicable to Christians, who constitute, 
from the Divine standpoint, "a holy nation, a peculiar 
people." (1 Peter 2:9.) Christians are not to be unequally 
yoked with unbelievers. (2 Corinthians 6:14.) 
Christians are to come out from the world and be separate. 
This, however, does not apply to nominal Christians, 
but only to the spirit-begotten class, who have 
made a full consecration of themselves to the Lord. 
These are counselled to marry "only in the Lord"— only 
the consecrated. Those who disregard this Divine injunction 
endanger their own spiritual development, as 
well as their own happiness and that of the worldly 
person with whom they become yoked. 

MURDERING FOR POWER 

When King Ahaziah was slain by Jehu (2 Kings 9:27,28), 
his mother, the queen dowager, realized instantly 
that this meant her loss of rank and power— the 



power, the honor and the riches which her selfish, proud 
heart so loved. She realized that the moment her 
grandson ascended the throne she must vacate her position 
in favor of her daughter-in-law. Her selfish, proud 
heart resolved that on no account should this be. Rather, 
she would be a murderess. Forthwith she caused her 
grandchildren to be slain, except one, an infant, who was 
hidden by his aunt in a room used for the storage of 
sleeping mats, and styled in our lesson a bed-chamber. 
Subsequently he was nursed until his seventh year, in one 
of the rooms connected with the old Temple, which was 
in disuse during Queen Athaliah's reign, as she favored 
and upheld the worship of Baal. 

One lesson for us here is the power of pride. We 
may well hope that not many could be influenced to become 
murderers, even with such inducements. But not 
many of us will ever have such a temptation either to grasp 
a throne or retain hold upon one already possessed. Other 
illustrations of the power of pride leading to murder in 
the interest of a throne are mentioned in history. For 
instance, King Herod's murder of all the infants of 
Bethlehem of two years old and under was to preserve 
to himself and his heirs the throne of Israel. History 
tells us that Laodice poisoned her six sons, one by one, 
that she might be Empress of Constantinople. Another 
mother named Irene, which name signifies peace, gouged 
out the eyes of her own son that he might be incapable 
of ruling the empire over which she sought to reign. 

No wonder the Bible declares that the heart of man 
in his fallen condition is deceitful above all things and 
desperately wicked! (Jeremiah 17:9.) No wonder the 
Bible tells us that the blessing of the New Covenant 
which God will establish with the world through Israel, 
during Messiah's Reign, will operate to the taking away 
of the stoniness of the human heart and to the return to 
mankind of a heart of flesh— a proper human sympathy, 
such as the perfect man had when he was created in the 
image and likeness of God! (Ezekiel 11:19; 36:26; 
Jeremiah 31:31-34.) How glad we are that Messiah's 
Kingdom will not merely restrain sin and sinners, but 
by restitution processes will take away the stoniness of 
heart and bring as many as are willing of mankind back 
to tender-heartedness and to harmony with the Divine 
Law of love for God and for the neighbor! 

Since we are not kings and queens and do not have 
their temptations, let us note that the same principle of 
hard-heartedness operates in the business world, in the 
social world and in the family. In the business world 
it operates to the destruction of a rival concern. In the 
social world it cuts rivals, prompts to misrepresentations, 
slander, etc. In the home, as between parents and children, 
brothers and sisters, it frequently means injustice. 
The correction for all this is a love of righteousness 
which will lead each to love and to obey the Golden Rule, 

R5787 : page 315 



and to comply as nearly as possible with the Divine will 
—"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart 
and with all thy mind and with all thy being and with all 
thy strength; and thy neighbor as thyself." 

CROWNING THE BOY KING 

The young king's name was Joash. He was kept in 
hiding for six years, and in his seventh year was 
crowned. Jehoiada, the high priest, whose daughter had 
rescued Joash, superintended the coronation ceremonies. 
With great wisdom he called together the chiefs of the 
nation at a time of festival, when their assembling would 
not be thought strange. Likewise the guards were so 
disposed as to give every protection to the young king 
and to leave the palace without protection. 

The ceremony passed off successfully. The queen 
dowager heard the shouts, "Long live the king!" and 
came forth from the palace to the Temple to investigate. 
Realizing the situation, she cried, "Treason! treason!" 
So it is that sometimes injustice becomes so intrenched 
and fortified in human minds that an attempt to establish 
righteousness is considered treason, rebellion, outrage. 
To all the Lord's consecrated children the lesson is, 
"Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the 
issues of life."— Proverbs 4:23. 

When the crown was placed upon the young king's 
head, on top of it was laid the parchment scroll of the 
Ten Commandments. Thus was indicated the fact that 
the Divine Law was superior to the crown. Such should 
be the estimation of the matter in every well-balanced 
mind. Divine Law comes first; human laws second. And 
human laws are usually up to as high standards as the 
people who make them are worthy. 

Judah must have been considerably sunken in the 
qualities of patriotism and manhood to allow the queen 
dowager to usurp the throne by murder for six years. 
Similarly, states and cities that permit and recognize the 
domination of frauds and combines against the public 
interests are usually getting as good treatment as they 
deserve. It is the heart, the intellect, the mind, that is 
to be educated up to the higher standards. Then those 
higher standards will be attained by the body politic. 



R5789 : page 315 

TOO MUCH MONEY-FURTHER OFFERINGS REFUSED 

-NOVEMBER 7.-2 KINGS 11:21-12:16.- 

A LESSON FROM THE FAR PAST ON GIVING FOR RELIGIOUS 
PURPOSES -TREASURERS WITHOUT BONDSMEN-THE TEMPLE 
REPAIRED-TYPICAL APPLICATION OF THIS EVENT -NECESSITY 



FOR A RETURN TO BIBLE STUDY-DOING OUR PART 
IN THE REBUILDING OF THE WALLS OF SPIRITUAL ZION. 

"God loveth a cheerful giver."— 2 Corinthians 9:7. 

SIXTEEN years passed after the incidents of 

our previous Study and found King Joash 

in his twenty-third year. Already he had 

made suggestions to the priests respecting 

the repairs of the Temple, which was considerably 

dilapidated; for the people were 

still half-hearted in the worship of Jehovah. 

The influence of the idolatry of the surrounding 

nations was yet upon them. Some 

of them continued to burn incense upon the 

altars for Baal worship. 

PRIESTS POOR BUSINESS MEN 

King Joash found that allowing the priests to collect 
the money wherewith to repair the Temple showed no 
results. Not every good-hearted man has executive ability. 
The record does not tell that the priests were dishonest 
in the use of the money collected for their affairs; 
nor does it say that they spent the money unwisely. Possibly 
the people did not have confidence in the priests, and 
did not give so freely on that account. 

However, the king noted the fact that the Temple 
continued to be dilapidated. He called for the priests and 
said to them, "Why repair ye not the breaches of the 
Temple?" The answer of the priests is not given. But 
the king's mandate was, "Now, therefore, take no more 
money from your acquaintances." The king passed over 
the matter as lightly and courteously as possible, without 
charging the priests with embezzlement or neglect. 

A new procedure was to have an especially prepared 
money-chest inside the Temple Court, convenient to the 
worshipers who passed in and out, and under the care of 
the priest who served as doorkeeper. This method proved 
successful. The money speedily accumulated. Ere long 
there was a sufficiency to make the repairs and more. 
Further donations for this purpose were refused. The 
Temple was put into good order, and a general blessing 
followed the experience. 

There is a lesson in this matter for us. People like 
to see results. They wish to know that moneys donated 
for benevolent purposes are not all absorbed for office 
expenses. Volunteer offerings have the approval of both 
God and man, rather than offerings that are importuned, 
coaxed, begged, wheedled from saints and sinners. Whoever 
gives to the Lord's Cause is advantaged thereby. He 
not only forwards a benevolent Cause, but cultivates generosity 
in his own heart. Our Lord said, "It is more 
blessed to give than to receive"— where the giving is 
willing and voluntary. 

Church begging is undoubtedly doing great harm. 



Some one has remarked that in some churches the chief 
item of religion is begging for money— private solicitation, 
and also public solicitation, by the passing around 
of the collection box. Church fairs, church suppers, grab-bags, 
etc., are still more reprehensible than the collection 
box and private solicitation. Some one has called such 
efforts "the milking of the goats." The Lord's people are 
supposed to be sheep; the world's people, goats. 

SCRIPTURAL METHOD OF GIVING 

The proper thought seems to be what the Scriptures 
inculcate; namely, that each Christian should give according 
to his ability and his interest in the work; and that 
non-worshipers should not be expected to give nor requested 
to do so. But who does not know that a large 
proportion of the money collected for church purposes is 
unwillingly given by people who are not only often uninterested 
in the projects, but sometimes even opposed 
thereto! Thus Protestant business men often give to 
Catholic charities, rather than offend good customers. 
Likewise Catholic business men donate to Protestant enterprises 
with which they have no sympathy. 

It is a good time to return to the Gospel admonition. 
(1 Corinthians 16:2.) Let each one of you lay by in reserve 
on the first day of the week according as God has 
prospered you— for religious and charitable objects. Only 
such voluntary giving has any merit whatever in the sight 
of God or in the sight of good men. Only such will 
receive the Divine blessing upon it, whether it be the 
widow's mite or the rich man's munificence. 

R5789 : page 316 

BREAKS IN THE TEMPLE WALL 

Viewing the spiritual Temple, we perceive that outwardly, 
as represented by the magnificent churches of 
metropolitan cities, nothing more could be desired than 
what is now enjoyed. Describing the church conditions 
of our day, the Scriptures portray these conditions under 
the figure of the Laodicean Church, saying, "I know thy 
works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou 
wert cold or hot. So then because thou art lukewarm, 
and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of My 
mouth. Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased 
with goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest not 
that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, 
and naked: I counsel thee to buy of Me gold tried in the 
fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white raiment, that 
thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness 
do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eyesalve, 
that thou mayest see."— Revelation 3:15-18. 

It is from the spiritual standpoint, therefore, that the 
Temple of today needs to have repairs. Outwardly, the 
Church is rich; spiritually, she is poor. The majority of 



her educated, including ministers, have abandoned all faith 
in the Bible as the Word of God. Yet they are not known 
as infidels, but by the less harsh terms, Higher Critics, 
Evolutionists. With many even the faith in a personal 
God is shaking; and they incline to wonder whether, 
somehow or other, we have not an unintelligent god- 
Nature— and whether mankind and all other intelligences 
are not merely evolutionary products. 

The cause and foundation of this disastrous condition 
is not far off. The absurdities of the creeds formulated 
during the Dark Ages are so great that intelligent people 
can no longer accept them. We have made the mistake of 
supposing that these absurdities are based upon the 
Scriptures and well supported thereby. The truth is that 
the creeds of the past not only contradict each other, but 
contradict the Bible. To learn this, to believe it, signifies 
a return to Bible study with the colored spectacles of our 
fathers removed and with our hearts uplifted to God that 
He may give us the light promised to His faithful people 
in the end of this Age. Of this we read, "We have also 
a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well 
that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark 
place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your 
hearts."— 2 Peter 1:19. 

THE DUTY OF THE HOUR 

Noting the spiritual impairment of the House of God, 
the Church, all who love the Lord and who worship Him 
should do their part, should make their contribution, 
toward the improvement of these spiritual conditions. The 
work is not to be left wholly in the hands of the clerical 
or priestly class. The people in general are to appreciate 
the situation; and each is to delight to do his part in the 
rebuilding of the spiritual walls of Zion. Those spiritual 
walls consist of "the faith which was once delivered unto 
the saints."— Jude 3. 

Each Christian should ask himself, "What am I doing 
toward these repairs? How am I manifesting to the Lord 
my zeal for Truth and righteousness and my hatred for 
sin and untruth?" And as an answer to these questions, 
each should redouble his efforts to understand the Truth 
and to help others to an understanding of it, whatever 
the cost to the creeds and systems of the Dark Ages. 



R5787 : page 316 

EUREKA DRAMA-CLASS EXTENSION 

THE PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION was greatly 
blessed of the Lord and, we believe, accomplished 
a great work. Many new Classes 
and many enlarged Classes are amongst the 
fruits. While we know much of the fruitage 



of this service in the Lord, a wide-spread, 

general impression, favorable to the Truth, 

was made; and what good this has accomplished 

only eternity will show. The majority 

of our DRAMAS, both here and in 

Europe, are idle because the funds necessary to their 

free presentation have been exhausted. We are not 

soliciting money, but merely stating facts. 

Meantime, the EUREKA DRAMA, described in our 
issues of August 1st and 15th, 1914, has been accomplishing 
great success under the Lord's blessing. Not only 
have thousands been permitted to hear the Good Tidings, 
but the brethren who have given the exhibitions and have 
conducted the follow-up work, have received great blessings 
in their own hearts as a part of their reward for 
faithfulness to their opportunities. Exhibitions have 
been given in many small cities and towns in competition 
with moving pictures, and with good success. However, 
we recommend, brethren, that the EUREKA outfit be used 
in places where there are no moving picture theatres. 
We have the most complete combination of slides of a 
religious kind to be found anywhere in the world, and 
we have the finest phonograph presentations of the human 
voice to be found anywhere. Everybody is astonished at 
the clearness, at the distinctness of tone with which the 
lectures and hymns are rendered. 

RECORDS IN MANY LANGUAGES 

Besides the English, we have the DRAMA records in 
German, Swedish, Danish and Finnish; and we have in 
prospect Italian, Spanish and Polish. The latter three, 
however, we may not be able to supply this year. The 
foreign records are double price. The hymns can be 
furnished only in English. 

We know of no better way in which to serve the 
Truth and to interest the public than by the use of the 
EUREKA DRAMA. After the giving of the three DRAMA 
exhibitions there comes an opportunity for follow-up work 
—Class Extension work. We urge nothing; we are 
merely mentioning the facts so that those who desire and 
have the opportunity may avail themselves of these privileges. 
For new readers we will here repeat, briefly, 

A DESCRIPTION OF OUTFITS, PRICES, ETC. 
"EUREKA DRAMA" OUTFIT NO. X 

Any of our readers desiring to purchase for 
his own use the full set of 96 DRAMA lectures 
(three PARTS, two hours each) with nine choice 
introductory, intermission and closing hymns 
and a portable phonograph, with a carrying 

case, can have the entire outfit for $38.50 

The full set of records without phonograph.. 29.00 
Carrying case for records 1.25 extra. 



"EUREKA DRAMA" OUTFIT NO. Y 

This outfit is the one especially intended for the CLASS -EXTENSION 
work. Its three PARTS require only the same 
number of lecture and music records as foregoing; but, to 
use to full capacity— the THREE PARTS showing three places 
at once— each PART should have its own Phonograph, each 
PART its own Stereopticon, etc. We therefore show each 
PART complete in itself, as follows: 
One PART includes one Primo Stereopticon for electric 

current— Oneida Lens (three for varying distances); 

special price $20.00 

Variable Rheostat (five amp., ten amp., or fifteen amp.) 

may be effective for house current or for heavy 

current arc lights 6.00 

Attachment for Acetylene Gas or Presto Light (useful 

in places where there is no electric current, but 

where gas can be taken from an automobile tank) 4.00 

R5787 : page 317 

DRAMA stereopticon slides, beautifully tinted, with 
special carrying box and carrying case 38.00 

One portable Phonograph, one Operator's Book, Lecture 
and Hymn Records for one PART, and carrying 
case 19.50 



Total cost per PART, "EUREKA DRAMA," No. Y $87.50 

Additional would be the expressage from Brooklyn. 

The Society would furnish posters, window-cards and free 

SCENARIO, and would supply the bound SCENARIO for sale in 

any quantity at one-half retail prices. 

PARTS II. and III. would cost exactly the same 
as the above, the entire THREE PARTS amounting 
to $262.50 

With only one Stereopticon, one Rheostat, one 
Acetylene burner and one Phonograph 185.00 

Expressage extra. Foreign records 25.00 extra. 

Any Class of Bible Students desiring it may obtain the 
Y DRAMA by paying $100.00 down and agreeing to pay the 
remainder in monthly instalments. 

BIBLE STUDENTS' FAMILY OUTFIT 

This consists of a phonograph and a choice selection of 
records from the DRAMA and some musical records. A few 
of these records might be said to be a little shop-worn, but 
none of them are bad— most of them are strictly new. They 
are priced so as to bring them within reach of many of our 
readers who could not afford to purchase the regular DRAMA, 
but who would like to have some of the records for their 
own family use and for such of the public as might choose 
to hear our most wonderful records. 

The entire outfit represents a choice selection of twenty 



of the short lectures of the SCENARIO, four beautiful hymns 
and a disc-phonograph (concealed horn)— all for $12, or if 
all new, $15. Expressage extra. 

Carrying case for phonograph $1.50 extra. 

" " " records 1.25 " 

DRAMA MUSIC RECORDS 

The musical records used with the moving pictures of 
CREATION DRAMA were greatly admired. We have some on 
hand that were slightly used and some quite new. We will 
supply these, while they last, at half price. 



R5787 : page 317 

NO NATIONAL PREJUDICES 



MY DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

It is after several months of considering and praying over 
the matter, that I have decided to write these lines: In 
advance I wish to say that I am writing as a Christian 
brother, and that there is no malice or ill-will in my action. 
I would surely not add to your burden. I am going to write 
of what appears to me unfairness and injustice in your 
articles in THE WATCH TOWER about the war. It is incomprehensible 
why I should find this in a man who is not 
merely a Christian, but, as I believe, that "faithful servant," 
of whom Christ spoke. 

In many articles since the beginning of the war, now 14 
months ago, you have referred to this event, which I consider 
not only proper, but necessary, as it again shows the 
accuracy of the Word of the Lord. You have shown that 
human civilization is a hollow boast. So it is. You have 
drawn attention to the horrible perversion of Bible texts. 
To all this a Christian can only most emphatically agree. 
You have adduced, in showing this, the offenses of Great 
Britain, the hypocrisy of British and Canadian ministers. 
This is right. I have read of other perversions by the 
Bishop of London and other chaplains at the front, which 
have made me sick to the heart. The more fearlessly you 
do this, the better. 

But even before the war you were in the habit of citing 
British sins as illustrations of evil. The oppressing of Israel 
by the Philistines and other Gentile nations is constantly 
made clear by references to British rule in India, for instance. 

R5788 : page 317 

The Lord probably does not approve of that rule as 
it is carried out. Does He approve of American rule in the 
Philippines or in the Indian reservation in the States? And 
what about the oppression of the natives in German S. W. 
Africa and East Africa? The methods in German S. W. 
Africa, which finally drove the Herreoos into rebellion, were 



so atrocious, as was the war of extermination that followed, 
that even so patient a body of slaves as the German Reichstag 
could not swallow it. Were these matters not equally 
illustrated or were they perhaps too fiendish? 

Although Count von Bulow has publicly declared that war 
is one of the fundamental principles of the scheme of God, 
it is not so according to the Bible. It is purely a human 
affair, and as such I would waste no time to discuss it. But 
it is not wrong to mention its various features, as you do, in 
connection with the Word of God. And here, month after 
month, you continue as before the war. Poor old England 
has to supply the proof; noble Germany is persistently not 
mentioned. Could you not possibly draw occasionally upon 
German crimes and German perversions of the Bible to 
illustrate points? Is there any doubt in your mind that Germany 
not only started this war, but even engineered it? Did 
she really create such a war machine and glorify war, merely 
for parades at Potsdam? You dwell on the "frightfulness 
and destructiveness" of this war; but you never mention the 
demon who started it. Why not? With love in Christ, 

Your fellow servant, W. M. HAHNNEMANN.-Canada. 

REPLY OF EDITOR 

We appreciate the above letter, and promptly explain that 
any apparent unfairness was quite unintentional. We are 
far from thinking of Great Britain as the worst nation in the 
world. On the contrary, we esteem the British and the North 
American peoples at the head of the list for human progress 
and civilization. American by birth, British by ancestry, it 
is only natural that the Editor should appreciate highly the 
standards of his own race. But this does not, and should 
not, blind him to injustice and perfidy. If he has sought 
more to correct these than the evils of other nations, it is 
because THE WATCH TOWER, published in the English, has 
less opportunity of reaching or of assisting people of other 
tongues. 

It is far from our thought that the German Kaiser and 
the Russian Czar are the Lord's mouth-pieces and agents, and 
their warriors soldiers of Christ. We know that this is their 
claim. We have already pointed out the fallacy of such 
claims, and have shown that the delusion came from the 
Dark Ages. First the clergy separated themselves from the 
people, whom they styled laity. Having thus exalted themselves, 
they claimed that the Kingdom of God had been set 
up and that the Church was reigning. First through the 
Popes, and afterwards through the Protestant denominations, 
the kingdoms of earth were told that they were God's Kingdoms, 
whose duty it was to defend the Church and to oppose 
heresy. For centuries the domination of the Church has 
been growing less; but the kingdoms have maintained their 
power; and doubtless many of the rulers believe that they are 
God's appointees in His Kingdom. 

Each nation in this war seems to believe itself God's 
favored people, whose ultimate mission is to rule the world. 
They are all in error. They are all on the verge of collapse. 



They are all to go down speedily, as soon as Messiah shall 
take to Himself His great power and begin His reign. As 
the Bible declares, they shall be broken into shivers as the 
potter's vessel, ground to powder, as pictured in Daniel's 
vision, and no place ever afterwards will be theirs; they shall 
be as though they had not been. 

We are not without sympathy for all these peoples; for 
we perceive that they are all blinded by the Adversary, as are 
also their rulers. We have no sympathy with their atrocities, 
however; and we recognize war in general as devilish anywhere, 
everywhere, and as having a brutalizing effect upon 
all engaged in it. 

We are glad that in this war personal atrocities (aside 
from the legalized atrocity of war) have not been proven 
against the British and the French, although substantiated 
against the Russians, who, besides devastating everything, 
deliberately shot non-combatants, gouged out the eyes of 
German soldiers, and put buttons into the sockets, etc., etc. 
Quite possibly those barbarous Russians were incensed by 
something that the Germans had done against them. For 
instance, it is well authenticated that the Germans decoyed a 
Russian army of thirty thousand into a swamp, from which 
they could not extricate themselves. The narrative declares 
that nearly three hundred of the German soldiers went insane 
that night from the hearing of the cries and curses of the 
poor Russians floundering and dying in that swamp. 

We have no apology to make for the semi-barbarous 
Turks either, and think quite probable that atrocities reported 
against them are true. At the beginning of the war, the Germans 
were charged with atrocities in connection with the 
Belgians— with destroying an entire town and many of its 
non-combatant inhabitants. But the answer came, showing 
that there was a measure of excuse; that the people of that 

R5788 : page 318 

town had in the night in various ways sought to poison, to 
stab and to maim the Germans, who were in full possession. 
The Germans, in self-defense and by way of teaching a 
lesson, retaliated. 

We sympathize, too, with the Belgians, for they realized 
that their little kingdom was suffering from an unlawful invasion 
on the part of a stronger neighbor. They did not 
understand the rules of war, and felt justified in doing anything 
for the protection of their national liberties. They 
were unwise in this, and suffered. 

We do not defend Germany's invasion of Belgium. It 
was no more right than all the land-grabbing practised by 
other nations previously. What European nation has thoroughly 
clean hands in Africa, India, China? Each nation, 
in stealing the government and the liberties of other peoples, 
has been violating the Golden Rule of Justice; but each has 
claimed that in so doing it not only advanced its own welfare, 
but really brought greater blessings to the conquered people. 
And we presume that Germany would make a similar claim. 
In reality, it is pride and selfishness which is behind all the 



land-grabbing of the great nations, and not a benevolent influence 
and a benevolent attempt to bless the families of the 
earth. It will be Messiah's Kingdom that will really bless all 
people unselfishly and for their highest welfare. 

THE REAL CAUSE OF THE WAR 

The present war, as all well-informed people know, has 
been brewing for forty years. Ever since Germany defended 
herself successfully against the French and took two French 
Provinces as part of her indemnity, the French have been 
bent on reprisal— revenge. With but half the population of 
Germany a French army has been maintained for forty years 
on a war footing, sometimes in greater numbers than the 
German army, which also has been kept in a state of high 
military efficiency necessary to its defense. Meantime, Russia, 
as the friend of France, organized an immense army. 
Well-informed people have known for years that these two 
nations were intent upon crushing Germany at the first favorable 
opportunity. 

The Germans felt that their very existence depended upon 
maintaining a strong military organization, capable of combating 
foes on both sides. Meantime economy, and efficiency 
and wisdom controlling wonderfully, has cemented the German 
people and made them a rich and powerful nation. The once 
rude, clumsy, stupid German youth not only served his term 
drilling as a soldier, but at the same time, got his schooling. 
This has lifted the German people out of the rut of centuries 
and made them one of the brightest peoples of the world. 
The eyes of the world are only opening to these things which 
the war is demonstrating. 

Meantime, as German thrift and management brought 
prosperity, German commerce increased, German merchant 
vessels and steamship lines all over the world were practically 
the only rivals of the British, who, for centuries, have been 
masters of the sea. With a growing commerce, Germany not 
unnaturally craved a proportionate navy. Her ambition for 
commerce and for a navy have brought on this war. France 
and Russia feared to undertake a war, and have procrastinated 
for years. Great Britain feared to lose her proud place 
as mistress of the sea, and considered it necessary that Germany 
be not allowed to become a greater rival. British 
diplomacy encouraged Russia and France, and led them to 
believe that they would have British support in the war. 

Germany recognized that the mobilization of the Russian 
army in defense of Serbia was the beginning of the national 
plot of forty years' standing for the destruction of Germany. 
She realized that if she waited until the French armies had 
mobilized on her western border, and the Russian army on 
her eastern border, she would be at a disadvantage. Her 
predetermined plan in self-defense was that she would smite 
one of her foes first and then the other. Her railways, etc., 
had all been arranged with this in view. She hoped in 
British assurances, yet, nevertheless, was fearful of what 
came— British declaration of war, ostensibly in defense of 
Belgium, but really in fear of Germany's growing greatness 



—in fear that Britain might some day lose her boasted rule 
of the seas. 

While we deprecate the German method of submarine 
warfare and its exposure of neutrals and non-combatants, 
we should not forget that the Germans in turn are in desperate 

R5789 : page 318 

straits— surrounded by nations three times their size 
and these nations seeking, additionally, to cut off Germany's 
food supplies and thus to starve the German non-combatants. 
What is there commendable about war anyway, even if it 
could be staged as a prize-fight with the usual prize-ring 
rules and regulations! 

SEEN FROM THE BIBLICAL STANDPOINT 

So, dear Brother, understand us as sympathizing with the 
purblind peoples engaged in this terrible war— each fearful, 
each jealous, each envious of the other, and none of them 
knowing, understanding, the Gospel of the Kingdom— of 
Messiah's Millennial Reign, now at the door. Understand us 
also to be fully out of sympathy with submarines, dreadnoughts, 
armored biplanes and Zeppelins, mines, rapid fire 
guns, great and small. It is time, however, that the whole 
world recognized that much of our boasted civilization is 
not Christianity, nor built upon the foundations of Christianity; 
and that, therefore, it is giving way to the better 
conditions of Messiah's Kingdom. Soon the resurrection 
"change" will perfect the elect Church of Christ, and qualify 
them as kings and priests and judges of the world. Soon 
Messiah's Empire will begin its sway. Soon all these Gentile 
kingdoms will pass away forever. And this is what we mean 
—the passing of earthly empires— when we pray, "Thy 
Kingdom come!" 

There is nothing kind, loving or Godlike about war. It 
is fiendish, devilish. The men now at the front are being 
hardened, brutalized and prepared for the revolution and 
anarchy which the Bible points out will follow the war. 
Whoever thinks of war as a kid-glove affair, and expects 
great politeness from the belligerents, is unwise and will 
continually be disappointed. Moreover, it is to be remembered 
that all officers and great men will, publicly at least, 
throw their influence against all forms of barbarism; but in 
the rank and file of every army are to be found individuals 
who continually need watching, that they should not bring 
their comrades to disgrace. And even such discipline cannot 
always be enforced when men of the dare-devil kind are 
needed, and when entire regiments need to be plied with 
intoxicating liquors in order to make them sufficiently reckless 
to undertake a charge in the face of almost certain death. 



R5789 : page 318 



INTERESTING LETTERS 
"BLESSED ARE THEY THAT TRUST IN HIM" 

OUR BELOVED PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

The September 1st WATCH TOWER has just arrived and I 
do not know how to express the encouragement I feel in the 
reading of the first article on the "Christian's Duty and the 
War." As you know, no doubt, there has been a form of 
Census taken here in England, and many of the dear friends 
have been very much exercised as to what they ought to do 
if Conscription should come. 

In reference to those of military age, my dear husband 
(who with myself has had the glorious knowledge of the 
Truth of God's Word for nine years) is of military age, and 
I have assured him that I should be proud of him (if he were 
compelled to go) to know he had been shot as a traitor (according 
to this world's opinion) rather than feel he had taken 
human life, because I should know he had been faithful to 
"His King"— the King of Glory. The knowledge that he had 
finished his course and entered into the joys of his Lord 
would be just another link to draw me closer to the Lord, 
although the extent of the loss of his companionship only the 
Lord would know. 

So strong do I feel, dear Brother, about having no part 
or lot if I can help it with this war, that when our son, a lad 
of 16, kept pressing the matter to us of going to sea on a 
passenger liner, I gave way very willingly, whereas not long 
ago I had been very much opposed to the thought on account 
of the great risks they are running; for I feel I would rather 
know he had gone down by a torpedo, etc., than know he 
had taken human life, for although so young he was continually 
being badgered to join the army and told he could say 
he was 19, and when the news came that there was to be a 
registration and that he might be taken for making ammunition, 
I looked away from the present things and thought of 
the glorious beyond, when all should hear His voice and come 
forth from Sheol. 

When I tell you, dear Brother, that he is our only son, 
and very, very dear to us both (our other one, a dear little 
lad of 5-1/2 years, the Father has graciously hidden— "until the 
wrath be overpast"— for four years now), you may know that 
we needed the Lord's strength to let him go; but if we never 
meet again we are assured that "All things are working together 
for good." 

I feel so glad you have made it clearer as regards the 
actually going into the trenches and firing, because I felt all 
along that if I were a brother I could not agree to the 
thought of accepting the uniform, taking the oath, etc., and 

R5789 : page 319 

then, if one was refused a place at the base or hospital and 
compelled to go into the trenches, to refuse to fire. To my 
mind it would not be rendering to Caesar the things that are 
his. I felt it would be more honest to say, "No, I refuse to 



take human life"; and then if they said I should be shot- 
well I would take it that it was the Lord's will. 

The present happenings in England are calculated to unnerve 
many, for one never knows when he goes to bed at 
night whether a bomb will strike the house. But we that 
have put our trust in the Lord can rest peacefully, knowing 
that He is in charge. One dear sister who rents a room 
and lives alone had the awful experience of a bomb striking 
the house she was in, and the whole of the room, except where 
her bed stood, was utterly destroyed, and she herself came 
through without a scratch. On the following day (Sunday) 
she gave a splendid testimony to the friends, and told them 
that the same God who had cared for her would also take 
care of them, and if it was His will they should finish their 
course that way, what matter; they were only going Home to 
see their dear Father and elder Brother. Poor dear! Her 
face showed the strain of her ordeal; but she had not a bitter 
feeling towards the Germans; she just said she had dropped 
them over into the Millennium for Judgment. 

Now, dear Brother, I am afraid this is a very lengthy letter, 
but I felt I wanted you to know how the Lord is blessing 
your labor of love in ministering to His people. May He 
give you grace and strength to press on until you see Him 
face to face. With our united love, 

I am your sister by His grace, 

NELLIE BUCKNER.-England. 



"BEWARE OF WOLVES" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

For some time it has been on my mind to write you respecting 
a matter which I believe properly claims your attention, 
but other interests of the work have delayed the matter. 

Just before crossing the State line of Illinois, heading 
westward, I learned that a man representing himself to be a 
brother in the Truth had visited some of the classes in the 
country, stating that he was formerly an attache of the 
Headquarters in Brooklyn, but had been "sent forth with 
the seventy." I do not remember the name, but undoubtedly 
it was fictitious. He wanted assistance to get further westward, 
where he had friends and where he could find work, 
etc. The "loan" was made, but that was the last seen or 
heard of this individual in the form of a man. 

In western Kansas I learned of an almost identical case, 
save that there were somewhat more details given, which 
enabled me at once to detect the fraud. In each case it was 
the isolated who were "worked." In the Kansas incident 
the individual stated that he had put all the money that he 
had into the work; but that everything was closing down at 
Brooklyn, so he had been "sent forth," and without money. 
The story he told did not correspond with the facts as I 
knew them to be at Headquarters, so I quickly detected that 
it was a confidence game that was being systematically 
worked. Among other misstatements was one to the effect 



that he had worked in the "bindery" at Brooklyn, but the 
Society was no longer publishing the STUDIES, so the "bindery" 
had closed down, and he among others had to be set adrift, 
etc. Like the Illinois case he too wanted to get further 
west, where he had friends and where he expected to find 
work. He made the "touch" and got away. 

Now none of the friends who assisted these individuals 
were in a position to do so; but out of their goodness of 
heart they denied themselves to help, as they supposed, a 
Truth brother. Besides, what they have is consecrated to the 
Lord. So it was really the Lord's money that these frauds 

R5790 : page 319 

obtained. It occurred to me that you might consider this 
of sufficient importance to sound a warning through THE 
WATCH TOWER. 

Again I wish to report that I find the general conditions 
in the field most encouraging. While the friends are restful, 
they are not sleepy, but rather are "waiting on the Lord," 
with "full assurance of faith" that He who has begun the 
good work is still at the helm and will finish the same in His 
own "due time." I find the friends growing in grace, zeal 
and love, and in joyous expectancy of a glorious change soon 
—very soon. The class conditions, as I have noted them, 
are an inspiration to me, spurring me on to renewed zeal 
and more determined efforts to have my sacrifice consumed, 
while it is called Day. 

I cannot close without again assuring you of my ever increasing 
love and abiding confidence in you as the Lord's 
specially chosen servant to bring forth meat in due season 
for such as have partaken sufficiently of the "bitter herbs" to 
have their appetites sharpened so they can relish the "table 
prepared by the Lord." 

By His kind favor, your brother and fellow servant, with 
warmest love in the Lord, W. M. WISDOM. 



ABOUT DIVIDING CLASSES 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In June 1 WATCH TOWER, 1915, page 2, you speak of the 
division of the Berean Classes, when they number more than 
twenty, and say that this same rule, you believe, would be 
found advantageous for the Prayer meeting. A few of our 
Class want the Wednesday meeting divided, but have said 
nothing as to the other classes being divided. I am sure 
that we all want to do the will of our dear Lord. Was it 
your thought that the classes should be divided regardless of 
the will of the majority? 

REPLY BY THE EDITOR 

Everything in THE WATCH TOWER and in the STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES, etc., should be understood as advice— nothing 



as commanded. We hold that only the Lord and the Twelve 
Apostles (St. Paul taking the place of Judas) have the right 
to command the people of God. Others, including the Editor, 
have merely the right to advise. And such advice should 
always be accompanied by either a Scriptural citation or an 
explanatory reason. 

In recommending to the classes of Bible Students throughout 
the world that classes be divided when they number over 
twenty, we were following this rule— merely giving advice. 
There being no Scripture for this, we submitted our reasons: 
That large classes cannot so efficiently participate in 
the lessons and, therefore, cannot be expected to reap as 
large a blessing from them. We hold that in every Wednesday 
evening Testimony meeting a special blessing comes to 
all who participate; and very similarly, that in the Berean 
classes participation sharpens interest and deepens the impressions, 
and thus enlarges the blessings to be derived. 

However, in every case it is for the class itself to decide, 
and that by a majority vote, whether in their case the class 
shall be divided or not. There might be reasons why a general 
rule might not apply in some particular cases because 
offset by other conditions. Be it always understood that according 
to the Divine arrangement as given us in the Bible, 
the class itself decides every question. And only the consecrated 
ones constitute the class proper, although the pleasure 
of the unconsecrated who may attend might well be considered 
by the consecrated when voting. 

While each class might be considered an Ecclesia, or 
Church, by itself and entirely independent of every other 
class, nevertheless unity and fellowship are very desirable, 
and the various classes in one city may very appropriately be 
united in one Ecclesia, or Church, thus deriving the benefits 
of occasional joint meetings, joint fellowship and participation 
in the joint arrangement in the selection of servants- 
Elders and Deacons. In thus uniting, each class, as well as 
each individual, sacrifices independence for the benefits of 
cooperation. 



AS MOMENTS PASS THE KINGDOM NEARS 

Men may sorrow in distress, 

Sin-cursed, blind and weary, 
Death may rule supreme today- 
All things may look dreary: 
Make haste, O time; speed on, ye years! 
As moments pass, the Kingdom nears. 

Saints may "groan within" and suffer 

Outward shame, distress, defeat; 
Trouble may test faith and patience- 
Fiery trials, "furnace heat": 
But stop your sighing, dry your tears; 
As moments pass, the Kingdom nears. 



Men for earth and saints for Heaven; 
God's decree will surely stand. 
Shout for joy, give God the glory! 
Safe deliverance is at hand. 
Ah, no more doubtings, no more fears, 
As moments pass, the Kingdom nears. 
J. G. KUEHN. 



page 320 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 321 

VOL. XXXVI NOVEMBER 1 No. 21 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 323 

War Leading Toward a Climax 323 

National Amity After the War 324 

Why Church Union Lags 325 

"Winning of Immortality" 325 

"Plato Mistaken for Christ" 326 

Proper Basis of Honor in the Church 326 

Have No Ambition for Personal Glory 326 

Selection of Elders and Deacons 327 

Colporteurs and Drama Workers 328 

Suggestions to Colporteurs 328 

Eureka Drama Successful 329 

"Like as a Father Pitieth" (Poem) 329 

Plain Food for Clear Brains 330 

God's Pity for the Heathen 332 

Interesting Letters 333 

"As Unorthodox as the Savior Himself" 333 

"The Light That is in Thee" 333 

Holiday Remembrancers 334 

page 322 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



TO BRETHREN SHOWING CREATION DRAMA ON 
COMMERCIAL BASIS IN THEATRES, ETC. 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

We find that the theatre people desire to run all of our 
films and just as few of our slides and records as possible. 

We have concluded that it is impossible to serve two 
masters with the DRAMA and be acceptable to both. We are 
therefore withdrawing the DRAMA from all service except that 
which shows it in its full four parts, as at first. You will 
please, therefore, make no more contracts except upon this 
full show basis. That, we presume, will be only for Sundays 
anywhere, or at the expense of the Classes. 

Very truly your servants in the Lord, 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSN. 
(DRAMA DEPARTMENT) 



All cheques, drafts, money orders, etc., should be made out 
to WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. There are no 
exceptions to this rule. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR DECEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
December follow: (1) 249; (2) 296; (3) Vow; (4) 145; (5) 324; 
(6) 105; (7) 15; (8) 58; (9) 303; (10) 91; (11) 267; (12) 114; 
(13) 325; (14) 87; (15) 120; (16) 7; (17) 14; (18) 195; (19) 
44; (20) 216; (21) 255; (22) 273; (23) 161; (24) 194; (25) 16; 
(26) 166; (27) 149; (28) 299; (29) 285; (30) 310; (31) 34. 



I. B. S. A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
Questions from Manual on Series Third of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDIES I., II. 



Week of November 7....Q. 1 to 8 Week of November 21... .Q. 8 to 13 
Week of November 14.. ..Q. 1 to 7 Week of November 28....Q.14 to 20 

Question Manuals on Vol. III., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each; 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



R5790 : page 323 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

WAR LEADING TOWARD A CLIMAX 

THE GREAT WAR continues to rage. More 
and more all the nations are being dragged 
into it, as intimated by the Lord through the 
Prophet. (Jeremiah 25:15-28.) One is reminded 
of St. James' words, "Ye kill and 
desire to have, and cannot obtain." "Ye ask 
[pray] and receive not [answers to your 
prayers], because ye ask amiss"— selfishly. 
Again we read, "Go to, ye rich men. Weep 
and howl for the miseries that shall come 
upon you."— James 4:2,3; 5:1. 

Regardless of their branch of the human family, all 
sincere men must sympathize greatly with the terrible 
conditions prevailing in Europe. The French are finally 
awakening to the fact that they are almost exhausted. 
They have no further reserves to call to the colors. They 
are patriotically using their money and exhausting their 
credit. They are convinced that they cannot win, that it 
will be either devastation or a bargain-peace. They know 
of no reason whatsoever as to why they are at war with 
their neighbor. The Italians are in much the same predicament, 
and are fearing insurrection, anarchy. The Russians 
are in terrible plight, also. The novelty of the war 
has worn off. The glory of marching into Berlin has 
faded. Revolution is threatening. The Balkan nations 
and Greece are perplexed and fearful under the demands, 
the entreaties and the threats of the great warring 
nations, compelling them to participate in the strife or 
threatening their future existence. 

Only Germany and Great Britain realize what the war 
is about— that it is commercial; that it is for the liberty 
of the seas and the profits of world commerce. Both of 
these great and intelligent nations now realize that they 
have gotten into a struggle ten-fold more severe than they 
had ever anticipated. Both would like to be out of the 
war, but both fear the future, realizing that no such combination 
could ever again be effected. Both are on the 
verge of financial bankruptcy, and wisely are borrowing as 
much as they can and seeking to avoid the thought that 
they could never pay the interest on their debts without 
risking revolution of their peoples against the heavy taxes 



that would be necessary. 

The warring nations are jealous of America and bitter 
against her for her neutrality. Americans are snubbed 
and insulted everywhere in Europe and even in Australia. 
The best intentions of our President and his own personality 
are ridiculed— so blind are the poor people in respect 
to the real issues of the war. Surely things are leading 
on toward the climax when every man's hand will be 
against his neighbor and against his brother and when 
there will be no peace to those who go out or to those 
who come in.— Ezekiel 38:21; Zechariah 8:10. 

WAR NECESSITIES COST LIBERTIES 

Few are aware of the extent to which war's necessities 
are interfering with the liberties of the peoples of 
Europe. Military necessity is rapidly pushing aside all 
the rights of the people in the great Magna Charta of 
British liberty. We are not saying that this is unwise, or 
that we could do better under the circumstances. We are 
merely noting the fact that the people are giving up their 
liberties as one of the costs of the war. In Great Britain 
large factories are taken over by the Government and 
turned from peaceful industry to the manufacture of 

R5791 : page 323 

munitions of war. The employees are required to continue 
to work the same as before. Other manufacturers 
and employers are forbidden by the Government to employ 
any one who has been connected with these factories 
taken over by the Government unless the applicant has a 
full release by the Government. This is difficult to get. 

Canada and Australia are being drawn into the whirlpool 
and are losing their liberties, too. At the beginning 
of the war it was a question as to what the Canadians 
and Australians would do to help the mother country— 
voluntarily. All that condition is changed. Instead, the 
Government is discussing whether or not it will conscript 
Canadian and Australian young men and force them into 
the war. And so great is the change that has come over 
the people that the right of the mother country in this 
respect seems not even to be questioned by the majority. 

Over and beyond all this, the Government is taking a 
record of every individual in Canada and Australia, as 
well as in Great Britain, with full particulars practically 
including all of the individual's affairs. This is called the 
War Census Act and recites: "Two things are certain- 
one, that we must continue to fight with every ounce of 
energy we possess; the other, that we can do this only 
by a complete organization of all our resources. By no 
other means can we continue this life and death struggle. 



"Every pair of hands must be occupied. Every resource 



must be developed. Every citizen must give to the 
country in labor and money the utmost of his capacity." 

As a further war measure personal liberty is being 
taken away under what is known as "The Defense of 
the Realm Act." Under this Act the Government holds 
absolute control of the press and of the lives and liberties 
of all the people. A Briton may be arrested and imprisoned 

R5791 : page 324 

for a year or more without even knowing the 

charge against him or having any opportunity whatever 

to defend himself— the act of habeas corpus being set 

aside. This law, now operative in Great Britain, is being 

extended to the Canadians and Australians, who, apparently, 

will meekly submit to it. If any one had 

prophesied such a condition of things three years ago, he 

would have been counted a fool. 

Our Brethren are not anarchistic, surely. Undoubtedly 
they will seek to be subject to the "powers that be" 
as long as they be— except wherever their consciences 
might be impinged. 

Needless to say that in Germany and all the other 
nations at war conditions are much the same, or worse. 
How long it will be ere our own favored land shall become 
involved we know not. However, 

"Through all the tumult and the strife 
We hear the music ringing; 
It finds an echo in our souls- 
How can we keep from singing"— 

that the King of Glory is at the door, and that His 
glorious Empire of Righteousness and Truth is about to 
be ushered in! Well may we be content with whatever 
the Lord's providence may mark out for us, knowing that 
all things will work together for good to those who love 
Him— called ones according to His purpose! 



NATIONAL AMITY AFTER THE WAR 

Prof. Bertrand Russell, of Cambridge, England, 
quotes the German historian Eduard Meyer, that "So far 
as one can foresee, peace will be only a short truce; England 
will use the first opportunity of beginning the fight 
again, better prepared, at the head of a new coalition if 
not of the old one, and a long series of difficult and bloody 
wars will follow, until at last the definite decision is 
obtained." 

Professor Russell proceeds: "Is it certain that these 
two nations will continue to fight and hate each other 
until one of them is utterly broken? Fortunately no 
country consists wholly of professors, not even Germany; 
and it may be hoped that more sanity is to be found among 



those who have not been made mad by much learning. 
For the moment, both countries are wholly blind to their 
own faults, and utterly fantastic in the crimes which they 
attribute to the enemy. A vast but shadowy economic 
conflict has been invented to rationalize their hostility 
which, in fact, is as irrational and instinctive as that of 
dogs who snarl and fly at each other in the street. The 
cynic who said, 'Speech has been given us to conceal our 
thoughts,' might well have added, 'Thought has been 
given us to conceal our passions from ourselves.' At 
least I am sure that this is true of thought in war-time. 



"France and Russia each has its myth, for without 
myth no great national upheaval is possible. But their 
myths are different from ours, whereas the myths of 
England and Germany are all but identical. Each believes 
itself a great peace-loving nation, powerful, but 
always using its power to further worthy ends. Each 
believes that the other, with an incredible perfidy inspired 
by the basest jealousy, suddenly stirred up the war, after 
many years of careful preparation, military in the one 
case, diplomatic [and naval] in the other. Each believes 
that only the utter humiliation of the other can secure the 
peace of the world and the ordered progress of civilization. 
In each, a pacifist minority urges moderation in the 
use of victory, while yielding to none in the conviction 
that victory is the indispensable preliminary to any future 
reconstruction. Each is absolutely confident of victory, 
and prepared for any sacrifice, however great, in order 
to secure victory. Each is unable to believe that the other 
is sincere in the opinion which it professes; its own innocence 
and the other's guilt are as clear as noonday, and 
can be denied only by the most abject hypocrisy. 

"Both cannot be right in these opinions, and a priori 
it is not likely that either is right. No nation was ever so 
virtuous as each believes itself, and none was ever so 
wicked as each believes the other. If these beliefs survive 
the war, no peace will be possible. Both nations 
have concentrated their energies so wholly on making 
war that they have rendered it almost impossible to make 
peace. In normal times civilized and humane people find 
a difficulty in believing that they do well to butcher each 
other. In order to overcome this feeling, journalists have 
filled the minds of their readers with such appalling accounts 
of the enemies' crimes that hatred has come to 
seem a noble indignation, and it has grown difficult to 
believe that any of our opponents deserve to live. Yet 
peace, if it is to be real, must be accompanied by respect, 
and must bring with it some sense of justice toward rival 
claims. What these claims are, and what justice demands 
if they are to be reconciled, must be realized in some 
degree before the peace, if the peace is to heal the wounds 
which the war is inflicting. 



"When the Germans, with their usual incautious explicitness, 
made the announcement, 'Our future is on the 
sea,' most Englishmen felt, almost without conscious 
thought, that the Germans might as well have announced 
that their future lay through the death of England's 
greatness and the starvation of our population. 



"Because the apprehension was real and deep-seated, 
the hostility was rather blind and instinctive; although, in 
the region of conscious thought, the hopes of an understanding 
were not abandoned, yet in that deeper region 
out of which effective action springs, the belief in a future 
conflict had taken root and could no longer be dislodged. 



"The Germans, in spite of their progress, their energy, 
and their population, are very inferior in colonial possessions, 
not only to England and Russia, but also to France. 
This seems to them unjust; but wherever they turn to try 
to acquire new colonies, England and England's navy 
block the way, because of our friendship with France, or 
our sensitiveness about India, or some other interest in 
the complicated web of our foreign policy. 

"German aggressiveness, real and obnoxious as it has 
become, is the result of experience. Germany cannot, as 
we do, acquire colonies absent-mindedly, without intention, 
and almost without effort. When colonies were 
easier to acquire than they are now, Germany had not yet 
entered into the competition; and since Germany became 
a great Power, it has been handicapped by naval inferiority 
and by the necessity of defending two frontiers. 
It is these accidents of history and geography, rather than 
innate wickedness, which have produced German aggressiveness. 
The aims of German policy are closely similar 
to those which we have always pursued, but its methods 
cannot be the unobtrusive methods which we have usually 
adopted, because such methods, in the circumstances, 
would achieve nothing. 

"Colonial ambitions are no doubt one reason why Germany 
has developed a navy; but another and more imperative 
reason is the necessity of safeguarding foreign trade. 

R5791 : page 325 

"In the time of Bismarck, Germany had not yet become 
a great, industrial nation; it was independent of foreign 
food, and its exports of manufactures were insignificant. 
Its industrial expansion dates from the introduction of the 
Bessemer process in 1879, by which its supplies of iron 
became possible to work at a profit. From that time onward, 
German industrial progress has been extraordinarily 



rapid; more and more, Germany has tended to 
become dependent, like England, upon the possibility of 
importing food and exporting manufactures. In this war, 
as we see, Germany is just able, by very painful economy, 

R5792 : page 325 

to subsist upon the stock of food in the country; but another 
ten years of such development as was taking place 
before the war would have made this impossible. High 
agrarian protection, which alone could have retarded the 
process, was naturally disliked by the manufacturers and 
the working classes, and could not be carried beyond a 
certain point for fear of leading to a triumph of Socialism. 

"It thus became obvious that in a few years' time Germany 
would be liable to defeat by starvation in any war 
with a superior naval power. In 1900, when the Germans 
decided to build a great navy, the Triple Alliance 
was weaker than France and Russia on the sea. The wish 
not to be inferior to France and Russia is enough to account 
for the beginnings of the German Navy; the rivalry 
with us may perhaps have been no part of the original intention, 
but merely a result of the suspicions produced in 
England by the German program. However that may be, 
it ought to have been obvious to the Germans that a strong 
navy was sure to make us hostile, and would therefore 
not serve the purposes for which it was intended unless 
it was stronger than our navy. But it could not be supposed 
that we should submit to the existence of a navy 
stronger than our own, unless we had first been utterly 
and hopelessly defeated; and there was no way of defeating 
us except by first having a navy stronger than 
our own. 

"For these reasons, the German policy was inherently 
incapable of success. And yet, without success, 
all industrial progress and all colonial expansion remain 
perpetually at England's mercy. If we ask ourselves how 
we should feel if we were similarly at the mercy of Germany, 
we shall perhaps begin to understand why the Germans 
hate us. And yet we can hardly feel any sense of 
guilt, because a supreme navy is for us a matter of life 
and death. 

"This dilemma must be faced, if we are to understand 
the conflict of England and Germany; and not regard it 
as merely due to wickedness on one side or on the other. 
After the war, sooner or later, exactly the same problem 
will have to be faced again. The native energy of the 
Germans cannot be permanently checked by defeat; after 
a longer or shorter period of recuperation, they will again 
feel that commercial safety and colonial expansion demand 
a strong navy, if they are not to be content to live in 
sufferance and to be compelled to bow to England's will 
on all occasions of serious dispute. The problem is a new 
one, since hitherto England has been the only nation dependent 
for subsistence on food imported by sea, and England 
has had unquestioned naval supremacy. But if we 



are to avoid the century of internecine warfare contemplated 
by Eduard Meyer, we must find some solution of 
the problem, and not be content merely to hope that, whenever 
war comes, we shall be victorious. Germany's industrial 
ambitions, at least, are entirely legitimate; and they 
alone make some security for German trade an imperative 
necessity. It is not only justice that makes it necessary 
to find a solution, but also self-preservation." 

WHY CHURCH UNION LAGS 

"Anything that even suggests an endeavor to close up 
divisions of followers of Christ claims favorable countenance 
from a generous Christian, regardless of whether 
it appears practicable or not. 

"It was doubtless on this presumption that all other 
Protestant denominations of any consequence in this country 
responded amiably to the Episcopalian request for 
committees to be named which should join in summoning 
and organizing this 'world-conference.' 

"And these commissions, when named, could not 
courteously do less than confer with the Episcopalian 
commission whenever the latter desired. So there have 
been many meetings and much resolving that it would 
truly be a beautiful thing if all churches would unite. 

"But at the end of every meeting the outcome might be 
summed up in this— that if the Episcopalians think they 
can do anything with such a world-conference, they are 
welcome to go ahead and do it... 

"What's the reason? Why aren't the other churches 
aroused? 

"Is it because other churches don't want union? Not 
if they understand themselves. But it is for another reason, 
which is hard to say under bonds of common courtesy. 

"Nevertheless, no relation between parties standing at 
different view-points can be substantial without frankness. 
The time has come when frankness is needed on this subject. 
So here is the plain truth: 

"The reason why other churches have not taken up enthusiastically 
the Episcopalian proposals for a world-wide 
congress on the union of Christendom is simply because 
they have not yet seen reason to believe that Episcopalians 
in general want unity enough to make concessions to procure 
it." 

The Continent. 



"WINNING OF IMMORTALITY" 

Prof. Frederick Palmer, A.B., D.D., Harvard Divinity 
Faculty, in his book entitled "The Winning of 
Immortality" says: "I have endeavored to sketch the 
growth of the doctrine of a future life from its appearance 
in Hebrew history through the line of Christian 
development to the present time. In doing this we come 



upon the fact that the belief which was counted orthodox 
in the first Christian centuries was different in one notable 
respect from that generally counted orthodox today. For 
while we regard it proper and Christian to hold that immortality 
is necessarily inherent in humanity, this was 
then regarded as improper and unchristian, the only true 
Christian view being that immortality was a victorious 
prize to be won through fellowship with Christ. 

"I cannot but think that their orthodoxy was wiser 
than ours. For I am sure that one great deterrent to 
believing in a future life is, with many persons, the dread 
thought of the vast multitudes, the majority of mankind, 
according to some theologies, who, it is asserted, are condemned 
to conscious existence in wretchedness and torture 
forever. Such must be the result if perpetual existence is 
a necessity inherent in humanity. But if it is contingent; 
if the soul is not necessarily immortal, but may become 
so; if the failure to attain immortality proceeds along 
ordinary non-arbitrary lines, and reaches a result which 
we see here imaged in the gradual elimination of decadent 
life, then the processes of the next world are redeemed 
from horror and made intelligible, almost verifiable. 

"Immortality as a necessity seems to me to have little 
to say for itself. As a goal to be attained, it is the prize 
of the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus." 
(Preface pp. 9-11.) 

R5792 : page 326 

"PLATO MISTAKEN FOR CHRIST" 

S. D. McConnell, D.D., D.C.L., Rector of All Souls 
Church, New York, in his book, "The Evolution of Immortality," 
states: 

"A careful study of the ante-Nicene Earners' can but 
convince one that in and among them a number of ethnic 
notions were struggling to express, each in its own terms, 
the truth which Christ had dropped among them. The 
early Christians had all been reared either in the religions 
of Judea or Greece or Rome. Those among them who had 
been reared Jews unconsciously transferred their idea of 
a corporate or tribal immortality from their old faith to 
their new, and their imaginations were filled with the hope 
of a 'Second Coming' and a 'New Jerusalem.' 

"Those who were Greeks brought to the new religion 
the Platonic idea that the individual soul is indestructible, 
being in fact an articulate portion of the substance of the 
mind of God. Those of Roman antecedents, having no 
inherited belief of a future life of any kind, were better 
prepared to comprehend the truth of Christ. The interaction 
of all these fragments of previous philosophy produced 
a confusion and uncertainty of mind which was not 
clarified for five centuries. Then the masterful Augustine, 
the man who fixed the lines in which the thought of the 
civilized world ran from the sixth century to the nineteenth, 
took Plato's doctrine of the inherent immortality 



of the soul, disengaged it from metempsychosis and transmigration, 
and gained for it a general credence which it 
has held to this day." (Pages 45,46.) 

"Tertullian in his treatises On the Soul and On the 
Resurrection of the Flesh gives by far the fullest presentation 
of what was commonly believed in his circles; 
but it is quite impossible to make him consistent with himself 
or with other Christian writers of the same period. 
Upon the whole, however, he leaves the impression, afterwards 
confirmed and fixed by Augustine, that he believes 
the soul to have an independent existence of its own, and 
to be of its own nature indestructible. The truth of the 
case seems to be that as the Greek influence gained the 
domination in the early Church the Platonic doctrine of 
a natural immortality which it brought with it came to be 
accepted. The notion was withstood from the beginning 
as being subversive of the very essence of Christianity. 
Theophilus (Ad. Autolycum II. 27), Irenaeus (Adv. 
Haeres. II. 34), Clement of Alexandria (The Pedagogues, 
I. 3), Arnobius (Cont. Gent. II. 24), and most weighty of 
all, Athanasius in his treatise on the Incarnation of the 
Word of God, all strenuously fought against it as a Pagan 
error which brought to naught the work of Christ. 

"They were defeated, however, and the conception 
prevailed which is vulgarly current today, of an immortal 
soul and a mortal body, temporarily joined, then severed, 
then reunited in an imperishable personality. Its currency 
has probably confused and obstructed the work of 
Christ among men more than all other obstacles combined. 

R5793 : page 326 

A Pagan speculation has masqueraded so long as 
an elemental Christian truth that now, when the intelligent 
world is well disposed to receive and comprehend Jesus' 
revelation of a life to come, Plato stands across the path 
and is commonly mistaken for Christ." (Pages 47,48.) 



R5793 : page 326 

PROPER BASIS OF HONOR IN THE CHURCH 

QUESTION-Matthew 20:27 reads, "Whosoever 
will be chief among you, let him be 
your servant." Is it a proper desire to be 
chief among the Lord's people, and are we 
to understand that the positions in the Kingdom 
of Heaven will be assigned entirely on 
the basis of the amount of service we render 
here? 

Answer.— The Lord had been pointing 
out to His disciples a certain weakness 
on their part— a desire to be the greatest— a 
desire that is general in the human family— an ambitious 



spirit. The context says that amongst the 
Gentiles there are some who exercise a lordship and have 
others to serve them in a menial way, but that this was 
not to be the case amongst the disciples of Jesus. They 
were to be actuated by a different spirit. With the followers 
of Christ there is not to be a spirit to dominate, to 
rule others, but a spirit of love, which seeks to serve 
others, to do for others, a spirit which is willing to sacrifice 
personal interest in the service of others. 

On this basis we consider further the words of this 
text. There will be some among the Lord's people who 
will be chief. It is necessarily so in any company or class 
or association where people are not all equal in talents— 
where some are born with more talents and some with 
less. Some one is bound to be chief. An absolute equality 
is not possible. 

It is advisable, too, that there be some among the 
saints of God to guide the Church. What, then, is to be 
the standard as to who is to be chief? Shall it be the 
one who would browbeat the others? No; this is not the 
standard. Shall it be one who will have a masterful 
influence and pleasant words, who will dominate merely 
because of some talent, or because of superior education 
or wealth— something of this kind? No; this could not 
be the standard. What, then, will be the standard as to 
those who will be recognized as chief ones in the Church? 

HAVE NO AMBITION FOR PERSONAL GLORY 

We reply, We should look for those who have most 
of the spirit of service. He who renders the greatest 
amount of service and brings the greatest spiritual blessing 
to the Class— the one who tries most to truly serve- 
consider him your chief. While our Lord's words were 
addressed to all the Apostles, and not merely to one individual, 
yet they are applicable also to the individual. The 
thought should come home to each of our hearts, that if 
any of us have ambition for service in some special capacity, 
we are not to do like worldly people. We should 
take the opposite track, and leave any honor of men out 
of the question entirely. We should leave God to attend 
to that matter as shall seem to Him best, and be content 
merely to be a servant to the brethren. Let the Lord see 
how willing you are to serve in any manner. 

The person without any ambition never amounts to 
anything. We need to have ambition if we are sowing 
or plowing or whatever we are doing— we need ambition 
to spur us on to do whatever we do in a satisfactory 
manner. And so if we have the opportunity of serving 
the Truth, we should seek to serve it in the most capable 
manner possible. Otherwise we should not be capable 
servants of the Lord. 

But we are to lay aside any desire to be chief so far 
as ambition for personal glory is concerned. We are to 
seek to serve the Lord the best we know how. If you 
can serve the Lord in some respects better than I, and I 



can learn something from you, well and good. And if 
afterwards you can learn something from me, so be it. 
True, we should be patterning after that which is especially 
commendable and doing all we can to further the 

R5793 : page 327 

Lord's Cause. And this service should be prompted by 
love. Any service not prompted by love is not acceptable 
in the sight of the Lord. 

HUMILITY A PRIME REQUISITE 

The Apostle Paul says that those who desire the office 
of a bishop are desiring a good thing. It is a noble service. 
This office in the Apostles' day was not the exalted 
official position it is understood to be in the nominal 
church systems of today. A bishop then was a humble, 
untitled servant of the Church, caring for the interests 
of the sheep. Every servant of the Church should seek 
to be efficient, should love to be, as far as he is able, a 
caretaker over the flock of God. Amongst these Elder 
brethren, pastors of the congregation, there will be those 
of different natural abilities. Each should seek to use his 
talents, his opportunities, in the service of the Lord, of 
the brethren and of the Truth. 

It is a pity that any of the Lord's people today forget 
the standard which the Master is here setting up. These 
seem to think that the office of Elder has become theirs 
by right, instead of realizing that the appointment to this 
office is by vote of the Ecclesia, the company of the Lord's 
people, and is to be the voice of the Church. We believe 
that the attitude of each one should be to be willing to 
accept the voice of the Ecclesia, the Church, implicitly. 
If he has become a member of the congregation by casting 
in his lot with the others, he has thus become subject to 
the rules that represent the controlling majority, whether 
it be a majority of one or of a larger per cent. Having 
done this, he should seek to continue in this attitude, 
whether chosen an Elder or whether another is chosen. 

Very frequently a congregation makes the mistake of 
selecting for Elder a brother who does not have the 
proper qualifications. This sometimes means dissatisfaction 
on the part of some of the Class, and leads to the 
breaking away of some to form another Class. We think 
this is not the wise course. We think that if the Class 
made a mistake, the Lord is able to overrule it for good; 
and that therefore those who withdraw lose some experiences 
which would be valuable to them. 

We are not always sure, however, that the Class made 
a mistake. How can we know but that the Lord has some 
lesson in this matter? If we have asked the Lord's blessing 
on whoever would be the choice, we should abide by 
that choice. If the one not chosen has ability for properly 
presenting the Truth and knows a number of places where 
he can be used and useful, we think that the brother 



should take advantage of whatever opportunities may 

present themselves. He need not leave the Class, however. 

He could perform whatever service came to his 

hand. Perhaps he could use his time and talent in Class 

Extension work— not feeling restricted in this direction 

because he was not elected Elder. He might go out and 

find opportunities for service. So the change in Elders 

might mean to the brother not elected or not reelected 

that the Lord was indicating to him another field of usefulness. 

The Lord's providences might be leading out 

for wider influence and usefulness for him. 

We should not be influenced by what men of the world 
shall say or think of us. This is immaterial; and it is 
immaterial what the Church shall think. We should seek 
to please the Lord. We should not esteem ourselves too 
highly, but rather give a preference to others in our 
estimation. Positions in the Kingdom of Heaven, we understand, 
will be awarded according to the degree of the 
development of the fruits of the Holy Spirit; and this 
means a love which will lead to zeal in the Lord's service. 

SELECTION OF ELDERS AND DEACONS 

Numerous inquiries have come to us indicating that 
some of the brethren have difficulty in applying the suggestions 
given in Vol. VI. on the subject of election of 
servants for the Classes. 

It was not our thought there to lay down an invariable 
rule on the subject. The Bible gives none, and no one 
else has a right to establish such a rule. Our suggestion 
was that whenever possible the election should be unanimous, 
and unless seventy-five per cent, of the Class, or 
more, favored a brother's election, it would be rather unwise 
for him to accept the office— the service. We did 
not by this mean that a minority of twenty-five or thirty 
per cent, should be encouraged to obstruct the Class and 
hinder an election. 

Strictly speaking, a majority of one in a Class would 
decide any matter except as love might come in to urge a 
consideration of the sentiments of others. If for instance, 
a Class numbered one hundred, fifty-one would have a 
right to decide respecting who should be the servants of 
the Church, and the other forty-nine should very quietly 
acquiesce, recognizing the fact that they constitute only a 
minority, and should loyally strive to support the will of 
the majority. 

Only the spirit of love and the best interests of all in 
the Class suggests more than fifty-one per cent. Love 
should strive for a unanimous vote. But how might this 
be obtained? We will offer a suggestion. 

Suppose that in a Class of one hundred, six Elders 
were considered as necessary for the service. A, B, C, 
D, E, F, would represent available candidates of more or 
less ability. A might have a hundred votes; B, ninety; 
C, eighty; D, seventy; E, sixty; F, fifty. Under a strict 
voting on the lines of preference only two would be selected 



on a ninety per cent, basis; but our thought would 
be that the entire six might be unanimously elected, if 
they were on the average as good material as the Class 
possessed, and if nothing were known derogatory to their 
moral character. 

R5794 : page 327 

It is a mistake to think that the standards established 
by St. Paul are to be taken literally, for no one would be 
found fully up to all the requirements. The Apostle has 
stated what the ideal Elder would be. Each voter should 
have this ideal before his mind in thinking of the will of 
the Lord; but the Class is not to be left without an Elder 
unless there are serious blemishes. 

Our Lord similarly set a perfect example before us 
when He said, "Be ye perfect, even as your Father which 
is in Heaven is perfect." (Matt. 5:48.) Who is perfect 
in the sense that God is perfect? "There is none righteous; 
no, not one." (Romans 3:10.) The Master evidently 
meant that we should not measure ourselves by a 
low standard, but by the perfect standard, that thus we 
would be assisting ourselves up to the grandest ideals in 
respect to our own lives and characters and in respect to 
those chosen to be Elders and examples to the Flock. 

Be it always remembered that none are to vote except 
those professing full consecration, manifested by the usual 
symbol— immersion in water. Such as have not symbolized 
their consecration, are not to be disowned as brethren, 
but should be considered so immature as not to be competent 
to express an opinion in respect to who would be 
qualified to serve the Church, and, of course, would not 
be qualified to be servants themselves. 

RE THE VOW 

Another question which here and there is obtruding 
itself is, Should any one be chosen as a servant of the 

R5794 : page 328 

Church who has not taken the special Vow which so many 

of us have found very helpful, and which has been recommended 

to all? 

We cannot make this simple Vow a test of brotherhood; 
for, even though we believe that the Lord 
has especially brought it forth at this time and that to a 
certain extent He intends it to serve as a test amongst 
the consecrated, nevertheless the Bible does not authorize 
us to make this a test of brotherhood. It is a matter of 
judgment rather than of Divine direction, just as the 
candidate's misuse of the English language, or uncouthness 
of manner might properly enough be taken into consideration, 
although not mentioned in the Bible amongst 
the qualifications for eldership. 

It would rejoice us greatly to know that all the dear 



Elders and Deacons amongst the Lord's people everywhere 
could see eye to eye with respect to the reasonableness 
of the Vow, and its harmony with the Divine Word 
and with our consecration Vow, to which it is, as it were, 
a blue fringe, or border and finish. One can scarcely 
refrain from wondering what objection any Christian 
brother or sister could have to that Vow. To some of us 
it seems as though it would imply either something wrong 
as respects their heart intentions or something defective 
in their reasoning faculties. However, we are not competent 
to judge so closely. The Master said, "Judge not." 

Our thought is that in selecting Elders or Deacons a 
preference might well be given to those who have taken 
the Vow and who see eye to eye on this subject. Nevertheless, 
if the brethren who are competent to lead Classes 
are acceptable in every other way and are not opposers 
of the Vow, they might be chosen. This would be especially 
true of those who declare that they are living up to 
all the requirements of the Vow to the best of their 
ability, and merely decline to take it because of fear that 
somehow or other the taking of this simple Vow might 
injure them while helping others. We may not understand 
the processes of their reasoning nor the attitude of their 
hearts, but we may under such circumstances pass over 
what we cannot understand nor appreciate. 



R5794 : page 328 

COLPORTEURS AND DRAMA WORKERS 

IT SEEMS very wonderful to us that, notwithstanding 

the fact that there are nearly 

nine millions of copies of STUDIES IN THE 

SCRIPTURES, in twenty different languages 

in the hands of the public, the demand continues 

as it does. Our output for August 

was over twenty thousand copies. 

We have recently heard of a Colporteur 
who felt a little hesitancy about selling 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES in view of their 
reference to the year 1914, and who, therefore, turned 
his attention to the sale of SCENARIOS. In our opinion 
the brother took a wrong view of matters. STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES are not prophecies. The fact that our 
expectations respecting the "change" of the Church in 
1914 were not realized does not signify that the prophecies 
failed. Our readers should know that we never prophesied 
anything. We merely gave our opinions respecting 
prophecies and gave the reader the reasons for those 
opinions, showing the chapter and verse. Nothing in 
the Bible declared that the Church would be glorified by 
the fall of 1914. The author did express it as his opinion 
that the Church would be glorified by that time, and 
gave his reasons for so thinking. Now that the date has 



passed and the Church is not glorified, the author is not 
disappointed. All the while he wished the Lord's will 
to be done and none other. 

What the Scriptures did clearly seem to teach, and 
what we did seek positively to affirm, was that, so far as 
the Bible chronology would show, the Times of the Gentiles 
would expire with the fall of 1914. Some time ago 
we pointed out that this expiration of the Times of the 
Gentiles need not be understood that they would be dispossessed 
at that date, but rather that their dispossession 
proceedings might be expected to begin. (See also THE 
WATCH TOWER, July 1, 1904, article on Universal 
Anarchy.) We gave the illustration of a lease of property. 
At the expiration of the lease the tenant should 
move; but, if he still seek to retain possession, the owner 
of the property is justified in taking forcible possession 
and in putting out the tenant and all his belongings. 

This seems to be the course of events as respects the 
nations of the world. They do not recognize the times in 
which we are living— that the New Dispensation has 
been ushered in, and that the time has come for Messiah 
to take control of earth's affairs. The kings of earth 
would laugh at any suggestion that they should resign 
their thrones and kingdoms to Messiah. The bearer of 
such a message would probably be looked upon as a 
lunatic. The Lord, instead of sending such a useless 
message, has begun dispossession proceedings. He is 
allowing the nations to rage against each other, to 
weaken each other, to destroy each other's property, to 
humiliate each other. Thus the winds of strife in the 
present war are leading on to the great social earthquake; 
and it, in turn, will lead to the fiery cataclysm of anarchy, 
that in due time, as St. Paul declares, everything may be 
removed that is shakable, in order that Messiah's Kingdom, 
which is unshakable, may be fully established.— 
Hebrews 12:27-29. 

As for the time for the completion of the Church, 
we do not know it and never claimed to know it. We 
merely expressed the opinion that it would occur some 
time before the greatest violence of the great Time of 
Trouble. We still think the same, and expect that the 
Church, the antitypical Elijah, will all have passed beyond 
the veil before the anarchy predicted in the Bible. 

SUGGESTIONS TO COLPORTEURS 

The great war now raging in Europe seems to be the 
beginning of the end of Gentile Times. Instead of feeling 
ashamed or discouraged, we feel the reverse. We 
are applying now the words of our Master, "When ye 
see these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and 
lift up your heads; for your deliverance draweth nigh." 
(Luke 21:28.) Any who are not rejoicing, but who, on 
the contrary, are feeling discouraged, despondent and 
disappointed and ashamed of the Truth, have evidently 
wrong impressions. Such should speedily correct such 



impressions and begin to share in the rejoicing that the 
Savior counseled, and should begin to share in the great 
opportunities offered for the serving out of the Truth. 
Surely there never was a time of greater soul-hunger 
amongst mankind in respect to the Word of God! We 
know nothing so good to give them as the six volumes 
of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. In our opinion they 
need no change nor alteration. 

It is not necessary for us to print something and 
insert it in the books saying that our expectations of the 
"change" of the Church before October, 1914, did not 
come true, for sensible people would not need such a 

R5794 : page 329 

notice. They would see that that suggestion or expectation 

had not been realized. But they would see also that 

the expectation based upon the prophetic Word is being 

realized. We are in the days of the Son of Man. The 

nations are angry, and shortly His wrath will come. 

Then the various other steps leading on to the full accomplishment 

of the great blessing of Messiah's Kingdom 

will be in order. We urge the Colporteurs, therefore, 

not to permit any misconception or false shame to interfere 

with their scattering of the only literature in the 

world that gives an accurate and reasonable account of 

the Bible program, and that has shown in advance experiences 

upon which the world has already begun to enter. 



Nevertheless, we have no objection whatever to any 
Colporteur changing from the sale of the STUDIES over to 
the sale of the DRAMA SCENARIO, if he prefers it. It is 
merely a question of which you make your specialty. If 
selling the STUDIES, you do well to call attention before 
leaving to the SCENARIO advising the great value of it 
for children, as well as for adults. It is written in 

R5795 : page 329 

simple language. Its ninety-six lectures are brief, condensed, 
pointed, in simple language and interesting to 
everybody. No better book could possibly be put into 
the hands of Christian parents from which to teach their 
children something respecting creation and the Bible in 
an interesting and historical way. 

Likewise, those who specialize with the SCENARIO 
should, of course, inquire on every suitable occasion if 
the STUDIES are in the home and are being read and 
found helpful. So doing, especially when delivering the 
SCENARIO, you might be the means of removing prejudice 
and of deepening interest. 

PRICE OF SCENARIOS 



When the SCENARIOS were gotten out, it was not our 
thought that they would ever be colporteured; hence no 
special Colporteur price was arranged for. At the request 
of Colporteurs, we have fixed a retail price on them 
now as follows: 

The paper-bound edition in three parts $0.30 

" cloth- " " red edges 68 

" De Luxe " gilt edged, fine paper 98 

Or, because we have a large quantity of these on hand, 
Colporteurs may sell them at $0.89. 
We will supply these books to the Colporteurs as follows: 

The paper-bound sets $0.10 

" 68-cent, cloth edition 25 

" De Luxe edition (to get rid of large stock) 

will go below cost until it is reduced, namely, .38 

These prices do not include postage or freight or expressage. 
These prices are open to any of the Colporteurs 
regularly enrolled— or to any of the Bible 
Students' Classes, or in quantities of not less than twelve 
to any WATCH TOWER subscriber. 

Our thought is that the numerous illustrations of 
these books make them very attractive to the public. We 
find that nearly all who purchase them read them, which 
is sometimes not the case with the STUDIES. Quite a 
number thus far have been brought into the Truth 
through the DRAMA SCENARIO. 

EUREKA DRAMA SUCCESSFUL 

The EUREKA DRAMA is being blessed of the Lord 
beyond our expectations. We feared that on account of 
the popularity of moving pictures, the EUREKA DRAMA 
would awaken interest only in country districts not supplied 
with moving picture theatres, etc. Experience is 
proving the contrary. It is demonstrated by experience 
that people will come to the EUREKA DRAMA and sit for 
two hours watching the DRAMA pictures and listening to 
the DRAMA lectures with rapt attention, altogether in 
preference to going to a picture show. Indeed, the class 
of people attending the moving picture theatres is not 
always the intelligent and those of lofty sentiments. This 
is manifest from the character of the plays chiefly patronized. 
The theatre managers know the tastes of their 
audiences. Indeed, some of the good people whom we 
would interest are far from being regular attendants at 
picture theatres. 

For a time we tried to interest theatre managers in 
presenting the DRAMA. Then to meet their ideas, we consented 
to cut some of the entertainments in two. Finally 
the theatre people wanted us to eliminate the lectures and 
slides almost entirely and merely to show their audiences 
the beautiful films. This has led us to the decision that 



the regular DRAMA can be hereafter shown only in its 
full, complete form. What films we still have must be 
saved for presentation to the sort of audiences that will 
appreciate the lectures and the slides as well. 

Where theatres are unused on Sundays, and can be 
obtained by the Classes at very moderate rates permitting 
the showing of the complete DRAMA in its four parts, the 
Society will be willing to cooperate by loaning the 
DRAMA free and literature free— the Class bearing all the 
expenses of transportation of DRAMA and operators. The 
operator of the DRAMA must be one who has already had 
a training with the Society, in order to guarantee proper 
presentation, and so that the valuable films be not destroyed. 
Ordinary operators are not capable of handling 
our DRAMA. It requires at least three months' careful 
preparation for this. 

But, returning to the EUREKA DRAMA: It is being 
presented everywhere, often in high schools and colleges. 
Both professors and students are charmed with the pictures 
and with our wonderful phonograph records and 
our free SCENARIOS. At the colleges they object to the 
slide advertising Pastor Russell's STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES. We do not object to the omission of this 
slide when it is not desired. We believe that all of the 
schools should be interested in the EUREKA DRAMA; but 
we would not think of showing it to any except the advanced 
grades, unless the children were accompanied by 
their seniors. 

Classes not yet supplied with the EUREKA DRAMA can 
find the description and prices in our issue of October 15, 
page 316. 



"LIKE AS A FATHER PITIETH" 

The night is so dark, and the way seems so long, 

As we sadly and wearily struggle along; 

So often we stumble, so frequently fall, 

And the fear oft assails, "Shall we fail, after all?" 

Poor hearts ! we forget that the Master above 
Ever watcheth each step in His infinite love, 
And like as a father doth pity, the Lord 
Ever pities all those who do trust in His Word. 

No tear ever falls, when the heart's wound is sore, 
But the Lord's tender heart keenly suffered the more; 
No cup His hand pours, which He fills to the brim, 
But His own loving lips were pressed first to its rim. 

No night can be darker than that which He knew, 
And no waters be deeper than those He passed through. 
Ah! then, when thy cross seems too heavy to bear, 
Oh, remember thy Lord doth know, pity and care! 
GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



R5795 : page 330 

PLAIN FOOD FOR CLEAR BRAINS 

--NOVEMBER 14. -DANIEL 1:1-21.— 

JEWISH CAPTTVES-THE BABYLONIAN COURT-THE KING'S 
DAINTIES-DANIEL AND HIS CHUMS-LOYALTY TO PRINCIPLE 
AND ITS ADVANTAGE-PRINCIPLES ARE ETERNAL- 
SELF-CONTROL BRINGS BLESSINGS. 

"Watch ye; stand fast in the faith; quit you 
like men; be strong."— 1 Corinthians 16:13. 

TODAY'S Study is specially selected for the 

World's Temperance Sunday. How glad 

we are that the subject of temperance is 

making such grand headway throughout the 

world! We will not controvert the claim 

of some that they are strong enough to use 

intoxicating liquors wisely, without injury, 

and to their profit. This may be true of 

some; but all will agree that such are the 

minority— that the vast majority of humanity 

have not sufficient self-control to pursue such a course. 

With the majority, undoubtedly the safe course is to 

decide, once and forever, that they will never use intoxicating 

liquors as a beverage, unless medically prescribed 

as an absolute necessity. 

When we consider the worries of life, the crime, the 
headaches and the heartaches directly traceable to alcohol, 
it seems amazing that the wiser and the better balanced 
of humanity should be unwilling to curtail their own 
liberties in the interest of their fellowmen in general. 
The temperance sentiment— the total abstinence sentiment 
—is growing everywhere, our own nation grandly leading. 
We must not, however, deceive ourselves into thinking 
that the world has turned from alcohol. Undoubtedly no 
radical, permanent results will be reached until Messiah's 
Kingdom shall take the full control of earth's affairs. 
We may be sure that thereafter nothing shall be permitted 
to hurt or to injure in all God's holy Kingdom. ~ 
Isaiah 11:9. 

The good news that the Russians had abolished the 
use of vodka in their army and throughout the nation has 
been offset by later news that the people, giving up their 
usual intoxicant— vodka— have taken to private distilling, 
and as great intemperance as ever prevails. The report 
that the use of liquors in the armies of France and England 
has been abolished, and that in the home lands the 
temperance spirit is growing, is offset by the terrible 
news that in all the armies it has been found necessary to 
stimulate the soldiers with alcoholic beverages, just prior 



to ordering the men to make one of those terrible charges 
against entrenched foes in which sometimes a half and 
sometimes all of the chargers are wounded or killed. The 
nervous strain incidental to such a charge seems to require 
that sensible men shall to some extent befog their 
senses in order to participate willingly. 

How terrible a thing is this war! How shocking it is 
that men should be half-drugged before being commanded 
to go to their death! Alas; how absurd the claim that 

R5796 : page 330 

the kingdoms at war are kingdoms of Christ, and that the 
world in general is Christendom— Christ's Kingdom! How 
glad we are to know now that the Kingdom of God's dear 
Son is very different from these kingdoms, and that it is 
about to be inaugurated! And how necessary seems the 
Bible declaration that incident to the establishment of 
the Kingdom of God under the whole heavens is the great 
Time of Trouble, which already is beginning, and which 
the Bible indicates will end with anarchy and the utter 
destruction of the present order of society! Thank God 
that a new order will speedily take its place— symbolically 
called the new heavens and the new earth, wherein will 
dwell righteousness, and wherein wars will cease to the 
ends of the earth!— Psalm 46; 2 Peter 3:13. 

PLAIN FOOD-NOT KING'S DAINTIES 

Those inclined to think of the people of three thousand 
years ago as merely monkey men may take a lesson from 
today's Study. It not only shows great intelligence on the 
part of some of the youths taken prisoners from the land 
of Israel into the land of Babylon, but it also shows a 
breadth of wisdom in the Babylonian king. The fact that 
King Nebuchadnezzar selected young men from the captives 
to be especially trained in the Babylonian schools as 
the king's advisers and wise men shows us a breadth of 
thought that is equaled by very few of the monarchs of 
today. Would King George of Great Britain accept some 
young German captives and make special provision for 
them as counselors? Or would the Kaiser some young 
Britons and provide for them? Or would any of the 
other nations of the world today show as much breadth 
of mind as did Nebuchadnezzar 2,500 years ago? 

Not only was this done, but young Jewish captives 
proving their qualifications were given every opportunity 
to use their talents for the benefit of the nation adopting 
them. Daniel became Prime Minister in Babylon; and 
others of the Jewish captives attained to the rank of 
presidents of different divisions of the Babylonian Empire. 
Surely this shows not only that in some of the Jews 
there was merit of a high order, but also that there was 
an ability to appreciate this and an absence of narrowness 
and jealousy hindering the best interests of the empire. 

Today's Study introduces us to the time when four of 



these Hebrew captives had been selected and been placed 
in Nebuchadnezzar's special school. This provision for 
them included not only their training, but also liberal 
provision for their physical welfare. They got a portion 
of the king's meat; that is, they shared in the food prepared 
for the royal family and supposed to be necessary for the 
development of the highest intelligence and ability. 

Daniel and his three chums met the situation wisely. 
Under the Lord's blessing Daniel's meekness, gentleness 
and general nobility of character, derived from his knowledge 
of the true God, the faithful training of godly 
parents, and the knowledge of the Divine Law and promises, 
commended him at once to the loving favor of the 
chief eunuch. Thus the way was prepared for the favorable 
consideration of the proposition that these four young 
Hebrews would prefer to have plain food rather than the 
dainties and wines provided from the king's table. 

The prince of the eunuchs hesitated to grant their request, 
believing that it would show unfavorably in the 
personal appearance of the Hebrews; and that this would 
be a reflection upon him and call for inquiry, and bring 
upon him the king's displeasure, and perhaps punishment. 
In reply to this, Daniel and his associates requested that 
the matter be tried out for ten days; and that if at the 
end of that time they seemed to be losing in flesh or otherwise 
inferior to the others, their request for a change of 
diet would be withdrawn; otherwise that they should be 
permitted to continue on the plain food. 

Their request was that they be permitted to eat pulse. 
This, strictly speaking, seems to signify leguminous foods, 
such as beans, peas, etc.; but we surmise that the word is 
used in a general way to signify vegetables. The world is 
coming to recognize the fact that such leguminous foods 
as beans and peas contain the elements of nutrition generally 
sought for in flesh meats; and, more and more, flesh 
food is being discarded or limited and farinaceous and 
leguminous foods being substituted, and apparently in 
many cases to advantage in our day. We are not to think, 
however, that the Bible prohibits the use of flesh food. 
Christians are left to the exercise of their judgment and 

R5796 : page 331 

experience as respects what kind of food will best nourish 
their bodies and make them most useful in the Lord's service. 
That flesh meat is not to be despised nor considered 
sinful is abundantly proven by the fact that our Lord and 
the Apostles ate meat— lamb, fish, etc. 

LOYALTY TO GOD AND TO PRINCIPLE 

There is a special reason why Daniel and his fellows 
desired to be excused from eating of the king's portion. 
It was customary at that time to offer meat before idols 
before partaking of it— as though wishing to have some 
special blessing upon the meat. While such a blessing 



would not really injure the meat— for an idol is nothing 
and could neither bless nor curse the meat— nevertheless, 
to eat such meat would more or less imply to the people 
that the young men were receiving blessings from the 
heathen gods, and that any wisdom or efficiency that they 
might have were thus derived. Doubtless this thought had 
much to do with the request for the change of the food. 

Besides, although the Scriptures have not forbidden 
the use of alcoholic liquors, they do indicate special blessings 
upon those who abstain, as well as upon eunuchs. 
Daniel and his fellows were apparently fully consecrated 
to the Lord; and their being away from home in a heathen 
land, instead of relaxing their religious interest, seems to 
have deepened it. More than ever they realized their 
need of a true God and desired to be His true servants. 

How the Lord greatly blessed these young Hebrews in 
their resolution to live upright, clean lives in the midst of 
the heathen is a part of this lesson. At the close of the 
ten days of trial the four young Hebrews were found to 
be advantaged by the difference of diet; and the record 
is that eventually, when the king began to inquire of 
them, he found them ten times more wise than the 
magicians and astrologers of his realm. Nebuchadnezzar's 
wisdom was manifested in his exalting of these young 
men to high positions in his realm. It paid the young 
Hebrews well for all their self-denials and their loyalty 
to God and to principle. 

We believe that there is a general operation of Divine 
Law to the effect that whoever seeks to live conscientiously, 
cleanly, purely, honestly, will have compensations in 
his own heart, in his own life, whether he also reaches 
positions of honor amongst men or not. The ideal condition, 
of course, is that of the true Christian, who is not 
merely a church member— not merely an attendant at 
church services— but whose entire will has been given to 
the Lord. To such an one, as the Apostle explains, "old 
things have passed away, and all things are become new." 
—2 Corinthians 5:17. 

Such go to the Bible to learn therein the will of the 
Lord concerning them, and then to the best of their ability 
live in harmony with that will. It regulates them as respects 
what they eat, what they drink, where they go, 
what they do, what they read, what companionship they 
cultivate, and as respects even their very thoughts. With 
this class everything is subjected to the Divine will. Of 
all the people in the world these have the best ground for 
happiness and peace, having the promise not only of the 
life that now is, but also of glory, honor and immortality 
in the life to come as members of the glorified Church, 
sharers in its great work of blessing humanity during the 
thousand years of Messiah's Kingdom. 

A GOVERNOR'S VIEW OF TEMPERANCE: 

"There is no denying that intoxicating liquors are indulged 
in by many respectable people; or that they are 



associated, in some literature and in some society, with 

good fellowship and merry times; or that some persons 

can use them moderately without immediate apparent injury. 

But take my word for it, that the risk of their use 

is a terrible risk; that there can be just as good times 

and just as good fellowship without them; and that nobody 

thinks a bit the less of a young fellow because he will not 

use them; but, on the contrary, that every business man 

or professional man, whatever his own habits, instinctively 

turns away from employing any young man who has the 

taint of liquor about him. 

"Every physician now condemns the use of alcohol as 
a drink. Every employer counts the use of it against an 
employee. If you want a clear head, if you want a sound 
heart, if you want a clean conscience, if you want a 
healthy body, if you want money in your pocket and credit 
to your name, put your foot right down and say that you 
are going to abstain from the use of intoxicating liquors, 
and keep the faith. Is there anything nastier than a man 
under their influence? Be clean and wholesome. Keep 
your brain clear, your head steady, your self-respect firm, 
and you will have a life that is worth living. This is not 
a matter of goody talk and sentiment. If nothing else 
will convince you, experience will; but it will be that experience 
which can only come too late to be of any use. 
You may think that you have self-control enough to take 
care of yourself. But the chances are that your self-control 
will be no more than pasteboard against a Gatling 
gun if you tamper with temptation and once begin the 
indulgence of intoxicating liquors. 

HOW RUSSELL SAGE COUNSELED 

At a University Club meeting one of the members entertained 
his fellows with the following story:— 

R5797 : page 331 

"My first years in New York were not successful ones. 
I came down from the upper part of the State, determined 
to get along; but somehow, after a brief experience of 
city life, I became discouraged and lax. There were no 
positions but clerkships to be gotten, and to work my way 
up to the top from an army of young clerks, all as efficient 
as myself, seemed hopeless. At twenty-five, I was 
making only four dollars a week more than when I 
started; and I hadn't a cent to my credit in the bank. 

"One day, scared and desperate about my future, I 
called to see Russell Sage. Sage came from my part of 
the country, and had known my father well. He listened 
to my narrative with interest. 'Do you drink?' he said. 

'"Yes, sir, moderately,' said I; 'but only very moderately.' 

'"Well, stop it for a year. Then come to see me again,' 
said Mr. Sage. 

"I stopped drinking for a year; and at the end I paid 
my second visit to the millionaire. He remembered all 



about me. He chatted a little while. Then he said, 'Do 
you gamble?' 

"'Yes,' I said; 'I sometimes gamble.' 

'"Well, give it up for a year; and then come to see me.' 

"So I stopped gambling; and the year went by, and for 
the third time I appeared in Mr. Sage's office. 'Do you 
smoke?' he said, after we had had a third discussion of 
my affairs. 

'"Yes, sir,' said I. 

'"Stop smoking,' said he. 'Come back after you have 
stopped smoking for a year.' 

The speaker laughed. One of his auditors said impatiently: 
"Well, when you went back what happened?" 

"I never went back," was the reply, the speaker's eyes 
were twinkling humorously. "Because if I had, Mr. Sage 
would only have told me that now I had given up drinking, 
gambling and smoking, I must have saved enough 
money to start myself in business. It was true; I had 
saved enough money to start myself in business. That 
shrewd, wise man had set me, almost without my knowing 
it, on the road to success." 



R5797 : page 332 

GOD'S PITY FOR THE HEATHEN 
-NOVEMBER 21.-JONAH 3:1-4:11.- 



JONAH'S EXPERIENCE A TYPE OF OUR LORD'S DEATH AND RESURRECTION 
-"GOD PREPARED A GREAT FISH"-DIVINE ABILITY 
UNQUESTIONABLE-DIVINE PERMISSION OF EVIL LIMITED 
-DIVINE COMPASSION ILLUSTRATED-HOW "GOD REPENTED 
OF THE EVIL" -JONAH'S SELFISH SPIRIT REBUKED 
-THE MESSIANIC KINGDOM THE HOPE OF THE WORLD. 

"Go ye therefore, and teach all nations."— Matthew 28:19. 

SKEPTICS have long been inclined to treat as 
a seaman's yarn the story of Jonah's experiences 
in the belly of the great fish. 
Many pulpiteers even laugh at the account 
of Jonah's experiences as suitable only for 
the credulous, and not for wise Higher 
Critics. Nevertheless, the Great Teacher 
refers to Jonah and his experiences in the 
belly of the great fish; and those who believe 
the Scriptures will seek no better ground 
for their faith in the story than this. 

Nor is Jonah's account without a considerable parallel. 
Some years ago one of the New York journals gave a 
detailed account, profusely illustrated, showing how a 
sailor was swallowed by a great sulphur whale, but escaped 
after several hours, his skin made purplish from 
the action of the digestive fluids of the whale's stomach. 



So far as we know, Jonah's case was the only one in which 
any one spent parts of three days and nights in the belly 
of a fish. True, the throats of the majority of whales 
seem too small to admit a man. We remember, however, 
that they are quite elastic. The great sulphur variety is 
of enormous size and is said to have a throat capable of 
swallowing a skiff, which is much larger than a man. 
Besides, the Bible description of the matter tells us 
specifically that God prepared a great fish. No one who 
has a proper appreciation of the powers of the Almighty 
would question for an instant the ability of God to prepare 
a special fish, either at the moment or, foreknowing 
Jonah's course, long in advance. The exceptional character 
of Jonah's experience constituted him a type of our 
Lord Jesus, who in death was swallowed up of the earth 
as was Jonah by the fish; and as our Lord was liberated 
from His prison-house, so was Jonah.— Matthew 12:39,40. 

PREACHING TO THE NINEVITES 

Today's Study, however, is connected with the Prophet 
Jonah's preaching to the Ninevites. Nineveh was a great 
city outside the pale of Judaism and therefore, at that 
time, outside the lines of Divine favor; for from the giving 
of the Law Covenant at Mount Sinai until three and 
a half years after the Cross, God's favors were exclusively 
confined to the nation of Israel, under the terms of the 
Law Covenant. At the close of Israel's period of exclusive 
favor, Cornelius the Centurion was the first Gentile 
to receive evidence of Divine favor. 

In the cases of the Sodomites, the Ninevites and the 
Amalekites, Divine Justice decreed that their iniquity had 
come to the full; that for them to live longer would be 
unwise; and that for them to be cut off in death would 
not only hinder them from further degradation, but also 
furnish to mankind a general lesson, to the effect that 
there is a limit to the Divine permission of evil. The 
fact that these people were thus condemned and overthrown 
did not signify that they had ever enjoyed salvation 
or even an offer of salvation. Like all Adam's children, 
these people were under the sentence of death— 
"Dying, thou shalt die." They were merely cut off from 
further life under present conditions. Their opportunity 
for future life by resurrection was not interfered with, for 
neither they nor others had yet been redeemed. 

Hence the future life, secured by the redemptive work 
of Jesus, was in no sense interfered with by the sentence 
of death issued against them en masse. Indeed, even the 
Jews were not saved. The offer of salvation made to 
them under the Law Covenant did not give them eternal 
life. As St. Paul declares, "By the deeds of the Law shall 
no flesh be justified in God's sight." (Rom. 3:20.) If the 
Jews were justified by the Law, then Christ died in vain. 
The Law made nothing perfect. 

The offer of life given to the Jew was merely to prove 
to him, and ultimately to all, the impossibility of any one's 



obtaining life under the Divine Law without Divine assistance 

—without the Savior and His work at Calvary 

and, additionally, His work for the world as the Mediator 

of the New Covenant, during His Messianic Reign of a 

thousand years. In harmony with this the Apostle declares, 

"Christ brought life and immortality to light 

through the Gospel." And again, "There is none other 

name under Heaven given amongst men whereby we must 

be saved." And again, "This great salvation began to be 

preached by our Lord and was confirmed by those who 

heard Him. "-2 Timothy 1:10; Acts 4:12; Hebrews 2:3. 

THE NINEVITES REPENTED 

Jonah's preaching was that within forty days God 
would destroy Nineveh. But the people, impressed by his 
message, repented of their sinful course and sought 
Divine forgiveness. The king's proclamation was that 
"neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste anything; 
let them not feed, nor drink water; but let man and beast 
be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God; 
yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and from 
the violence that is in their hands." The Lord hearkened 
to the Ninevites, accepted their repentance, and permitted 
their national life to continue for a time. 

We are, of course, to understand that God knew the 
end from the beginning— that He knew that the Ninevites 
would repent, and that He would not blot them out within 
forty days, in accordance with the Prophet Jonah's preaching. 
Nineveh did pass away utterly, great city as it was, 
but not within forty literal days. Possibly the time meant 
by the Almighty was what is sometimes termed prophetic 
or symbolical time— a day for a year; 40 days, 40 years. 

The lesson shows us how much greater is the compassion 
of the Almighty than that of His imperfect servants 
of human kind. God was pleased to have the 
Ninevites turn from their sins to hearty repentance. He 
was pleased to grant them an extension of earthly life. 
But Jonah was displeased. His argument was, "There! 
God has made a fool of me. He told me that this great 
city would be destroyed within forty days; and I preached 
it. God has brought discredit upon me, and I am now to 
be regarded as a false prophet." 

Jonah was more interested in himself and his own 
reputation than in the Ninevites and their interests. The 
servants of the Lord must not be so. Self should be lost 
sight of. As the great Apostle Paul advises, "Love 
seeketh not her own"; and again, "Even Christ pleased 
not Himself."— 1 Corinthians 13:5; Romans 15:3. 

"GOD REPENTED OF THE EVIL" 

In some minds the query arises, How can God repent 
and change His mind if He knows the end from the beginning? 
The answer is that the word repent has a 
wider meaning than is generally appreciated. Humanity 



uses it only in respect to a change of purpose. But, as 
modern dictionaries show, the word may mean either a 

R5797 : page 333 

change of action or a change of purpose, or both. God's 
purposes do not change. He never repents of them. But 
He does change His conduct. 

Thus Israel, for centuries His favored people, were 
cut off; and God's dealing toward them changed. But 
His purposes never changed. He had foreknown and 
had foretold their rejection of Jesus and His rejection of 
them, and also had foreseen that later on they would be 
regathered to their own land and would be forgiven and 
blessed by Messiah, when He assumed His Messianic 
Office as King of kings and Lord of lords— "The Prince 
of the kings of this earth."— Revelation 1:5. 

The Lord taught the Prophet Jonah a lesson respecting 
his sympathy for a gourd, an inanimate thing, and his 
lack of sympathy for the Ninevites. So it is with many 
preachers and others. They have sympathy for the 
flowers, for the birds, for the lower animals, for children 
and, to some extent, for all mankind under the distresses 
of the present time. Nevertheless, such people sometimes 
become angry at the bare suggestion that God does not 
purpose to roast the Ninevites, the Sodomites, the Amalekites, 
or anybody else to all eternity; and that His 
gracious purposes for the world in general will be manifested 
in giving all an opportunity to attain unto human 
perfection, a world-wide Eden and everlasting life, if 
they will hear and obey the great Messiah, whose Head 
is Jesus and whose members, the elect Church, have been 
in process of preparation throughout this Gospel Age. 

Our Lord declared that the Gospel was to be preached 
no longer to the Jews only, but to all nations. (Luke 24:45-48; 
Acts 1:8.) The preaching was not intended to 
convert all nations, and has not done so. It was intended 
to gather a saintly few from all nations; and this it will 
soon have accomplished.— Acts 15:14-18. 



R5797 : page 333 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
"AS UNORTHODOX AS THE SAVIOR HIMSELF" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

As I years ago had my name struck off the membership 
roll of Christ Church (Anglican), Chatham, Ontario, because 
I no longer believed its teachings and thought it not 
honest to be longer identified with that body, so, now, I 
desire my name to be enrolled as a joyful follower in the 
footsteps of Our Lord Jesus Christ— "in the Lamb's Book 
of Life." 



From the time of severing my old connection up to a few 
months ago I was in darkness. I knew that in the Lord's 
good time and in His own good way all would be well with 
His world; but all of the alleged churches with their God-dishonoring 
and antagonistic doctrines repelled me. A well-known 
preacher of Macleod, Alta., sneeringly suggested that 
I would better start a church of my own so as to have 
one to suit me. I told him I did not think that would be 
necessary, but that if I ever found any body of Christians 
whose belief I could hold in my heart and soul, and not only 
with my lips, I would assuredly apply for membership in 
that body even though they were as "unorthodox" as the 
Savior Himself. And here I am! 

Since receiving a copy of THE WATCH TOWER with 
"Where Are the Dead," etc., in February last, I have read 
five and a half of your six books of SCRIPTURE STUDIES, 
then— with them at hand— I read the Bible through in a 
new and marvelously clearer light for which, after God, I 
thank you. Many of your Bible Students Monthlies also I 
have read— and, as you may imagine, very little else. Beyond 
the merest scanning of the daily paper, I have no time from 
my belated study of God's Word to devote to other reading. 

In this world's goods I am a poor man, but I am richer 
with the glorious knowledge of God's Word that has come 
to me than I ever hoped to be rich. As I told an acquaintance 
recently, I would not if I could trade the knowledge of the 
Truth that I have received in the past few months for all 
the money in the world. And, as the dear man had recently 
buried his wife, I passed on to him "Where Are the Dead?" 

My wife, I regret to say, is not a believer. I would not class 
her as an "unbeliever," but she is stronger for the so-called 
orthodox and accepted faith than for a personal faith based 
upon a personal searching of the Scriptures. The friction, 
however, will undoubtedly work out for the best. Her health 
is poor, and I spend every possible moment at home, but 
studying the Word of Truth. 

Several of the brethren here I know, and though there is 
no doubt that my "godfathers and my godmothers" did their 
best for me in infancy, according to their light, yet I propose 
to arrange to be baptized. 

I trust that you will pardon the unseemly length of this 
letter, which has really grown far beyond my intention, 
beyond your time, but not, I hope, beyond your forbearance. 

Your loving brother in the Lord, ROBT. S. SMYTH. 



"THE LIGHT THAT IS IN THEE" 

Question.— Please explain the statement, "If the light 
that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness!" 

Answer.— Apparently our translators have failed to get 
the Master's thought; hence the bungling statement troubles 
the English reader. Manifestly it is absurd to say that a 
light in a person is darkness. If it is light it cannot be darkness; 
if it is darkness it cannot be light. 



In Volume V., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, we have endeavored 
to give the correct thought without taking time 
for discussion. On page 264 we render it thus: "If the 
light that is in thee become darkness [be extinguished], 
how great is that darkness." Evidently the darkness would 
be greater to the person who had once had the light and 
who had lost it than to the person who had never had it. 

In Volume V., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, page 294, we 
quote the passage, "If the light that is in thee be [become] 
darkness, how great is that darkness." The paraphrasing 
here is still different, but gives exactly the same thought, 
that light was once enjoyed and darkness displaced it. 

A very good translation of the entire passage reads: 
"The lamp of the body is the eye. If your eye is unclouded 
your whole body will be lighted up; but if your eye is diseased 
your whole body will be dark. And if the inner light 
become darkness, how intense must that darkness be!" 

Our Lord was showing the importance of a proper 
spiritual sight, in order to discern Truth clearly. Originally 
man had a clear eye, mental as well as physical. By reason 
of sin his discernment of right and wrong has been more or 
less blurred, and some are totally blind to the deeper and 
spiritual things. As St. Paul says, "The god of this world 
hath blinded the minds of all who believe not." (2 Corinthians 4:4.) 
Again St. Paul prays for the Church, "I pray 
God for you,. ..that the eyes of your understanding opening, 
ye may be able to comprehend what is the hope of His 
calling," etc. (Ephesians 1:15-18.) This is the same thought 
which our Lord sets forth. Whether the darkness is that 
which came by the fall of the natural man or whether it be 
a darkness which comes upon the Christian after having 
been once enlightened— either way— the darkness is the 
greater by reason of whatever light we once enjoyed. 

The Bible uses the figure of the Church as the Body of 
Christ— its members His members. St. Paul suggests that 
the eye, ear, tongue, etc., which belong to the head, are special 
gifts for the Church. Thus the Lord has set in the 
Body the various members. He mentions the eye as one of 
these. A lesson is suggested in connection with the Lord's 
Word that in proportion as the Lord's people at any time 
have clearness of understanding of the Divine Truth it 
would be because the eye members would be blessed of the 
Lord with clearness of vision and opportunity to assist the 
entire Body. 



WHAT IS ADAM'S CONDITION? 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is over twenty-three years since the Lord opened my 
eyes to see the beauties of the great Plan of Salvation, and 
each year of that period has surpassed the preceding one in 
the preciousness of the Truth of God. 

During that time every experience has emphasized the 
fact that our understanding of the Divine purpose is irrefutably 



correct, and I write to tell you of a little conversation 
between one of the Brethren and a gentleman 
who takes a leading part in Sunday School work in his 
neighborhood, which well illustrates the confusion of those 
who follow the creeds of men instead of the Word of God. 
They were discussing the state of the dead, the denominationalist 

R5798 : page 334 

arguing that at the moment of death everyone 
went either to a heaven of bliss or to a hell of torment, 
while our Brother insisted that the Bible taught the dead 
were dead until the time for the awakening at the Second 
Coming of Christ. 

Brother W. said, "Now there was Adam, where do you 
suppose he went at the time of his death?" 

Mr. A. replied, "Adam did not do anything very heinous, 
and even after he was driven out of the Garden of Eden he 
seemed to long for fellowship with God; so I presume he 
went to heaven when he died." 

The Brother said, "But look here, Adam was the one who 
got all the rest of us in trouble by his disobedience. As St. 
Paul says, 'By the disobedience of one, judgment came upon 
all men unto condemnation,' and according to your view 
this means that Adam's sin was the thing which started 
millions of the race on the road which will terminate in an 
eternity of torture; and yet Adam, the one who helped to 
send them there, is to go to heaven." 

Mr. A. said, "That is so, isn't it? I never thought of 
that before. Surely Adam could not go to heaven after 
that. My statement was incorrect; Adam must have gone to 
hell when he died." 

Brother W. said, "But see what that involves you in. 
Adam merely ate some forbidden fruit, and all have done 
as bad things as that. So if God sentenced Adam to such 
an awful eternity for such a little thing, what hope can the 
rest of us have?" 

The gentleman answered this with, "That's so, that's so. 
My first answer was right, Adam surely went to heaven." 

Our Brother replied, "If that is true then it involves you 
in a greater absurdity than before. Had Adam been obedient 
he would have dwelt forever in that perfect Paradise, the 
Garden of Eden, but now he had disobeyed and must die, and 
in consequence of his sin he was to get something far 
better than he ever would have had by obedience." 

Our friend in his confusion tried to correct himself 
again saying, "That couldn't be; that would be inconsistent; 
Adam must have gone to hell— that's the correct thought." 

Again our Brother had his turn: "But see what this 
leads to. Thousands of years ago Adam sinned and died, 
while today men are passing into death who have had far 
more of the spirit of rebellion in their hearts than Adam 
ever had; and yet they will have thousands of years less of 
infernal agony than Adam, who committed such a little sin 
in comparison. Would that be justice?" 

Mr. A. said, "You've got me all confused. I do not know 



where I'm at, and I don't know where Adam's at either." 
How well this brings home to our hearts the fact that 
while the Truth is "clear as crystal," the error is "clear as 
mud" ! I do not like to use an undignified expression like 
the last, but it takes an undignified statement to describe 
an undignified system of doctrine. Thanks be to the Lord 
who has lifted our feet out of the mud and placed them 
upon the Rock! 

With many prayers that the Heavenly Father will continue 
to use you to His glory to the very end of your course, 
I remain, 
In much Christian love, B.H.BARTON. 



page 334 

HOLIDAY REMEMBRANCERS 

A LIST of our stock, suitable for Holiday Gifts, 
we are publishing a little earlier than usual 
this year. This will give those living at a 
distance ample time to forward their orders 
to us and have them filled in good season- 
before the rush and congestion of the mails 
during the weeks immediately preceding 
Christmas. This will be a convenience to us 
as well. Those living near by would also do 
well to send their orders early. 

As New Creatures in Christ Jesus our Gifts should in 
some sense always represent ourselves, and we believe the 
list below will be found to meet this requirement in a 
large degree. The prices are low— covering merely cost. 

"Studies in the Scriptures." India paper edition, fine sealskin 
binding, gold edges, light, small, beautiful, per set, $4.80 
(1L.); in cloth carton, $5 (1L. lOd). 

"Studies in the Scriptures." Morocco, over boards, gold 
edges, but on paper the same as the ordinary cloth edition, 
suitable for book-shelf, $3.60 (15s) for six volumes, postpaid. 

"Studies," Volume I., with Pyramid Chapter added. This 
special edition is very suitable for presentation to uninterested 
friends. Many have had their interest awakened by the reading 
of the Pyramid Chapter. A picture of the Great Pyramid 
is stamped in gilt on front cover. We recommend this 
Volume for gift purposes. Postpaid 50c. (2s Id), but, to 
stimulate its wide circulation, ten copies for $2.50 (10s lOd). 

Scenario of the Photo-Drama of Creation. The ninety-six 
short, pithy lectures of the Creation Drama can be supplied 
in print as follows: 
IN ENGLISH: 

*De Luxe, gold edges, embossed, 400 illustrations 
$1.00 postpaid 

Cloth, burnished edges, embossed, 400 illustrations 
50 " 

*Paper in three booklets, complete; per set 25 " 

A Newspaper edition in 4 Parts FREE 



IN SPANISH, ITALIAN, GREEK, POLISH, ARMENIAN: 

Cloth bound, complete 25 " 

Paper " " 15 " 

Newspaper edition, 3 Parts, 2c ea.; per set 05 " 

IN GERMAN AND FINNISH (glossed paper, embossed, 
like English Ed.): 

De Luxe, gold edge (Finnish only) 1.00 " 

Cloth, red edge (German and Finnish) 50 postpaid 

Paper, 3 Parts (Finnish), per set 25 " 

Paper, complete (German) 25 " 

Newspaper ed. (Finnish), 4 Pts., 2c ea.; per set 05 " 

" " (German— via German mail) 05 " 

IN SWEDISH: Newspaper ed. only, 2c ea.; per set 05 " 

Colporteurs and Class Secretaries may deduct one-half 
from above prices if shipment is ordered charges collect. 

"Poems of Dawn." Nearly three hundred very choice 
poems topically divided, the very thing each should have near 
him for a leisure moment. The value of these as spiritual 
stimulants is inestimable. They can be appreciated by all 
Christians, though of course especially by those possessing a 
knowledge of Present Truth. Postpaid in cloth binding 25c. 
(Is); karatol, red edges, 35c. (Is 6d); leather-bound, gold 
edges, 50c. (2s Id). We have the cloth edition now in stock; 
karatol and leather editions will be ready about Dec. 15th. 

"In the Garden of the Lord." This little booklet is a 
choice poem from the pen of Sister Seibert. It contains sixteen 
colored illustrations, twenty-four pages. Postpaid 6c. 
(3d) each; per dozen 65c. (2s 8d). 

Choice Motto Cards for home embellishment and spiritual 
refreshment: 

Packet Ma— Ten mottoes, small and medium, postpaid 50c. 

Number Mb— Eight medium-sized cards, $1. 

Number Mc— Two large and two medium cards, $1. 

Where $5 worth of these are sent to one address the saving 
in packing and expressage would be 50c, making the price 
$4.50. Order by number only. 

Postcards. Assorted mottoes and designs, 15c. (7-l/2d) 
per dozen; two dozen, 25c. (Is l/2d); 100 for $1. 

Scripture Memorizing Cards. We have two different sets 
of these— No. 1 and No. 2. Colors of the cards indicate the 
topic. For instance, purple represents royalty and the 
Kingdom, garnet represents the redeeming blood, etc. On one 
side of the cards are texts appropriate to the color. On the 
reverse side of the card is the citation of where it is found. 
These can be used personally or with a company of friends. 
The design is to commit the text to memory and its citation. 
Many have found these very useful. Fifty cards to the pack, 
25c. (Is Id) per pack, postpaid. 

Write your letters and correct P.O. address very plainly; 
also give name of nearest express office and company. 

Write your orders on a separate sheet of paper from your 
letter. If answering a letter marked File A, File R, or otherwise, 
refer to it in the opening paragraph of your letter. 

All cheques, drafts, money orders, etc., should be made 
out to WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. There are 



no exceptions to this rule. 
By observing these simple requests, delay will be avoided. 



*On the De Luxe and Paper Editions of the English SCENARIO we 
now offer to all, Class Secretaries or otherwise, two copies for the price 
of one, and ten sets of the paper ed. (30 Parts) for $1 postpaid. Get 
them into the hands of the public. 



page 335 

"I.B.S.A." BIBLES AND OTHER BIBLE STUDY HELPS 

First in this list we mention the several volumes of 

"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" SERIES 

[SEE OVER, ALSO INSIDE FRONT COVER.] 

We commend also, as aids, the following publications (not all our own), 
which we supply at specially low prices because of the assistance they 
lend to the study of God's Word. We mention these somewhat in the 
order in which they seem to us to be desirable aids. 

OUR SPECIAL "I.B.S.A." BIBLE 

Hereafter to distinguish our own special edition from other Bibles, 
we will refer to it as the "I.B.S.A." Bible. This Bible is becoming 
more and more indispensable to all readers as they learn how to use it. 
The translation, of course, is not at all different from that of other Bibles 
of the Common Version. We specially recommend 
it for its smallness of size, lightness of 
weight, and good-sized print, and above all for 
the helps to Bible students and teachers bound 
with it; printed on India paper; excellent 
press work. Its special feature, distinguishing 
this Bible from all others, is 

BIBLE TEACHERS' MANUAL. 
Part I. 

Biblical Comments from Genesis to Revelation 
with references to the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES and others of our publications 
showing the page where the text is more fully 
discussed and elaborated. We can scarcely 
imagine anything more helpful than these for 
Bible study. It is so easy to turn to the 
reference and ascertain if the matter has been 
treated and where and how. It represents 
four hundred and eighty-one pages of matter. 

Part II. 



INSTRUCTORS' GUIDE TEXTS. 

This is a topical arrangement of Bible subjects 
specially convenient for those who have 
opportunity for teaching others the Divine 
Plan of the Ages. Its various Topics are arranged 
under distinct headings and the various 
texts bearing upon the subjects are collated. 
With this help a novice has at his 
command, well-furnished, "the Sword of the 
Spirit." It is in condensed form, very convenient, 
and consists of eighteen pages solid 
matter. 

Part III. 
BEREAN TOPICAL INDEX. 

The Berean Topical Index, alphabetically 
arranged, presents a large variety of subjects 
showing references to the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES and others of our publications 
treating the same. This feature covers 
twenty-eight pages. 

Part IV. 
DIFFICULT TEXTS EXPLAINED. 
SPURIOUS PASSAGES NOTED. 

In this, specially difficult texts are brought 
to the attention and references given showing 
where they are treated in our publications. 
Following this is a full list of various interpolations 
and spurious passages of the Scriptures 
not in the original MSS., as proven by 
the oldest Greek MSS.— fifteen pages. 

These four features, representing five hundred 
and forty-two pages, are not to be found 
in any other Bibles on earth and, in our 
opinion, they are of almost priceless value. 
One of our interested readers if he could not 
procure another would not sell his copy for 
a hundred dollars— many of them surely 
would not take thousands for it. 

All of our "I.B.S.A." Bibles contain the 
above, and some of them, the numbers of which end with a nine, contain 
additionally Bagster's Bible Study Helps, including an alphabetical index 
of proper names and Bagster's Bible Concordance and Maps— a total of 
one hundred and eighty-six pages. 

We not only supply these Bibles at cost price, but, because of the 
large quantities ordered at a time, we are enabled to secure a cost price 
which is really phenomenal. The very low prices must not lead you to 
think that these are manufactured in any slipshod manner. They are 
first class in every particular. The prices are, many of them, less than 
one-half of what you pay for such books almost anywhere else. 

So great is the demand for these "I.B.S.A." Bibles that hereafter 
we purpose carrying no others in stock except pocket Bibles and large 



type Bibles for the aged. We will still, however, be pleased to serve anyone 
who desires other Bibles. We can procure for these wholesale rates, 
usually twenty-five per cent, off, plus postage. 

DESCRIPTION AND PRICES-"I.B.S.A." BIBLES 

1918, price $1.65, postage prepaid, is a beautiful book. It is small and 
light. Size 4-3/4 x 6-3/4 inches. It has minion type, red under gold edges, 
divinity circuit, French Seal. Looks like the genuine sealskin, but it is 
in reality good sheepskin. 

Number 1919, price $1.75, postage prepaid; the same book, the same 
Bible; the same every way, except the addition of Bagster Helps, Concordance, 
etc., making this size a trifle larger. 

No. 1928, price $2.65, postage prepaid. This is the same book exactly 
as No. 1918, except that it has genuine morocco binding; leather-lined. 

LITTLE LARGER, IONIC TYPE, SELF-PRONOUNCING 

Number 1939, price $1.95, postage prepaid. This is the same book as 
1919, the same binding and contents, but it has a coarser print and is a little 
larger book. Size 5-1/2 x 7-1/2 inches. 

Number 1959, price $3.65, postage prepaid. This is the same book as 
1939, except that it has splendid morocco binding, is calf-lined and silk-sewed. 
Bibles similar in quality and finish are listed in many catalogues 
at $8. 

The sale of these books is not restricted to WATCH TOWER readers. 
They are valuable aids in Bible study and open to the public. 

BIBLE STUDY HELPS (BOUND SEPARATE). 

These are the same as in the latest "I.B.S.A." Bibles, described 
above. Full leather, divinity circuit, $1.00; Karatol, red edge, 50c, 
postpaid. Also in German (leather), $1.00; (cloth), 50c. 

Remit with order. We can secure such prices only by paying spot 
cash and must sell on the same terms. Insurance, 5c. additional. 

Anyone ordering patent index on any of these Bibles should so state 
and should add twenty-five cents to the price. 

Should any desire other Bibles we will be pleased to 
supply publishers' catalogue, giving full description and 
prices. We are usually able to secure a discount of 25 
per cent, on the publishers' list prices. 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 
FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH 

The demand for this publication increases year by year. 

Our present edition of the "Manna" contains the same texts and comments 
as all former editions. Every alternate leaf is blank -ruled for use 
as an autograph and birthday record. Its value increases as additional 
autographs of friends are secured. It is printed on fine bond paper. 

The following wholesale rates postpaid are granted to all WATCH 
TOWER subscribers: 

Purple cloth, gold embossed, gilt edges $0.35 

Dark blue cloth, silver embossed, German 35 

Leatherette, blue edges, Swedish and Norwegian 35 

Leatherette, gold edges, Swedish and Norwegian 65 



Genuine Morocco, gold edges, English and Norwegian 1.10 

We hope this little book will find a place at every breakfast table; 
that spiritual refreshment may thus be enjoyed with the natural food. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

This Greek New Testament, with interlinear, word-for-word rendering, 
and a free-reading emphasized translation alongside, based upon the 
famous Vatican Manuscript, No. 1209, is a very valuable work. Originally 
published under the author's copyright by Fowler & Wells Co., New 
York City, it was sold by them at $4 in cloth and $5 in half-leather binding. 
For several years a friend, an earnest Bible student, desirous of 
assisting the readers of our Society's publications, has supplied them 
through us at a greatly reduced price; now he has purchased the copyright 
and plates from the Fowler & Wells Co., and presented the same 
to our Society as a gift that the poor of the Lord's flock may have this 
help in the study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICE.— Hereafter we will have the Diaglott in leather binding 
only, divinity circuit, Bible paper, and have reduced the price to $2.00 
(8s. 5d.), postpaid. We offer THE WATCH TOWER for a year as a 
premium, with each order for the Diaglott, if it is a new subscription. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT 

This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. As footnotes 
it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek MSS., Sinaiticus, 
Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these differ from the Common Version. 
This is a very valuable little work, published in Europe, which we 
specially import. Price, 50c, including postage. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading Hebrews, by 
one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is a valuable aid in 
critical study of the Old Testament. Our special price, in leather binding, 
including postage, is $1.10. 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 1240 
pages. A valuable work for all critical students. We are not permitted 
by the publishers to cut their price, but we may and do give in addition, 
postage free, any four volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, cloth binding 
with each Concordance, or six volumes if purchaser pays expressage. 
Postpaid, cloth binding, $6. 

EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 1800 
pages. This is also an able work and useful in critical study. It has 
some advantages over Young's; after getting used to it we prefer it. 
Special reduced prices in cloth binding, $3.96; half leather, $5.96 postpaid. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who have either of 



the above. English only. Cloth binding, 760 pages, $1, delivered. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's work. It 
is a large volume of 1,020 pages. Cloth binding, $1.30, including postage. 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE" 

Next to the Creation SCENARIO, this is the best book of its kind we 
have ever seen. It presents the Bible stories in simple, but not childish 
language, and seems remarkably free from the bad theology so common in 
this class of books. All Christian parents should have a Sunday Bible 
lesson with their children, and this book furnishes interesting topics, to 
which may be added as much concordant "Present Truth," as the age of 
the children will justify. Some parents obtain still better results by 
using the Drama SCENARIO, however. Parents are responsible for their 
children's training in theology as well as in morals. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and corners, gilt 
edges. Our special price, $1, postpaid. 

MISCELLANEOUS 

Hymns of Dawn, with music (cloth) $0.35 

Hymns of Dawn, without music (flexible) 06 

CHARTS (Blue Prints, soft cloth): 

Plan of the Ages, 5 ft., $1; 8 ft 1.50 

Chronology of the Bible, 8 ft 1.50 

Tabernacle of the Wilderness, 8 ft 1.50 

BINDERS for THE WATCH TOWER: Spring Back (holds 1 year) 50 

CROSS AND CROWN PINS (Gold, with Red Enamel): 

5/8"-No. 1 Ladies' Style, No. 2 Gents', each 1.15 

l/2"-No. 3 Gents' Style, No. 4 Ladies', each 1.00 

5/8"— Celluloid, per dozen, 25c; each 03 

Missionary Envelopes, per hundred, 25c; per M 2.00 

Vow Bookmarks (paper), 25c per 100; (silk) each 05 

"Dove" Poem and Vow Bookmarks (celluloid), 5c; per dozen 50 

Celluloid "Cross" Bookmarks, 2 for 05 

Booklets (on Hell, Spiritism, Evolution, Tabernacle Shadows, Our 
Lord's Return), also Berean Question Booklets on each volume of 

SCRIPTURE STUDIES each 5c; per dozen 50 

Report on Foreign Missions, each 05 

Judge Rutherford's Defense of Pastor Russell (illus.), 10c; 25 for 2.00 
Tracts in all languages FREE 



page 352 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 

page 337 



VOL. XXXVI NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

The Editor's November Itinerary 338 

Views From The Watch Tower 339 

The Sin of the Church 339 

Marching to Universal Slaughter-House 339 

The Secret Place (Poem) 340 

Why God Has Permitted Satan's Lying 
Deceptions 341 

Fallen Spirits Especially Active Today 342 

Delusions of Christian Science, Etc 342 

All But "Very Elect" to Be Deceived 343 

The Ministry of Sorrow 344 

Depths of Sorrow— Heights of Joy 344 

"This Honor Have All His Saints" 346 

Amos the Fearless Prophet 347 

Giants in the Earth Forebode Evil 349 

"Pride Goeth Before Destruction" 349 

Interesting Letters 351 

"Light Afflictions-But for a Moment" 351 

Blazed a Track Through Bad Theology 35 1 

Canada Red Cross Contributions 351 

page 338 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



NOVEMBER ITINERARY 

Pastor Russell has arranged to visit the following Classes 
and to give Public addresses at the places and times named. 
Additionally he expects to address the Bible Students at each 
place less publicly. In many of the places arrangements have 
been made for two and three-day conventions: 

Montreal, Que., Nov. 21. 

3:00 P.M., His Majesty's Theatre, Guy St. 
Watertown, N.Y., Nov. 22 

8:00 P.M., City Opera House, Arsenal St. 
Orillia, Ont., Nov. 24. 

7:30 P.M., Orillia Auditorium. 
Gait, Ont., Nov. 25. 

7:30 P.M., Scott's Opera House. 
Port Huron, Mich., Nov. 26. 

7:30 P.M., Masonic Temple. 
Pontiac, Mich., Nov. 27. 

7:30 P.M., The Armory. 
Grand Rapids, Mich., Nov. 28. 

3:00 P.M., Powers' Theatre, Pearl St., N.W. 
Jackson, Mich., Nov. 28. 

8:00 P.M., Masonic Temple, Cortland St. 
Jamestown, N.Y., Nov. 29. 

7:30 P.M., Samuels' Opera House, E. Second St. 

Commencing with the next issue Brother Russell's appointments 
will be shown on the last page of THE WATCH TOWER. 



"POEMS OF DAWN" 

In our issue of Nov. 1, page 334, re new "Poems of 
Dawn," we neglected to mention that it has both an alphabetical 
index and a topical index. This is a feature which, 
we understand, some of the friends missed in our former 
edition. 

The prices quoted are very low, permitting the books to 
be freely used as Christmas tokens. We can imagine very 
few Christmas gifts more appropriate. The book contains 
beautiful poetry suited to nearly every condition of the 



Christian's life. 



SPECIAL PUBLIC PILGRIM MEETINGS 

We are well aware that the Bible Students' classes do 
not represent a large amount of wealth, and hence, that their 
means for advancing the Truth are to that extent circumscribed. 
Nothing below is intended to urge any class to do 
more than its judgment and opportunities will reasonably 
permit it to do. 

The success of the one-day conventions in conjunction 
with the public address by the Editor of THE WATCH TOWER 
leads us to the thought that possibly similarly good results 
might be obtained in conjunction with public lectures by 
others of the Pilgrim brethren. We had in mind, therefore, 
selecting from the Pilgrim staff several brethren of special 
ability for interesting the public, and employing these for 
special meetings at places where the friends desire and can 
provide for public meetings. 

Only first-class auditoriums of good reputation should be 
thought of. Rinks, casinos and coliseums are generally unsatisfactory. 
They do well enough for political gatherings 
and other public functions where it is not necessary for every 
word to be heard; but for the presentation of the Truth, 
opera houses, theatres, etc., are usually much to be preferred. 
Large audiences and good houses are obtainable any night in 
the week if intelligently sought. 

Whenever the class has a good auditorium, not higher up 
than the second floor, the follow-up meeting should be held 
on the following Sunday by one of the local brethren, if 
competent. The topic for that meeting might well be "The 
Second Coming of Christ— How? When? Why?" 

Classes desiring such special public services will please 
notify THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, Care 
Pilgrim Department. 



I. B. S. A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 

Questions from Manual on Series Third of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY II. 

Week of December 5..Q. 21 to 27 Week of December 19. .Q. 35 to 42 
Week of December 12. .Q. 28 to 34 Week of December 26. .Q. 43 to 50 

Question Manuals on Vol. III., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each; 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



R5798 : page 339 



VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

THE SIN OF THE CHURCH 

BY RT. REV. CHARLES D. WILLIAMS 
(PROTESTANT EPISCOPAL BISHOP OF MICHIGAN.) 

IT IS an appalling thought that the Church 
should have had a part in the crime of Calvary, 
and yet it did, and that the chief part. 
It is really the villain of the plot. 

What was the sin of the Church that 
crucified Christ? Or, to put it another way, 
what are the characteristics of a perverted 
religion? They are chiefly two: 

1 . The ecclesiastical mind. 

2. The ecclesiastical conscience. 

The ecclesiastical mind is a closed mind— and there is 
nothing it resents so much as being pried open to receive 
a new idea. Its settled rule of judgment, its accepted test 
of truth, is "What is new is never true and what is true 
is never new." Philip Gilbert Hammerton has aptly compared 
the conventional process of religious instruction 
and training to the process of etching on glass. The 
mind of the pupil is first covered with an impervious coat 
of pious prejudice. The pattern of the desired creed is 
then carefully traced with the stylus of authority; and 
then only is the mind exposed to the sand-blast of reality 
and the acid test of experience, which cut along the exposed 
lines only and the desired creed is indelibly engraved 
upon the mind. 

The other characteristic of a perverted religion is the 
ecclesiastical conscience. It is strikingly illustrated by 
one Good Friday scene. A procession is sweeping through 
the streets of Jerusalem, bound for the Governor's 
Palace. Who compose this procession? They are the 
religious leaders of the people, the prominent divines, the 
chief ecclesiastics, the dignitaries and prelates of the 
Church, and the Sanhedrin, the chief religious legislative 
body of the nation. It is as if you rolled into one the 
Presbyterian General Assembly, the Methodist General 
Conference, the Episcopal General Convention, the 
Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and the House of Lords, with 
the whole Bench of Bishops. 

What is the business they have in mind? They are 
intent on committing the greatest crime in history— a 
crime at which the whole world has shuddered ever since. 
They would crucify the Son of God. But at Pilate's 
threshold they stop. Why? Ah, they have stumbled 
across a statute with a penalty, a canon of the Church 
with a sanction. And these people have great respect 
for penalties and sanctions, if they have little for truth 
and righteousness. If they should enter a heathen house 
that Passover morning, they would become ceremonially 
defiled and unfit to partake of the sacrament. They 
would lose their reputation for strict churchmanship. 



They are indefinitely scrupulous and utterly unprincipled, 
entirely sincere and yet completely untruthful and unrighteous, 
pious and perverted. 

The "ecclesiastical conscience" holds the precept so 
near the eye that it hides the principle; it substitutes petty, 
thumb-nail rules for the fundamental law of righteousness. 
It makes religiousness a substitute for righteousness 
instead of a means thereto. It puts technical priests 
and properties in the place of character. It makes churchmanship 
do for religion and "churchianity" for "Christianity." 

And the ecclesiastical conscience is not confined to the 
Church. The lawyer who makes a legality his test instead 
of justice; the merchant who is satisfied simply to conform 
to the code of his trade, whose excuse for any dishonesty 
is, "They all do it"; the "gentleman" or "lady" 
who puts good form and manners in the place of sincerity 
and kindliness of heart, and politeness in place of courtesy 
—all are alike animated by the ecclesiastical conscience. 

It was this ecclesiastical mind and this ecclesiastical 
conscience which crucified Jesus Christ. 



MARCHING TO UNIVERSAL SLAUGHTER-HOUSE 

Again we quote for the benefit of our readers, truthful 
words from an editorial of the New York American, 
as follows: 

"We are living today in a time more trying to the 
souls of men than any period of the world's history. 
We are witnessing, in the war which involves every 
continent of the earth in the direct conflict of arms, a 
visitation of horror and destruction greater than the 
human race has ever suffered before. From North 
America, South America, Europe, Asia, Africa, Australasia, 
from every corner of the earth and every clime, human 
beings are marching to the universal slaughter-house. 

"In one year of this fearful struggle billions of property 
has been destroyed, and the bloody combatants 
already claim to have murdered or maimed more than 
four million human beings. This is all in one year, and 
no decision is yet in sight. Neither side has yet won a 
decisive advantage. 

"The military experts believe that the war has only 
just begun. Lord Kitchener, head of the British forces, 
declared, even before the Russian defeats, that it would 

R5798 : page 340 

take three years to reduce the Teutonic allies and the 
Turks, while the disinterested military experts are doubtful 
if the Central Empires can ever be conquered. 

"The French, the British, the Russians and the 
Italians are waiting until their factories, and our own 
American factories, can equip their armies with guns 
and ammunition which they need in order to bring to 



bear their greatest power for destruction. If four million 
men have gone in one year in which the side that is 
stronger in numbers has not yet brought its full strength 
to bear, what will be the wastage in human life if they 
fight it out to a finish? 
"We Americans are neutral. But are we not interested? 

R5799 : page 340 

Are we not involved in this fearful struggle? 
Are we not involved in it as a part of the human family, 
as members of the white race, as participants in the 
Western civilization, all of which are threatened by a 
prolongation of this dreadful carnage? 

"If this war is fought out to a finish, shall we not 
suffer morally and materially, whichever side wins? If 
the allies are the conquerors and the German people are 
overwhelmingly beaten and broken, shall we not, as part 
of the world, suffer an irretrievable loss? Germany's 
wonderful contributions to the world of science and 
industry and commerce are known to all business men. 
But, great as they are, her contributions to governmental 
efficiency, to the ability of society acting as a social unit 
to perform wonders for the benefit of her people beyond 
even the dreams of individuals, have scarcely yet been 
recognized. She is making a contribution to socialistic 
experiments greater than was ever known to any people 
before. Her national Government owns its railroads, its 
telephone and telegraph companies. Her great cities 
own their waterworks, their gas and electric light companies 
and their street railways. They build wharves 
and docks and they plant forests and they develop land, 
not by individual initiative, but as a governmental function. 
They, first among the nations, began to free their 
workingmen from industrial slavery by old age pensions, 
workingmen's compensation laws and rigid safety appliance 
laws and inspections. They first devised the means 
of freeing the farmers from financial peonage by rural 
credits through which the farmer could borrow money 
from the State to improve his farm. They are showing 
the world what the people in their organized capacity can 
do and how prosperous they can make themselves, even 
though crowded within the confines of a not too favorable 
territory. We Americans are every day copying something 
from the German socialistic experiments. Can we 
see them crushed without immeasurable loss to ourselves? 

"If, on the other hand, the Allies should be crushed, 
it would involve the destruction of France and of a historically 
great people whose contribution to human liberty 
and to the economic freedom of the world John Stuart 
Mill, the distinguished political economist, has declared 
greater than that of any other, even including our own. 

"Would it benefit the world to see the spirit of England 
broken and her commercial and industrial efficiency impaired 
and her purchasing power destroyed? There 
never was a time in the last twenty-five years when, if 



England could no longer buy from us, we would not have 
faced a financial crisis. We do not forget the great enterprises 
and the great industrial developments in America 
which English capital has financed. We cannot 
forget that most of the elementary principles of liberty 
which we call our own had their birth and first development 
in Great Britain." 



When, after reading the above editorial, we call to 
mind that the Lord in the Bible has foretold the direst 
things foreboded in the editorial, and much more— even 
to anarchy and the entire destruction of the present order 
of things— we might well weep. God has kindly veiled 
the eyes of humanity that they do not see the coming 
storm in all its dread severity; because they have no eyes 
of faith to see the resulting blessings as we see them. 

How glad we are to know that ours is a God of love 
—to know that the millions that are dying in frenzied 
strife are not going to eternal torture, but in due time 
they shall share in the general blessings of the world 
which Messiah's Kingdom will accomplish. Can we wonder 
then that our Master left the message, "When ye see 
these things begin to come to pass, then lift up your heads 
and rejoice; knowing that your deliverance draweth 
nigh"?-Luke 21:28. 

If the deliverance of the Church meant eternal suffering 
to the non-elect, how could we rejoice in it? But 
as our eyes of understanding are opening, we see with 
astonished wonder the lengths and the breadths, the 
heights and the depths of the great Creator's love and 
mercy. We perceive that the glorification of the Church 
means the blessing of all then alive by the inauguration 
of the reign of righteousness and peace, and by the 
breaking of the shackles of sin and ignorance, and by 
the binding of Satan for a thousand years. And oh, so 
much more, the release of the thousands of millions of 
heathens who, for the past six thousand years, have been 
going down into the great prison-house of death— the 
Bible hell— the tomb! With this rosy view of the future, 
which the Bible so surely gives, darkness and clouds, 
sorrows and tears for the immediate present cannot 
daunt us. Our souls do magnify the Lord! We sing 
daily, hourly, the new song, "True and righteous are Thy 
judgments, O Lord God Almighty! Who shall not come 
and worship before Thee, when all Thy righteous dealings 
shall be made manifest?"— Revelation 15:3,4; 16:7. 



THE SECRET PLACE 

Wondrous the thought— that the Father 

Knows of our every care; 
Feels for us when the shadow 



Lurks where the sky was fair: 
Knows of the pent-up sorrow, 

Feels for the eyes that weep; 
Tells of a brighter Morrow 

Where shadows never creep ! 

Precious to know the Good Shepherd 

Tenderly guides His sheep 
Over the stony places; 

Cares when the path is steep: 
Watches for greenest pastures, 

Tends them with loving skill; 
Guards them from fright and danger, 

Leads them by Waters still! 

Joyous the thought— that the angels, 

Guardians are, to keep; 
Bearing in hands so tender 

Weary and wounded Feet 
Daily are gaining access 

To the dear Father's face; 
Hourly are seeking succor 

For those who crave His grace! 

Blessed to feel we are dwelling 

Safe in the Secret Place; 
Under Jehovah's shadow, 

Trusting till we can trace: 
Knowing no ill can harm us, 

Knowing His Arm of Love 
Safely will shield, till He calls us 

Unto His Home above! 

-MARY CLEVELAND JEWELL. 



R5799 : page 341 

WHY GOD HAS PERMITTED SATAN'S LYING DECEPTIONS 

"The Lord your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the 
Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul." 
—Deuteronomy 13:3. 

GOD'S children realize that this text is to them 

full of deep significance and import. It 

can scarcely be considered too often or be 

too strongly emphasized. The word prove 

has the sense of test, demonstrate. The 

words were addressed to Israel, God's 

chosen people who had entered into a special 

Covenant with Him, agreeing to be 

His people, set apart from the heathen 

nations by whom they were surrounded, to 

be a holy nation, Jehovah's peculiar treasure; and He had 

agreed to be their God. As they had promised to obey 



all God's requirements, so it was proper that the Lord 
should prove them. He did not prove the heathen nations; 
for they had made no covenant with Him and were not in 
relationship to Him as His servants. But Israel must be 
proved. The character of their testing is shown in the 
context. This proving would be accomplished by permitting 
false teachers, false prophets, to be amongst them. 

We are to remember that the word prophet, in its 
broadest signification, means one who teaches, as well as 
one who foretells. The Lord permitted some to be among 
the Israelites who would declare things designed to mislead 
them into the worship of other gods. This would 
not be because God could not have stricken down the 
false teachers, but it was permitted as a test to the people 
who professed to be consecrated to the service of the 
true God, Jehovah. These false prophets were able to 
give signs or demonstrations to convince of their miraculous 
power. But Israel was warned of God to give heed 
to no prophet whose teachings and works would tend to 
lead them away from Jehovah and His service. Such 
signs and wonders are still frequent accompaniments of 
the heathen religions, which are inspired by Satan and 
his demon hosts. 

Since all that happened to fleshly Israel was for our 

R5800 : page 341 

admonition (1 Corinthians 10:11), our text has a very 
forceful application to Spiritual Israel. "The Prince of 
demons" and his hosts of fallen spirits have great wonder-working 
powers, as well as considerable ability to foretell 
future events, sometimes with marvelous accuracy. The 
fallen angels possess much knowledge of earthly affairs, 
with power to read the mind as well. This has been true 
throughout the past. 

One of the tests that spirit-mediums formerly used 
was to tell of the death of some one before it had become 
known. They would tell, for instance, of the death of 
some notable. They might declare, "The king of Sweden 
died today." There would be no means of verifying this 
information until some ship would come over; for in 
those days, before the invention of the telegraph and 
cable, news traveled very slowly. But in a month or two 
the news would come, and it would prove to be true as 
foretold by the medium. It would sometimes be found 
that he had died at the very hour that the medium had 
declared. Mediums can do less along this line today because 
of modern inventions for the rapid transmission of 
news throughout the world; but they have many other 
means of ascertaining facts and communicating them. 

GOD'S WORD HIS PEOPLE'S GUIDE 

We are not informed regarding the power used by the 
fallen angels in their miracle working and cures, but we 
know that it is not from God. It is for the Lord's children 



to remember that He has given us His Word, and 

that He reveals Himself through this Word. It is sufficient 

that He warns us against having anything to do with 

these occult powers. Examples of such warnings are 

found in the following Scriptures: Leviticus 19:31; 

20:6,27; Deuteronomy 18:10-12; 2 Kings 17:17; 23:24; 

1 Chronicles 10:13; 2 Chronicles 33:6; Isaiah 8:19; Jeremiah 27:9,10; 

29:8,9; Luke 8:26-35; Acts 16:16-18. 

We are to search the Scriptures and thus to learn 
about God and His great Plan, and we are not to permit 
any of these false prophets to lead us away from Him or 
to have any influence over us. The Lord permits this 
evil influence to be in the world. Why? Because He is 
now selecting the Bride for His Son, and He wishes the 
members of this class to be tested. Only by permitting 
false teachers could He demonstrate to Himself and to 
the angels to what extent His professed people are loyal 
to Him, and whether they will follow false doctrines and 
false teachers. The Lord will have only those to be of 
the Very Elect who will obey Him and will trust Him 
even where they cannot trace Him; so long as they have 
His Word, His Testimony, it should be sufficient. 

The tendency of all these false teachers is to lead 
away from the one true God to the worship of demons. 
There are a great many gods, even in America. When a 
Brahmin comes to this country to live, he just as truly 
worships Brahma here as in India. Theosophists also 
make their images or idols to take the place of the true 
God. Because of greater civilization the false gods are 
not always of clay or bronze or wood. But today the 
idol images are often made with printer's ink. The gods 
that the heathen of civilized countries worship are very 
different from the God of the Bible. 

There are very many today in civilized countries who 
do not worship the true God. Some have an abstract idea 
of a principle of right, and this principle is their god. 
They have also an idea of a principle of evil or wrong, 
and this evil principle is to them the Devil, and is the 
only devil they recognize. These people are seeking to 
do right, but they are deluded. 

There are more and more of these false gods coming 
up in these days. There is the New Thought god. We 
believe that these new, unscriptural theories and ideas 
are from the demons, who are gaining greater power to 
deceive at this time. We do not know that the false teachings 
of the past were recognized as false by those teaching 
them— their promoters were probably not aware that they 
were false teachers. And so it is today. The teachers of 
false doctrines, the leaders of all these cults, ancient and 
modern, which deny or make void the Scriptures, are deceived. 
The evil spirits are responsible for much of the 
confusion and difficulty in which the world is today. 

The Apostle Paul, in referring to the close of this 
Gospel Age, declares that false doctrines will be multiplied. 
He tells us why many will be misled and deceived. 
He says, "They received not the love of the Truth, that 



they might be saved. And for this cause God shall send 
them strong delusion, that they should believe the lie 
[Genesis 3:4]: that they all might be condemned who 
believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. 
(2 Thessalonians 2:10-12.) The intimation here 
seems to be that those who have come into touch with 
God and with His Truth will be so attracted by the Truth 
that it will be like the needle attracted to the pole. God 
is the great Pole. Those really drawn to Him will be 
difficult to swerve. Although a magnetic needle may be 
temporarily diverted from the pole, yet it will surely 
swing back and point in the right direction. And so it 

R5800 : page 342 

is with God's true people. They have an affinity for the 
Truth, they are influenced by it, magnetized by it, drawn. 

These receive the Truth in the love of it— not in the 
love of building up a denomination, not in the love of 
soliciting money for a denomination, not in the love of 
certain ideas of their own, but in the love of the Truth 
itself. The Lord will not permit those who receive the 
Truth in the love of it to be turned aside. But He will 
send strong delusions to those who receive it from any 
other motive or for any other reason. These strong 
delusions He will permit to be spread abroad because He 
purposes to demonstrate the real heart attitude of each 
of those who have named His name and taken His vows 
upon them. Thus the loyal-hearted ones will be made 
manifest, and of them He declares, "They shall be Mine, 
...in that Day when I make up My jewels."— Mai. 3:17. 

FALLEN SPIRITS ESPECIALLY ACTIVE TODAY 

The fallen spirits have been very successful throughout 
the entire world in deluding and ensnaring humanity. 
The Lord advises His people that these spirits will be 
especially active and especially seductive in their methods 
of attack in the Harvest of this present Age. "Now the 
Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some 
shall depart from the faith, [through] giving heed to 
seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils; speaking lies in 
hypocrisy." (1 Timothy 4:1,2.) We are forewarned that 
this "hypocrisy" on the part of the seducing spirits consists 
of personating "angels of light" (2 Corinthians 11:13,14), 
and pretending to bring in "new light." 

Amongst barbarians there is no reason why the spirits 
should try to bring new light; for these are asleep and 
already under the power of delusion and false doctrines. 
But amongst the enlightened and civilized, thought and 
investigation are being aroused in this the beginning of 
the great Day of the Lord. Despite the blinding influences 
of Satan and the hosts of fallen spirits many of 
these are awakening, and it is here that Satan is kept busy. 

Amongst mankind today the old time necromancy and 
incantations will not do; their intellects are too alert to 



be much or long hoodwinked by these things. Even the 
deceptions of Spiritism in its manifestations of superhuman 
powers through tipping, writing, spirit-photography, 
voices, etc., all for the purpose of proving human 
immortality and the ability of the dead to commune with 
those on earth, are too gross and foolish to deceive and 
captivate a large proportion of intelligent people, and 
especially God's consecrated ones, the very class Satan is 
most anxious to stumble. Consequently there are changes 
in progress— new "garments of light" are assumed continually; 
and every feature of Present Truth sent by God 
as "meat in due season" for His saints is promptly 
counterfeited to "deceive if possible the Very Elect." 

But it is not possible to deceive and lead away those 
whose faith in God, through Christ, is fixed, who are 
trusting in the merit of Christ's great redeeming sacrifice, 
and whose hearts are wholly consecrated to the Lord 
and His service. Such shall "never fall"; but all others 
are to be separated from the faithful. God so uses 
Satan's wrath in the outworking of His plans that He 
may be said to send the strong delusions which are now 
misleading all whose faith is not securely founded on the 
Rock Christ Jesus, who have not put on the "whole armor 
of God," supplied in His Word. Those who are attracted 
by error and take pleasure in it are thus being manifested, 
and their condemnation as unfit for a share in the 
Heavenly Kingdom will be demonstrated as just and 
holy and righteous altogether. 

DELUSIONS OF CHRISTIAN SCIENCE AND THEOSOPHY 

Among the popular and more refined devices of the 
great Adversary, and all the powers of darkness, are 
Christian Science and Theosophy. These on the outside, 
together with the evolutionary and anti-Biblical theories 
on the inside, called Higher Criticism, advanced thought, 
etc., are rapidly tearing to shreds all of Truth that the 
poor nominal systems ever had. These theories all bear 
the distinctive marks of the "father of lies." (John 8:44.) 
They all with one consent declare man to be immortal. 
Higher Critics regard as "old wives' fables" much of the 
Word of God, including the record of miracles, the story 
of Adam and Eve and their fall in Eden, the story of 
Jonah and the great fish, etc. 

The name "Christian Science" is a misnomer for the 
tenets of Mrs. Mary Baker Eddy. Her teachings are 
devoid of scientific elements, and the word "Christian" 
attached as part of the name given her theories is only 
calculated by Satan to deceive and destroy God's people. 
To Christian Scientists Christ is not a Savior, nor was a 

R5801 : page 342 

Savior needed. Christ was only a good man, a Christian 
Scientist, who but imperfectly understood the new science 
which He introduced, but which in these latter times has 



been perfectly and fully set forth by the late Mrs. Eddy, 
of Boston. It has for its trademark, so to speak, "All is 
life; there is no death!" Thus they declare Satan's old 
falsehood started in Eden, "Ye shall not surely die." 
Jesus declared that Satan "was a liar from the beginning 
and abode not in the truth," not from his own beginning, 
but from man's beginning. 

The various shades of Universalism unite in the same 
conclusion— Christ did not die to ransom man from the 
power of the grave, as the Scriptures declare. He was 
only a man like other men, a good and wise Teacher, but 
not a Savior in any substitutionary sense, they assert. 
Some hold that man evolved from an ape or a tadpole or 
from protoplasm; that he was a very bad likeness and 
not at all an image of God; that he was like a "half-baked 
cake." But all unite in the belief that mankind are 
being gradually evolved to perfection. All assure us in 
Satan's very language, "Ye shall not surely die!"— death 
is only a process of evolution; man is his own savior. 

Then we have Theosophy— a theory appealing to a 
goodly number of the cultured and aesthetic who are of 
the blind, naked and hungry in the nominal churches. 
(Rev. 3:17.) It comes forward as one of the newest and 
most polished forms of religious thought. But those 
versed in ancient history know that in its very essence 
it is a revival of the central thought of Hindooism, and in 
many particulars of the delusions of the so-called "German 
Mystics" of medieval times. Theosophy holds that "all 
things are of God" in the absolute and ridiculous sense. 
It holds that all finite existences were effluxed or thrown 
off from one Infinite Being; that these effluxed beings- 
angels, men, beasts, birds and devils— being portions of 
Deity, are immortal, and (as Satan has always taught) 
"shall not surely die." 

In harmony with the philosophy of Socrates and Plato 
(while denying these as the authors or even the burnishers 
of their doctrine, and claiming that these Greek 
philosophers got their information, as they now get it, 
direct from God by communion and intuition), Theosophy 
claims not only that man will live forever future, but 
that he has lived forever past. It appeals to the weak-minded 
with the question, "Have you never seen places 
that seemed strangely familiar the first time you visited 
them? Those were places you had seen before your 
present existence began." And, as of old, Satan may 

R5801 : page 343 

sometimes assist a sluggish imagination with a dream. 
Theosophy holds that death is not death, but a new birth; 
and that each individual will be reborn again and again 
until he has developed sufficiently the Divine nature; and 
that then he will be reabsorbed into God for eternity. 

MAN'S WISDOM IS FOOLISHNESS WITH GOD 



Theosophy professes to be based upon neither theology 
nor philosophy. The word Theosophy is defined by its 
advocates to mean the Religion of Wisdom. They claim 
that its wisdom is Divine, resulting from direct intuition 
and communion with God. Consequently they reject 
philosophical reasoning, and revelation such as the Scriptures, 
as hindrances to true wisdom. They have substituted 
for the Revelation of God the vain imaginings of 
their own imperfect minds— holy meditations. "Professing 
themselves to be wise, they became fools," was written by 
Divine authority of a similar class.— Romans 1:21,22. 

Theosophy rejects all revealed religion, ignores all 
doctrines and claims to be the religion of cause and effect 
—that sooner or later wrong-doing will react upon the 
wrong-doer, bringing its penalty; and right-doing will 
bring its reward. It places Christ and Moses on a parity 
with Socrates, Plato, Confucius and Mohammed as world-teachers. 
It is ready to quote from the Bible or from the 
Koran any fragment that can be turned to account in its 
own support, but does not regard any book or man as 
especially inspired authority. It professes to be the 
patron of every noble trait and every benevolent design, 
and is willing to class as Theosophists all popular people. 
It favors alms-giving and good deeds, so done as to be 
seen of men. 

Therefore Theosophy is, as it claims to be, preeminently 
suited to the sentiments of the majority of the wise 
children of this world, who do not appreciate either their 
own imperfection or God's mercy in Christ. They say, 
"I want no one to pay my debts for me. I expect to pay 
for myself the penalty of my sins— if I commit any." All 
holding such sentiments are ripe for Theosophy. Indeed, 
the entire "Christian world" is ready to leave its former 
confused creed-mooring, and to set sail, with Theosophy 
for pilot and good works for motive power, to reach a 
haven of rest and happiness— if there be such a haven; 
for many of them doubt it. Alas! how ignorance of 
God's Word and Plan and how the confusion of the 
nominal churches have paved the way for this great falling 
away from the cross of Christ to "another gospel," 
which is really no Gospel.— Galatians 1:6-9. 

Of course none of these delusions has any use for the 
doctrine of the cross of Christ— the "Ransom for all"— 
or its testimony "in due time," now or hereafter. See 
1 Timothy 2:4-6. The Apostle here declares that God 
our Savior "will have all men to be saved [from the 
Adamic death now holding sway over the whole world], 
and to come to the knowledge of the Truth; for there is 
one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the 
Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a ransom for all, to 
be testified in due time." But no, the Bible doctrine of a 
Ransom past and of a consequent Restitution in the future 
(Acts 3:19-23) finds no place in any of these theories. 

SATAN'S LIE THE BASIS OF FALSE DOCTRINES 



These foretold "strong delusions" of our day are none 
of them actually strong or powerful. On the contrary, 
they are very weak. But they have great power to delude 
many because a large proportion of professed Christians 
of our day have never become real disciples of Christ, 
but are merely "tares," imitation Christians. Among 
those who are real Christians, few are "weaned from the 
milk." (Isaiah 28:9; Hebrews 5:12-14.) Few Christians 
in the nominal church are mentally or spiritually out of 
their swaddling clothes. Few have even used the milk 
of God's Word, and grown thereby to the use and appreciation 
of the "strong meat" of Present Truth, which is 
for the developed man in Christ. It is not surprising, 
therefore, that those whom Spiritism and Swedenborgianism 
did not affect are now being gathered into Christian 
Science and Theosophy, the later developments of Satan's 
cunning and deception. 

The strength of these delusions lies in the grave errors 
mixed with truths long held by Christian people, because 
of the "falling away" from the pure faith of the Apostolic 
Church, foretold in the Scriptures. Among these 
errors none is designed to open the heart and mind to 
these delusive and destructive theories of today more 
effectually than the general belief of the first lie— "Ye 
shall not surely die." The general acceptance of this lie 
results from a failure to understand the Bible doctrine 
concerning life and immortality, which were brought to 
light by our Lord Jesus through His Gospel of salvation 
from sin by His Ransom-sacrifice. 

Every error held obscures and hinders some truth; 
and we have now come to the time when every child of 
God needs all the panoply of Truth— the armor of God. 
He who has not on the "whole armor of God" is sure to 
fall into error in this "evil day," this "hour of temptation, 
which has come upon the whole world, to try them 
that dwell on the earth." And "judgment must begin at 
the House of God." Who shall be able to stand? None 
except those who are "building themselves up in the most 
holy faith" with the precious promises and vital doctrines 
of the Word of God. 

ALL BUT "VERY ELECT" TO BE DECEIVED 

The advocates of these false doctrines are surprisingly 
alert and active everywhere, especially in the United 
States, where thought is most active and where liberty 
often means license. Hundreds of thousands have embraced 
these errors as new and advanced light. The 
extent of their success is not fully apparent to many; for 
their success lies in a still hunt for prey. Their advocates 
are to be found in almost every congregation of every 
denomination, and especially among the more cultured; 
and the "angel of light" feature is seldom neglected. The 
nominal Churches are already permeated, leavened with 
these false doctrines. 

The Scriptural prophecy that "a thousand shall fall 



at thy [the true Church's] side, and ten thousand at thy 
right hand" (Psalm 91:3-14), is now fulfilled before our 
eyes. The doctrine of the Ransom, the substitutionary 
sacrifice of Jesus Christ for the sins of the world, has 
been the test. "The cross" has been the great stumbling-stone 
now, as in the days of our Redeemer's First Advent. 
Nearly all have fallen away from faith in this vital and 
fundamental doctrine of Christianity, of the Bible. By 
the great majority Jesus is now considered as only an 
Example for us to follow in certain particulars, not as 
our Redeemer, not as our Ransom. 

From the teachings of Scripture we may expect that 
all but the "Very Elect" of God will be more or less 
stumbled by the errors and worldliness of our day. 
(Matthew 24:24-27; 2 Peter 2:3-11.) The "angel of 
light" sophistries of the powers of evil, and their works 
of healing, will surely delude all whose eyes of understanding 
are not open through heeding the testimony of 
the sure Word of God. 

The doing of many wonderful works is one of the old 
tricks of Satan and his evil hosts. If disease and death 
are to a considerable extent under Satan's control during 

R5802 : page 344 

the reign of evil (Hebrews 2:14), why might he not, in 
his present emergency, when his fall is so near, reverse 
his methods of working and do some works of healing, 
thereby to clinch his errors and deceptions and to re-blind 
some whose eyes have been gradually opening under the 
light of the dawning Millennial Day, the Day of Christ? 

We believe that he is adopting this policy, and that 
he will do so yet more. We believe that our Lord's pertinent 
inquiry was suggestive of this when He said, "If 
Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how 
then shall his kingdom stand?" And, "If Satan rise up 
against himself, and be divided, he cannot stand, but hath 
an end." (Matthew 12:26; Mark 3:26.) So now, as 
Satan's kingdom is about to be overthrown, it is his effort 
to support it by many wonderful works, done by his unknowing 
as well as by his wilful agents, falsely and in 
the name of Christ. 

THE FAITHFUL SOON TO SHINE FORTH 

These various errors, "doctrines of demons," are 
gathering out of God's Kingdom "all that offend, and 
them which do iniquity" (and these constitute the great 
mass); while the faithful, who are to receive the Kingdom 
and be joint-heirs with Christ in His great Messianic 
Reign now about to be inaugurated, alone will stand. 
(Eph. 6:11-13.) When this separation is complete— and 
we believe it is now almost accomplished— the fire of the 
great Time of Trouble will make general havoc of present 
arrangements— social, financial, political, ecclesiastical. 
Then all errors and falsehoods in religion will go down 



forever. Then the Lord's faithful Little Flock, having 
received immortality and the Divine nature, "shall shine 
forth as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father," seated 
with Christ in His Throne. (Revelation 3:21.) For a 
thousand years they shall reign over the world, for the 
scattering of all ignorance and blindness and the uplifting 
of all the families of the earth, the living and the dead. 

Then let all who know the Truth as set forth in the 
sure Word of the Lord be active in its spread. The time 
is short! If you cannot preach orally in public, perhaps 
you can preach privately, to your neighbors and friends 
and those with whom you come in contact. Surely nearly 
all can preach privately, to your neighbors and friends 
and those with whom you come in contact. Surely nearly 
all can preach by the printed page and by pen, as well as 
by consistent daily conduct. Those about us need whatever 
help we can give them; and if they do not get it 
very soon they will surely become entangled in some of 
these latter-day delusions of the Adversary. 



R5802 : page 344 

THE MINISTRY OF SORROW 

"Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord!" "When 
He giveth quietness, who then can make trouble?"— Psalm 130:1; 
Job 34:29. 

THE life of every human being has its lights 

and shadows, its heights of joy and its 

depths of sorrow. These make up a large 

part of the warp and the woof of experience; 

and the web of character which flows 

from the active loom of life, will be fine and 

beautiful or coarse and homely, according 

to the skill and carefulness with which the 

individual weaves into it the threads of experience. 

In every life, in the present reign 

of sin and evil the somber shades predominate; and to 

such an extent is this true that the Word of God aptly 

describes the human family in their present condition as 

a groaning creation. "The whole creation groaneth 

and travaileth together until now," says the Apostle. The 

children of God are no exception to this universal rule; 

we also "groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, 

the deliverance of our Body"— our company, the 

Body of Christ— Romans 8:22,23. 

But while we are waiting for our deliverance, the 
daily experiences of life have a most important mission 
to us, and the manner in which we receive them should 
be a matter of deepest concern; for according to the use 
we make of them, each day's prosperity or its adversity 
and trial bear to us a blessing or a curse. Those experiences 
which we are accustomed to regard as prosperous 



often have in them subtle dangers. If wealth increases 
or friends multiply or a large measure of earthly joy 
comes to us, how almost imperceptibly the heart finds 
its satisfaction in the things of earth! But when the 
keen edge of sorrow and disappointment is felt, when 
riches or health fail, when friends forsake, and enemies 
take up a reproach against us, the natural tendency is 
to despondency and despair. 

Just here is a very important part of the great warfare 
of the Christian's life. He must fight the tendencies 
of his old nature and must confidently claim and expect 
the victory, in the strength of the great Captain of his 
salvation. He must not yield to the alluring influences 
of favorable outward conditions, neither must he sink 
beneath the weight of trials and adversity. He must not 
permit any experience in life, however hard and painful, 
to sour and harden him or make him bitter, morose or 
unloving. Nor may he allow pride or love of show, or 
self-righteousness, to feed upon the temporal blessings 
which the Lord in His loving providence has given him 
to prove his faithfulness as a steward. 

DEPTHS OF SORROW LEAD TO HEIGHTS OF JOY 

Sorrow and griefs may, and perhaps often will, come 
in like a flood, but the Lord will be our Stay and Strength 
in every experience which He permits. The soul that has 
never known the discipline of sorrow and trouble has 
never yet learned the joy and preciousness of the Lord's 
love and helpfulness. It is in seasons of overwhelming 
sorrow and grief, when we draw near to the Lord, that 
He draws especially near to us. So the Psalmist found 
it, when in his deep affliction he cried to God, saying, 
"Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord! 
Lord, hear my voice; let Thine ears be attentive to the 
voice of my supplications!" (Vs. 1,2.) Feeling his own 
weaknesses and shortcomings, longing for full deliverance 
from every imperfection, and prophesying of the 
bountiful provisions of the Divine Plan of Salvation 
through Christ, he adds, "If Thou, Lord, shouldest mark 
iniquities [imputing them to us], O Lord, who shall 
stand? But there is forgiveness with Thee, that Thou 
mayest be feared [reverenced]."— Vs. 3,4. 

How precious are such assurances when the soul is 
painfully conscious of its infirmities, of its utter inability 
to fully measure up to the perfect law of righteousness! 
How blessed it is to know that when our hearts are loyal 
and true, our God does not mark against us the unavoidable 
blemishes of our earthen vessel! If we come daily 
to Him for cleansing, through the merits of our Redeemer, 
our failures are not imputed to us, but freely 
forgiven and washed away. The perfect righteousness 
of our Savior is our glorious dress, arrayed in which we 
may come to God with humble boldness, courage— even 

R5802 : page 345 



into the presence of the great Jehovah, the King of kings 
and Lord of lords. 

If thus God ignores the infirmities of our flesh, and 
fully receives us and communes with us as His dear children, 
we should so regard one another, considering not 
and charging not against one another the infirmities of 
the flesh, which each humbly confesses, and which they, 
like us, are earnestly endeavoring to overcome by the 
grace of God, to the best of their ability. To each one 
of the Lord's true children the words of the Apostle 
apply: "If God be for us, who can be against us?... 
Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's Elect? 
Shall that God that justifieth? Who is he that condemneth? 
Shall Christ that died?" (Romans 8:31,33,34 
— Diaglott.) The case is different, however, when the 
infirmities of the flesh are cultivated, indulged in without 
proper effort to correct them, and are justified, in order 
that the faults may be continued. Then, indeed, they are 
charged against us, and if we do not speedily "judge ourselves, 
and take decisive measures to correct them, the 
Lord will Himself judge and chasten us.— 1 Cor. 11:31,32. 

In the midst of the cares, perplexities and difficulties 
that come to the children of the Lord, we are to trust 
Him fully, and to possess our souls in peace and patience! 
We are to wait patiently for the Lord to outwork the 
issues of our experiences in His own good way. How 
necessary is the patient waiting on the Lord! The Psalmist 
says, "I wait for the Lord, my soul doth wait, and in 
His Word do I hope. My soul waiteth for the Lord more 
than they that watch for the morning: I say, more than 
they that watch for the morning." (Psalm 130:5, 6.) In 
every experience of sorrow and distress, and when the 
strain of the jarring discords and the stinging vexations, 
and wounds that make the heart bleed, threaten to overwhelm 
the spirit, let the child of God remember that "He 
knows, and loves, and cares," and that His ministering 
angel is ever near us, and that no trial will be permitted 
to be too severe. The dear Master is standing by the 
crucible, and the furnace heat will never be permitted to 
grow so intense that the precious gold of our characters 
shall be destroyed, or even injured. Ah, no! If by His 
grace the experiences may not work for our good, they 
will be turned aside. He loves us too well to permit any 
needless sorrow, any needless suffering. 

THE REWARD OF PATIENT WAITING 

"Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in Him, 
and He shall bring it to pass. And He shall bring forth 
thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the 
noonday. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for Him." 
(Psalm 37:5-7.) We must not be disappointed and allow 
our faith to falter when the test of patient endurance is 

R5803 : page 345 



applied, while the outward peace and quietness which we 
crave tarry long. Our Father has not forgotten us when 
the answer to our prayers seems to be delayed. Outward 
peace and calm are not always the conditions best suited 
to our needs as New Creatures; and we would not desire 
conditions in which the precious fruits of the Spirit 
would not grow and develop in us. Therefore, "Think it 
not strange concerning the fiery trial which shall try you, 
as though some strange thing happened unto you, but 
rejoice." (1 Peter 4:12,13.) He who numbers the very 
hairs of our heads is never indifferent to the sufferings 
and needs of His weakest and humblest child. Oh, how 
sweet is the realization of such loving, abiding care! 
"When He giveth quietness, who then can make trouble?" 

The saints have indeed in every sorrow and grief a 
blessed consolation of which the world is wholly in 
ignorance. None but the true child of God can know it. 
What is this consolation? Oh, you who have never enlisted 
under the banner of the Cross, who have never put 
yourselves wholly into the hands of the Lord to be 
moulded and fashioned into His glorious likeness, who 
have never made an earnest effort to stem the tide of the 
tendencies of your own fallen nature, who have never 
contended earnestly for Truth and righteousness in the 
midst of a crooked and perverse generation, what can 
you know of the sweets of this Divine consolation? It is 
the precious balm of Gilead for wounded spirits on the 
battle-field of life, it is the stimulating, refreshing 
draught for fainting souls, hard pressed by the relentless 
foe. It is the soothing caress of a loving hand upon the 
fevered brow of the noble contender for Truth and godliness. 
It is the gentle whisper of hope and love and 
courage when heart and flesh are almost failing. This 
is Divine consolation, the only consolation that has in it 
any virtue of healing or refreshment. It is reserved alone 
for those noble souls who are faithfully bearing the burden 
and heat of the day in the service of the King of 
kings; while those who listlessly drift with the current 
of the world and the downward tendencies of the carnal 
nature can never have an intimation of its sweetness. 

How loving and tender is our God, and how wise and 
strong! His promises have never failed those who have 
put their trust in Him. We may feel that our efforts to 
be good and to do good are very unproductive, that the 
opposition from without and within is very strong. But 
it is when we are weak, when we realize our own helplessness 
and incompetency, that we may be strong in the 
Lord and in the power of His might. It is then that we 
may realize that His strength is made perfect in our 
weakness. The fact that we are weak and lame does not 
separate us from the love and power of our God, while 
we are striving to do His will; for "He knoweth our 
frame, He remembereth that we are dust." Then let us 
more and more lay hold of this strength of the Lord, that 
we may courageously pursue our course in the narrow 



way of difficulty and trial. Precious indeed to the saint 
of God is the ministry of pain and sorrow! 

"YE HAVE SEEN THE PATIENCE OF JOB" 

The saints of every Age have learned the blessing of 
afflictions and sorrows. The Psalmist David says, "It is 
good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn 
Thy statutes"; and again, "Before I was afflicted, I went 
astray; but now have I kept Thy Word." (Psalm 1 19:67,71.) 
God's faithful servant Job suffered almost overwhelming 
troubles, but the Lord brought him out into a 
large place when his testings had accomplished their 
designed effect. He was proven and strengthened by his 
sore experiences. Few if any of us could suffer more. 
He suffered the loss of all his property, then of all his 
children, whom he loved, then of the love and loyalty of 
his wife; and finally, he was smitten with sore disease- 
boils, from head to foot. To crown all, three of his 
friends came to see him on hearing of his great trials; 
and instead of being true comforters, they added to his 
sorrows by insisting that his own sins must have been the 
cause of all these disasters; that his experiences must 
surely be punishments from the Lord because of unfaithfulness 
on his part. Surely poor Job was afflicted! 

But did he lose his faith in God? Hear him: "The 
Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the 
Name of the Lord!" (Job 1:21.) "Though He slay me, 
yet will I trust in Him." (Job 13:15.) Job was indeed 
much cast down, but he maintained his integrity of character 
and his faith in the Lord through all. He did not 
charge God with injustice, and God did not desert His 

R5803 : page 346 

faithful servant. He reproved his accusers and required 
them to offer sacrifice, and instructed Job to pray for 
them, that their trespasses might be overlooked. In the 
end he was blessed more abundantly than ever before. 
God made him a great type of the human family, of the 
troubles of their fallen condition and of their final restoration 
to all that was lost in Adam, with the blessings of 
added experiences to make them wise. How faithful is 
the Lord in all His dealings! Truly His children should 
never doubt His love; for 

"Faith can firmly trust Him, 
Come what may." 

PRECIOUSNESS OF INTIMATE FELLOWSHIP WITH GOD 

It is when continued trust in the Lord and His many 
responsive providences in our lives have ripened into 
precious personal acquaintance and intimacy that we learn 
to delight in Him. Yes, it is when heart answers to heart, 
when pleading prayer brings recognized answers of peace, 



when the Divine love and care have been clearly seen in 
the guidance of our way, that we can recognize the abiding 
presence with us of the Father and the Son. Then, 
however dark may be our way, however severe may be 
the storm that rages about us, the thought of Divine protection 
is ever with us, so that as the children of the Lord 
we are never in despair; though cast down, we are not 
destroyed; though persecuted, we are never forsaken. 
We know our Father's hand is ever at the helm, that His 
love and care are sure and unfailing. 

Those who have come into real heart sympathy with 
God have learned to see Him as the Fountain of all goodness 
and Truth and blessing. To them He is the One 
altogether lovely. His Law is their delight. His friendship 
and love are their very life. When the heart has 
become thus centered in God, it is the most natural impulse 
to commit its way unto Him. These can truly sing 
with the poet: 

"So on I go, not knowing, 

I would not if I might; 
I'd rather walk in the dark with God 

Than go alone in the light; 
I'd rather walk by faith with Him 

Than go alone by sight." 

Surely these have the desires of their heart, and no 
good thing shall be withheld from them. Their fervent 
prayers avail much, and in the Lord's good time their 
righteousness, however much it may now be misunderstood, 
misrepresented and evil-spoken of, shall be brought 
forth as the light— clear, cloudless and widely manifest; 
and their judgment, the justice and righteousness of their 
course and of their hearts, shall be brought forth as the 
noonday. Even while we remain here as aliens and foreigners 
in the enemy's land, we shall be fed, nourished, 
temporally and spiritually, and shall rejoice and be glad 
in the "house of our pilgrimage." Precious indeed are 
the promises of God; and to the praise of His abounding 
grace, His saints of the past and of the present all bear 
ample testimony to their fulfilment. 

"Who need faint while such a river 

Ever flows their thirst to assuage?— 
Grace, which like the Lord, the Giver, 

Never fails from Age to Age!" 



R5803 : page 346 

"THIS HONOR HAVE ALL HIS SAINTS" 

"Let the saints be joyful in glory, let them sing aloud upon their 
beds. Let the high praises of God be in their mouth and a 
two-edged sword in their hand, to execute vengeance upon 



the heathen, and punishment upon the people; to 
bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with 
fetters of iron; to execute upon them the 
judgments written."— Psalm 149:5-9. 

WE ARE frequently asked whether we understand 
that there is to come a time when the 
Lord's people, the saintly ones, while still in 
the flesh, will have a full understanding of 
the entire Word of God, including the dark 
expressions of Ezekiel, Zechariah, Revelation, 
etc. In reply we usually remind the 
questioners that eighteen hundred years ago 
St. Paul wrote, "Take unto you the whole 
armor of God," including the "Sword of the 
Spirit, which is the Word of God"; and that we are, 
therefore, to understand that St. Paul himself and other 
Christians of his time had the "Sword of the 
Spirit." We are sure, however, that they did not understand 
certain portions of the Word of God which were 
not then due to be understood; for instance, that portion 
of Daniel's prophecy which the angel said was to be sealed 
up until "the time of the end," and many other prophecies 
which were not then unfolded. This has always been 
more or less true ever since. Prophecy unfolds gradually. 
Today more is due to be understood than ever before. 
We are not to understand that the Bible will have no 
value in the incoming Age, but rather to the contrary of 

R5804 : page 346 

this. Our thought is that the Bible will be used then, not 
so much as the sole means of communicating God's will, 
but as a source of information, much as we now use 
histories. It will enlighten men respecting the Divine 
promises and supervision of the world and respecting 
God's laws, etc. There is nothing to indicate that every 
matter of which the Bible treats will be seen clearly by the 
Church while we are on this side the veil. The Apostle 
says that "now we see through a glass, obscurely"; but 
that beyond the veil we shall see "face to face." We 
shall see clearly; for we shall then be like our Lord. 
"Now we know in part, but then we shall know even as 
we are known."— 1 Corinthians 13:12. 

The Scripture which tells us that the Bible will be 
used in the future, tells us that all the world will be 
judged by the things written in these books, and informs 
us that the books will be opened (the books of the Old 
and the New Testaments), implying that up to that time 
they were not opened. (Revelation 20:12.) They are 
open now to God's people in a large measure. We believe 
that there has been "meat in due season" for the Household 
of Faith in every time. There was not so much 
knowledge of spiritual matters necessary in the past as in 
the present; hence never before have the books been so 
widely opened as they are today. Now the entire Plan 



of God shines very clearly. But we do not know of anything 
in the Scriptures which says that these books will 
be understood in every detail by the Lord's people on this 
side of the veil, on this side of the resurrection change. 

THE WORK NOW GOING ON 

In speaking of this present time, as we think, the 
Prophet David says, "Let the saints be joyful in glory, let 
them sing aloud upon their beds." The children of God 
should be joyful at all times— even in tribulation, knowing 
that these experiences work out for us a development of 
character and a preparation for the Kingdom glories. The 
Psalmist here foretells that the saints at this time are at 
rest upon their beds, while they sing God's praise. This 
statement might be meaningless to us until we understand 
from other Scriptures that these beds represent creeds or 
the sum total of one's religious belief. 

R5804 : page 347 

While some are reclining on a short creed bed, which 
cramps and fetters them, and the narrow covers of which 
cannot give them warmth and comfort, the true saints of 
God have at this time beds of full and proper size, and a 
cover which is warm and ample. They are shown in this 
prophetic picture as taking their ease, resting in faith, 
while others are restless and uncomfortable. But while 
thus resting in these good beds, representing their mental 
attitude and heart condition, and while praising the Lord, 
they are using skilfully the "two-edged Sword." This 
Sword in their hands is the Bible. The thought is not 
necessarily that God's people have absolute knowledge of 
every feature of God's Word; but that they have all the 
knowledge needful to the efficient use of the Sword at this 
time, all the knowledge designed for the saints now, when 
this prophecy applies. 

"Let the high-sounding praises of God be in their 
mouth," urges the Psalmist. We believe that this is more 
and more becoming true. The saints can praise God more 
intelligently and fully now than ever before. We can see 
our Lord's character better, because much of the ignorance, 
misconception, mysteries and obscurity have fled 
away. God's Word is shining out with more brightness 
than ever. We cannot see that our Brother John Calvin 
could have had very much of the high-sounding praises 
of God in his mouth; for it is surely not a high-sounding 
praise to declare that our God would assign thousands of 
millions of humanity to an eternity of torture. Nor can 
it be said of people of today who teach this same horrible 
doctrine, that they have the high-sounding praises of God 
in their mouths. 

God's name is blasphemed, and His glorious character 
traduced and misrepresented every day. The world is 
told that God has a devilish Plan— that He has made a 
hell in which to torture a very large part of humanity; 



and that He has the devils there already doing the torturing, 
and that this will go on throughout eternity. There 
are no high-sounding praises connected with any such 
beliefs and teachings. But the Lord's people who keep 
close to His Word are now able to tell forth the wondrous 
Story of God's Love, Wisdom, Justice, and Power as 
never before. And the Truth is surely accomplishing a 
work in the binding and fettering of error. We believe 
that the words of the Psalmist in this text are being fulfilled 
at this time. To some extent at least we are already 
engaging in the great work here depicted. 



R5805 : page 347 

AMOS THE FEARLESS PROPHET 

--NOVEMBER 28.-AMOS 5:1-15.- 

AMOS THE SHEPHERD BECOMES AMOS THE PROPHET-DISASTERS 
TO COME UPON THE TEN-TRIBE KINGDOM-DIVINE 
METHOD OF PRESENTING THE PROPHET'S MESSAGE- 
ISRAEL GUILTY OF INJUSTICE AND OPPRESSION-LESSONS FOR 
OUR DAY-ISRAEL'S RECOVERY FORETOLD-FULFILMENT 
OF THE PROPHECY OF AMOS NOW DUE. 

"He that hath My Word, let him speak 
My Word faithfully. "-Jeremiah 23:28. 

OUR lesson has to do with the prophecy of 

Amos, who is noted as being one of the 

earliest prophets to write down the message 

which he delivered. True, Moses was a 

prophet; and we have his teachings in 

written form. David also was a prophet; 

and we have his teachings in the Psalms. 

But Moses' prophecies were chiefly through 

the types which he instituted under Divine 

direction; and David's prophecies were in 

poetic form, but were not discerned to be prophecies 

until our Lord and the Apostles so pointed them out. 

The Prophet Samuel seems not to have written any of 

his inspired messages; neither did Elijah, nor Elisha 

nor others of their time. 

The Prophet Amos belongs to a period about a 
century after the Prophet Elijah and nearly a century 
before the Prophet Isaiah, and about two centuries before 
the Prophets Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Daniel. Amos 
declared himself to have been of humble birth. His 
parents were not illustrious; and he was not educated 
amongst the sons of the prophets. Like David he was 
a sheep tender, a farmer, upon whom the Lord poured 
His Spirit with mighty power, sending him to proclaim 
the disasters sure to come upon Israel unless a change 
of course should turn aside the deserved punishment for 



transgressions against their Law. 

The brunt of the Prophet's message fell against the 
ten-tribe kingdom of Israel. The Divine method of presenting 
the matter is noteworthy. The Prophet's message 
began with the adjoining nations: (1) Damascus, 
the capital of Syria, on the north, is mentioned as being 
in line with the Divine retributions; (2) the Philistines, 
on the west; (3) Tyre, to the northwest; (4) the Edomites, 
to the south; (5) the Ammonites, nearly on the 
east; (6) the Moabites, also to the south; (7) Judah, to 
the south; and lastly, the center of the Prophet's message, 
Israel— the ten-tribe kingdom. 

We can fancy the attention which would be given to 
the Prophet's message by the people of Israel as they 
would hear fall from his lips words descriptive of the 
troubles coming upon surrounding nations which were 
their enemies. But as the circle grew narrower and 
narrower, and as the weight of the Prophet's testimony 
was found to be especially against themselves, we may 
be sure that there was intense indignation. If at first 
they shouted, "A true Prophet!" probably they afterwards 
gnashed upon him with their teeth. 

This denunciation of Israel occurs chiefly in chapters 3-6 
and in chapter 7:9-17. When the Prophet had gone 
so far as to tell openly of the fall of the reigning 
dynasty, Amaziah, the priest of Bethel, interfered, bidding 
Amos to return to his own country. But under 
the special power of the Holy Spirit, using him to deliver 
a particular message, the Prophet Amos refused to return 
home until he had accomplished his errand. He 
also added to the retribution of Israel some prophecies 
respecting the priest's own household. 

CHANGED CONDITIONS-CHANGED METHODS 

In drawing from the experiences of the Prophet 
Amos a lesson applicable to ourselves of today, we must 
remember that the Lord no longer sends His messages 
after this manner. Conditions have changed, circumstances 
have changed, and prophecies of the kind inspired 
by the Lord in early days are no longer His 
method. Respecting these prophecies, the Apostle Peter 
tells us, "Prophecy came not in olden times by the will 
of man; but holy men of God spake as they were moved 
by the Holy Spirit." (2 Peter 1:21.) Again, "Unto 
whom it was revealed that not unto themselves, but unto 
us, they did minister the things which are now reported 
unto you by them that have preached the Gospel unto 
you with the Holy Spirit sent down from Heaven."— 
1 Peter 1:12. 

In view of the changed conditions and the difference 
of operation of the Divine power, it is for us to preach 

R5805 : page 348 

the Word to whomsoever hath an ear to hear, to call attention 



to the application of the prophecies and testimonies 
of ancient times, and thus to make known the Divine 
Plan as it becomes due to be understood by those for 
whom it is designed— the Israelites indeed, in whom 
there is no guile. For any one to undertake at the present 
time to copy either the Prophet Elijah or the Prophet 
Amos or any other of the ancient Prophets of Israel 
would indicate a total misapprehension on his part respecting 
the Divine will and the Divine message; indeed, 
it might even be surmised to indicate a mental unbalance. 
As the Apostle declares, we speak the things that we 
know, and we testify to the things spoken aforetime for 
our admonition. (Romans 15:4.) There is a good lesson 
for us, nevertheless, in the method which the Lord 
guided the Prophet to take in delivering his message. 

Our Lord leaves to us of this Gospel Dispensation 
considerable latitude in the choice of means for serving 
His cause. He exhorts us, however, to be as wise as 
serpents and as harmless as doves; and He promises us 
rewards in proportion as we exercise such carefulness in 
His service as He can especially bless and use. Those 
who use wisely the pounds and talents intrusted to them 
are to have proportionate rewards when the Kingdom of 
God's dear Son shall have been set up. Let us then, in 
the exercise of our liberty and in accord with the 
Master's injunction to be as wise as serpents, notice that 
the Prophet's message respecting unpleasant and direful 
matters, all of which were true, began in such a manner 
as to rivet the attention of his hearers. 

The Apostle Paul practised this same wisdom, and 
mentioned it subsequently to some whom he had brought 
to a knowledge of the Lord. He said, "Being crafty, I 
caught you with guile." (2 Corinthians 12:16.) That 
is, he presented the matter to them in the form that 
would be most attractive to their hearts. He presented 
nothing untrue, however. Truth can be stated in a more 
or less palatable or unpalatable form. 

"NOT ALL THAT SAY LORD, LORD" 

Another lesson in connection with the Prophet Amos' 
message is that his opponents rose up from amongst 
those who were professedly religious— the priests. And 
so it was with our Lord and the Apostles. The priests 
and the religious teachers of their day were the chief 
opponents of the Gospel in its truth and purity; and we 
must expect the same in our day. The Truth, in proportion 
as it has been declared in its purity, has always 
roused opposition, and has always found its chief opposers 
amongst those who have "a form of godliness"— 
but generally amongst those who lack its power. 

Today's lesson is a part of the Prophet's pleading with 
the Israelites that they return to harmony with God and 
thus avert the calamities which must otherwise be expected. 
The history of that time shows that it was a 
very prosperous period, not only for Judah, but also for 



the ten-tribe kingdom. The prosperity was of the 
earthly kind. Riches were accumulated. But these were 
in the hands of the great; and the Prophet proceeds to 
warn the rich that the poor were being unjustly dealt 
with. He intimates that it would be from this source 
that the trouble would ultimately come; that the only 
terms upon which they could hope to live as a nation 
would be by seeking the Lord. It would be in vain for 
them to seek help at Bethel or in Gilgal or in Beersheba, 
the centers of their religious institutions, which were 
corrupt. These religious institutions would all go down 
in the trouble which the Prophet predicted. 

The Lord Himself must be sought with an honest 
heart; else He would cause destruction to break out like 
a fire to devour the House of Joseph. The ten-tribe 
kingdom is here called the House of Joseph, because the 
tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh were of preponderating 
influence in the nation; and these two tribes had sprung 
from Joseph. Hence the fire breaking out in the House 
of Joseph meant the destruction which would come upon 
the ten-tribe kingdom unless they repented. 

The Prophet proceeds to particularize some of the 
wrongs on account of which they were in danger. Justice 
was not rendered in their courts. Instead of the sweets 
of Justice, those who appealed to their courts, if they 
were poor, got wormwood— that is, bitterness, disappointment. 
The Prophet declares that righteousness was cast 
down to the earth; that equity was not a matter of 
primary consideration. He proceeds to point out that 
bribery was rife; that wealth, power and influence could 
accomplish almost anything. There must be a turning 
from this condition; and relief could come only from 
turning to the Lord. 

The Prophet refers to Divine Power in language 
somewhat similar to that used by the Patriarch Job. 
(Job 9:9.) Pointing to the group Pleiades in the constellation 
Taurus and to Orion, he would have his hearers 
see that the One whose assistance they needed was 
the One who was able to create the earth and the heavens 
also, the One who was able not only to gather the waters 
into the seas, but also to call the waters back from the 
seas to the clouds and to pour it down upon the earth 
again in its seasons. This great God was the One whom 
they needed; and all others assisting them would be 
powerless against Him. 

GOD CARETH FOR THE POOR AND NEEDY 

In verse 9 the Prophet intimates that God's Power 
would be with the poor and oppressed for their deliverance; 
and that this would mean destruction against the 
strong and powerful, against those that hate reproof and 
abhor the upright, those that are in opposition to any 
who reprove unrighteousness. 

Verses 11 and 12 specify and particularize the nature 
of the injustice which was practised and which needed 



to be renounced and discontinued. Verse 13 implies that 
there were amongst the Israelites some who did not approve 
of the general course; but that these, being helpless 
and in the minority, kept silence from prudential 
reasons— because the time was an evil one, and to have 
espoused the cause of the oppressed would have brought 
trouble upon them without bringing relief to the oppressed. 
But the Prophet Amos was especially commissioned 
of the Lord to give this very reproof. Hence he 
must not keep silence because of prudence or for any 
other consideration, but must speak his message with 
boldness. 

Similarly, it is not the duty of every one of the Lord's 
people today to take the place of Amos and become 
public reprovers of public officials, etc., even though they 
may see unrighteousness practised. Prudence, wisdom, is 
to be used in connection with whatever we do. Our commission 
today is not that of reproving nations, but that of 
letting our light so shine that others may see our good 
works, and glorify our Father who is in Heaven. Our 
Lord declares that He will rebuke the nations; that He 
will humble their pride; that He will cast down the mighty 
from their positions; that He will exalt the humble— in 
due time. To His people He says, "Wait ye upon Me, until 
the Day that I rise up to the prey."— Zephaniah 3:8,9. 

The lesson closes with an exhortation from the 
Prophet that his hearers should make a thorough reformation 

R5805 : page 349 

—that they should seek good and not evil, love righteousness 
and hate sin. If they would do these things, then 
indeed they might apply to themselves the promises of 
God, as they were already disposed to do, claiming that 
they were His people. Such claims would be appropriate 
enough if they would conform to the Divine requirements, 
but not otherwise. The Lord would be gracious to them 
as a people if they would come into line with His regulations 
and requirements. But otherwise they must expect 
the chastisements and punishments already foretold. 

Remembering that the Israelites were a typical people, 
we properly enough scan the text and the context to see 
whether anything connected with the prophecy of Amos 
was of larger application than it appeared to him and the 
people of his day. From the words of the Apostle Peter 
already cited, and from other examples in the prophecies, 
we are justified in expecting this. For instance, in David's 
prophecies how little the utterer of the words, "Not a 
bone of Him shall be broken," understood of the real fulfilment 
of his declaration! Again, when he said, "Thou 
wilt not leave my soul in Sheol, neither wilt Thou suffer 
Thine Holy One to see corruption," how little David or 
the people of Israel understood the import of those words 
—that David was a Prophet, and was unwittingly speaking 
of Christ and His resurrection from the dead— from 
Sheol! So, while realizing the appropriateness of the 



Prophet Amos' words, we find certain items in connection 
with this prophecy which imply a still larger fulfilment of 
his predictions upon Nominal Israel in the end of this Age. 

GIANTS IN THE EARTH FOREBODE EVIL 

It is not for us to claim that today Justice is fallen in 
the streets, and that Righteousness cannot enter in. It is 
not for us to claim that the poor are inordinately taxed 
or crushed or robbed. On the contrary, we freely state 
that there is a great deal of righteousness meted out in 
the courts of Christendom. We have sometimes wondered 
how natural men have ever brought together so 
many wise, just and reasonable laws and regulations. 
Nevertheless there is a sense in which injustice, inequity, 
is now operating, not so much through any individual evil 
as through the changed conditions under which we are 
living. The blessings of the New Dispensation, coming to 
us under social conditions which are based upon individual 
selfishness, are tending to make a few very rich, and 
before very long, we fear, will be found so to operate 
as to make many very poor. 

The appropriating of the advantages of our day, while 
legally done under laws that at one time were equitable, 
is bound to work a great hardship— putting the power and 
the financial control of the world into the hands of comparatively 
few. True, these few giants are as yet very 
moderate in their requirements and dealings; some of 
them are even generous. But the Scriptures seem to 
imply clearly that it will not be long until the power, 
willingly or unwillingly, will be so exercised as to bring 
great distress upon the mass of humanity, grinding them 
as between two millstones. 

From this standpoint the Prophet's words might well 
be appropriated by Christendom. But we may be sure 
that those in power and position are not disposed to 
hearken to Amos or to any one else; and hence we must 
expect what the Scriptures everywhere point out— that 
the overthrow of Christendom will come suddenly, in "a 
Time of Trouble such as was not since there was a 
nation"; and that in this conflict the Lord, who made the 
Pleiades and Orion, will be He that will strengthen the 
spoiled against the strong, so that the spoiled ones shall 
rise against the strong in anarchy.— Verse 9. 

The close of Amos' prophecy tells of the recovery of 
Israel and of the blessing of the Lord that will be upon 
all mankind, including the Gentiles, at that time. It is 
this prophecy that the Apostle James quoted in the Council 
at Jerusalem, saying, "After this I will return and will 
build again the tabernacle of Israel, which is fallen down; 
and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will set it 
up; that the residue of men might seek after the Lord, 
and all the Gentiles upon whom My name is called, saith 
the Lord, who doeth all these things."— Acts 15:16,17. 

We are living at the time when this prophecy is about 
to be fulfilled. The recovery of Natural Israel is about 



to take place under the reestablishment of God's Kingdom 

in the world— the Kingdom which once was typically represented 

in King David, but which is to be actually established 

in the greater David— the Beloved One. Under 

that Kingdom, reestablished under more favorable conditions, 

a Heavenly Kingdom, the residue of men will be 

given an opportunity to seek the Lord; for the knowledge 

of the glory of the Lord shall fill the whole earth. 



R5804 : page 349 

"PRIDE GOETH BEFORE DESTRUCTION" 

-DECEMBER 5.-2 CHRONICLES 26:8-21.- 

ISRAEL A TYPICAL KINGDOM-MESSIAH TO ESTABLISH THE 
ANTITYPE-UZZIAH'S POLITICAL AND MILITARY SUCCESS 

PROVES A SNARE TO HIM -HIS SIN OF PRESUMPTION 
-ITS PUNISHMENT -A LESSON TO BOTH THE CHURCH AND 
THE WORLD-IGNORANCE OF GOD'S LAW NOT AN ACCEPTABLE EXCUSE. 

"A man's pride bringeth him low; but he that is of a lowly 
spirit shall obtain honor."— Proverbs 29:23. R.V. 

UZZIAH was a great and prosperous king in 
Jerusalem. He made a good beginning, was 
reverential toward God, and put his capital 
and the remainder of his kingdom into good 
condition for defense against enemies. 
When thinking of the wars of Israel, we 
are to remember that for a time this nation 
represented God's rule in the earth in a 
sense that no other nation ever did, either 
before or after them. 

The kings of Israel were anointed by Divine commission 
and authority, as were no other kings; and they were 
said to "sit upon the throne of the kingdom of the Lord," 
as no other kings before or since have held dominion. 
Theirs was not, however, the Kingdom of God for which 
we pray, "Thy Kingdom come," but merely a preparatory 
arrangement with the typical Israelites. 

God's Kingdom will really come to earth after Messiah 
shall establish it. For a thousand years He shall reign, to 
uplift the humble, to bless all who seek righteousness, to 
punish and correct all others, and finally to destroy the 
incorrigible in the Second Death. It was, therefore, quite 
in line with the arrangements of the time that the kings 
of Israel and of Judah should fortify and strengthen 
themselves and defend the land which the Almighty had 
especially given to their nation. 

THE KING'S PRESUMPTION 

The truthfulness of the Scripture, "Pride goeth before 



destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall," was illustrated 
in King Uzziah. When his fame had spread abroad 

R5804 : page 350 

and he began to feel his greatness, pride came in. He 
forgot that he was merely the Lord's representative in 
the kingdom, and that his first duty as a loyal subject of 
God was to hearken and to obey the Divine commands. 

Having accomplished great things from a political and 
military standpoint, King Uzziah essayed to a religious 
distinction. Evidently he felt that God was proud of him 
and of his success, and would be very well pleased to 
have him enter the Temple after the manner of the priests 
and offer incense at the Golden Altar. He knew of the 
rules and regulations governing the Temple and its service, 
but considered himself above them. He would go 
directly to God, and not recognize the priest. 

Many successful people fall into the same error of 
supposing that their success in business or in politics, their 
brilliancy of mind or their polish of education is the only 
requisite in the sight of Jehovah God. They feel that if 
they should go to church and acknowledge God, He should 
be very proud to have them and, of course, should give 
them the first place in everything. This is a mistake. 
The great King Eternal, "the Lofty One that inhabiteth 
Eternity" (Isaiah 57:15), has rules and regulations governing 
all attempts to approach Him. There is just the 
One Way of approach, and no other.— John 14:6. 

THE MELCHISEDEC PRIEST 

"Oh!" says one, "I see. You wish us to understand 
that the laity have no access to God; that they must come 
through the clergy, even as King Uzziah should have approached 
God through Israel's high priest. But I deny 
that the clergy are any more than other mortals. I 
claim that many of them are less brilliant of mind than 
myself; that many of them are less educated, and others 
totally devoid of business sense. I admit that it may be 
well enough for the common people to approach God 
through the clergy; but whenever I approach, I do so on 
the strength of my own personal intelligence and with 
the realization that the Almighty is glad to have me come. 
Often I pray, 'O Lord, I thank Thee that I am not as 
other men, nor even as this publican.'"— Luke 18:11. 

No, friend; this is not our thought— not the Bible 
thought, not the lesson which we should draw from the 
Scriptures under consideration. We must admit that 
there is no Scriptural authority for a clerical class in the 
Church of Christ— unless it be the Twelve Apostles, St. 
Paul taking the place of Judas. Scripturally those Twelve 
rank as a hierarchy— the special mouthpiece of Jesus. 

We are not intimating that the soul desirous of approaching 
God must come through the clergy of any denomination. 
We do emphasize, nevertheless, the fact that 



there is but the One Way of approaching God, and that 

is by and through the Great Advocate whom He hath appointed 

for us— "Jesus Christ the Righteous"— "a Priest 

for the Age after the Order of Melchisedec." (1 John 2:1; 

Hebrews 5:6.) "No man cometh unto the Father 

but by Me," was His Message. "There is none other 

name given under Heaven or amongst men whereby we 

must be saved," is the Apostle's Message.— Acts 4:12. 

INCENSE AT THE GOLDEN ALTAR 

Those whose eyes of understanding have never been 
opened to a realization that Jesus is the Divine Appointee 
for the reconciliation of the world to God may be excused 
if they approach God in prayer aside from Him. Their 
prayers may be answered to a limited extent, if offered 
in sincerity, from the heart, and because, as St. Paul intimates, 
"God winked at" their ignorance of His arrangements. 
-Acts 17:30. 

But as King Uzziah knew of the Divine arrangement 
that only the priest could offer to the Almighty incense 
on the Golden Altar, so those who have come to a realization 
of the fact that Jesus is the great antitypical Priest, 
through whom communication with the Father has been 
opened up, would come under condemnation should they 
intrude into the Divine Presence in prayer otherwise than 
as provided in God's arrangement, even as King Uzziah 
was smitten with leprosy for his presumption and pride. 

Leprosy, Scripturally considered, is a type of sin. King 
Uzziah's experiences, therefore, signify typically that 
whoever would approach God aside from His ordained 
Priest, having a knowledge of the impropriety, would 
come under Divine sentence as a wilful sinner. The 
penalty would be in proportion to the degree of enlightenment 
previously enjoyed. 

FOURSCORE VALIANT PRIESTS 

When the king entered the Holy of the Temple to 
offer incense at the Golden Altar, the high priest and 
eighty of the under priests followed him, protesting 
against his sacrilege. Although this was only their duty, 
nevertheless it marked them as valiant, courageous men; 
for in ancient times a king had great power. King 
Uzziah was feeling his own greatness and was proud of 
it; therefore he was likely to resent any interference with 
his kingly prerogatives. 

Their words of protest voiced what the king already 
knew respecting the restrictions attaching to the services 
of the Temple. But they added, "Go out, for thou hast 
trespassed; neither shall it be for thine honor from 
Jehovah God." True honor, true blessing, true prosperity, 
cannot be found in opposition to the Divine arrangements. 
The king's course, therefore, must bring him dishonor. 
Had he hastened to glorify God, he would have received 
a blessing, no doubt. But instead, violation of the Divine 



Law brought him the curse. 

The lesson is a plain one, exemplified by our text and 
by our Lord's words, "He that humbleth himself shall be 
exalted; he that exalteth himself shall be abased." (Luke 14:11.) 
It was not enough, even if the king had good 
intentions, instead of pride, backing him up. Good intentions 
should have guided him to a study of the Divine 
arrangements and promises. Ignorance of the Law is not 
an excuse. Hence the Apostle's exhortation, "Study to 
show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth 
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth."— 
2 Timothy 2:15. 

The lesson seems to be one of humility, both for the 
Church and for the world. Some are born humble-minded, 
and others are born self-conceited. The latter, 
therefore, are handicapped as respects this grace, though 
Scripturally advantaged in respect to courage to battle 
against present adversities. On the whole, our handicaps 
through imperfections of the flesh are not so unequal as 
to make it easier for one than for another to enter into 
the Kingdom under the call of this Gospel Age. For 
where much is given, much is required; and the judgment 
of the Lord will be according to the heart, the will, the 
intention, the endeavor, and not according to the flesh, its 
weaknesses and its failures. 

Humility is important, not only on its own account, but 
also because the other graces of the Holy Spirit cannot 
be cultivated without it. At the head of the list of these 
spiritual graces is meekness. How could one be gentle 
or make good progress in the cultivation of these graces 
if he were not meek? How could one be patient and 
submissive in the trials and difficulties of life if not meek? 
How could one be kind toward opponents and kind in all 
things if he were not meek? How could one be patient 

R5804: page 351 

toward all if he were not meek? How could one have 

brotherly kindness except through meekness? How could 

one be Godlike except he possessed meekness? How 

could one be loving in the Scriptural sense without meekness? 

Along these lines all who will be of the Church 

will be tested. And meekness and humility must be cultivated 

and must abound in the heart, in order to enable 

the cultivation of the other fruits of the Holy Spirit. 



page 351 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
"LIGHT AFFLICTIONS-BUT FOR A MOMENT" 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER IN THE LORD:- 

"Grace be unto you, and peace from God our Father, and 



from the Lord Jesus Christ. I thank God upon every remembrance 
of you, always in every prayer of mine for you, 
making request with joy, for your fellowship in the Gospel 
from the first day until now."— Phil. 1:2-5. 

The Vow brought me much blessing, likewise the Resolve; 
then I began to watch for suggestions. Last fall 
came one: Z.'14, p. 341— to live each day as though it were 
our last. That was beautiful to me, and most helpful; to 
think to myself each morning, You wouldn't want to go 
Home tonight to a kind, gracious Father and a loving Bridegroom 
unless you, too, had all the day been kind, gracious 
and loving. It checked many a hasty word and act and mellowed 
all my life. 

When the suggestion concerning the cultivation of Love 
came, I rejoiced, for I knew a blessing lay in that also; and 
there has, and a deep and rich one, too. Not only have I 
been enabled day by day to be more kind in my thoughts, 
gentle in my words, and loving in my deeds, but my eyes 
have opened wider and wider to the measureless love of our 
Heavenly Father and His dear Son. In every day I find 
Their love; I have only to follow step by step as They beautifully 
arrange each day and fill it with blessings and love. 

I have more trials than ever before, but they are only 
blessings in disguise. I am learning what St. Paul meant 
when he spoke of "light afflictions, but for a moment." The 
"eternal weight of glory" is getting brighter each day, as I 
learn more of the height and depth and length and breadth 
of the wonderful love of God. I shall be glad to go Home 
by whatever way my Father sees best, but I am not anxious 
as I used to be, for each day is full of His love and blessing. 

I have wished to tell you particularly (as an isolated child 
of God) of a rich blessing I found I was not shut out from, 
did I but reach out by faith and claim it: Some time since, 
a dear sister of the Cameron Class was unable to attend the 
usual Wednesday night testimony meeting, and so, alone at 
home, she had a blessed testimony meeting. Afterward, 
when she told of this experience, I wondered if this blessing 
were not for all the isolated ones. I remembered your admonitions 
in Vol. VI. concerning the Memorial— that an isolated 
individual allow his faith to go out with sufficient 
strength to the Lord to claim the promise of Matthew 18:20, 
regarding the Lord and himself as two. It seemed to me 
the same principle applied here, and I began the Wednesday 
night meetings— and such blessings from the Lord! It is as 
good as the DAILY MANNA morning service— to be in union 
with the Body— the whole world over! 

I have been very careful to use Wednesday evening, because 
the Lord's blessing is more especially with me on that 
day. Other isolated sisters are testifying to this same blessing. 
We had been getting too much solid food and not 
enough fluid, heretofore. 

The blessing of fellowship with yourself still continues 
with me through the pages of THE WATCH TOWER. It is 
ever "meat in due season," for which my appetite grows continually 
keener. 

Dear Brother, "The Lord bless thee, and keep thee; the 



Lord make His face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto 
thee; the Lord lift up His countenance upon thee, and give 
thee peace!" 
Your sister in the Anointed, HOPE TATE.— Canada. 



R5804: page 351 

BLAZED A TRACK THROUGH BAD THEOLOGY 

OUR WELL-BELOVED PASTOR:- 

Loving greetings in our dear Lord and Redeemer, to you 
and all of "like precious faith."— Ephesians 3:14-21. 

Beloved Brother, it has been our thought this year to send 
you some slight token of the great love we have for you, as 
God's appointed servant and channel for dispensing the "Meat 
in due season" to the Household of Faith. How grateful we 
are to you, under God, for blazing a track for us out of a 
maze of bad theology! Daily we bear you up before the 
Throne of Grace, praying that He who has so far worked out 
His will in you may complete His work in His Elect, that 
you, with us and all the dear ones who are earnestly pressing 
forward, may be presented faultless before the presence of 
His glory with exceeding joy. 

We ask you, dear Brother, kindly to accept the HEAVENLY 
MANNA sent herewith with our autographs, also the 2L. Money 
Order enclosed as a token of our loving esteem from those 
to whom the Truth has come at the village of Turangarere. 

Sister Black by asking Sister Kelly to read Vol. 1, was the 
means of presenting the Truth which Sister Kelly was privileged 
to pass on to Sisters Mitchell, Merritt, Clough and 
Mulvay; and Sister Clough was used to pass the Message on 
to Sister Brown, and Sister Mitchell to Sister Gage. All are 
fully consecrated and pressing forward for the Great Prize. 

Sister Black received the First Volume in a very strange 
way. Her little granddaughter was buying a book for a birthday 
present for her grandmother at a second-hand dealer's 
shop. The man advised her to take the book, as her grandmother 
would like it; and so this great blessing came to us. 

Another dear one, Sister Bessie Lambei, sent a subscription 
asking that she, too, might be included in the gift to the 
Pastor to whom, under God, we all owe so much. Sister 
Lambei is one of the Lord's isolated ones. 

We are hoping if it is the Lord's will to meet in Wellington 
for Convention on December 25th; but just now New 
Zealand trade is paralyzed by an industrial strike, which if 
not soon settled may hinder our meeting. But we all look 
forward soon now to be favored by being present at the Great 
Convention of the First-born ones (Hebrews 12:22-24) beyond 
the Veil. Then we hope to meet our Beloved Master; and 
among all the dear Elect, what joy it gives us to look forward 
to meeting the dear Pastor, who has been so abundantly used 
of God to bring blessings to us and all the dear "Feet" Members 
of the Body, which is the Church! Earnestly entreating 
God's blessing upon your labors of Love for Him and His, 



Your loving Sisters, by His Grace. 

North Island, New Zealand. 

[The Editor begs these dear Sisters in Christ to accept his 
thanks for their kind words of comfort, which he will always 
cherish as priceless in value; also for the copy of MANNA 
containing their autographs. As for the 2L., he is putting 
it into the "Comfort Fund," from which he sometimes 
has the privilege of doling out a few dollars for the aid of 
brethren falling into dire need. The Editor has no lack. 
The Society's allowance to him and all the office workers, of 
ten dollars monthly for clothing and incidentals, is more than 
sufficient for our comfort] 



THE CANADA RED CROSS CONTRIBUTIONS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Here in Canada there is a general movement on for 
soliciting funds for the Canadian Red Cross work. Will you 
kindly give us your view on the subject? 

This is a matter of personal judgment— as is every benevolence. 
The Lord's people must remember that their all is consecrated 
to Him, and they must seek to use their best judgment 
respecting the use of their financial talents, as well as 
others. We would feel disposed to resent anything in the 
way of an attempt to coerce or compel contributions, and 
would prefer to exercise our own judgment and conscience, 
and not to have any one tell us what we should do, or should 

R5805 : page 351 

not do. However, emergencies might arise in which we 
would have the right to allow mercenary considerations to 
have their weight— if, for instance, because an employee 
should fail to contribute it would bring him into disfavor 
with his employer, so that he might lose his situation, or if 
a business firm found that they might be boycotted unless 
they contributed liberally, we believe that they would have a 
right to treat this matter from a commercial basis. The 
giving to the Red Cross Society would certainly not interfere 
with anybody's conscientious scruples. 

An examination of the Canadian Militia Act shows that 
certain persons are exempt from military obligations; viz., 
Judges, Government clerks, Telegraph clerks, Revenue clerks, 
Wardens of Prisons and Asylums, Policemen, Firemen, College 
professors, the Clergy, the son of a widow and persons 
averse to military service on religious grounds. 



page 352 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 353 

VOL. XXXVI DECEMBER 1 No. 23 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

View From The Watch Tower 355 

War May End in Exhaustion 355 

Proper Mortification of the Body 356 

Improper Mortification of the Flesh 356 

No Second Probation for the Church 357 

Editor's Answers to Interesting Questions 358 

Two Ordinations— One of God, One of 

Man 358 

Decorum in the House of God 360 

Consideration of Rights of Others 361 

Punctuality a Mark of Character 361 

God's Love for Israel 361 

A Little Talk by the Way 362 

The Apostle's Loving Counsel 362 

Looking on the Things of Others 363 

Interesting Letters 364 

"Before Afflicted, I Went Astray" 364 

The Progress of Three Months 364 

Your Good Hopes for 1916 365 

"Watch Tower" Subscriptions 366 

page 354 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, NY., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



1916-YEAR TEXT-1916 

As our Year Text we have chosen these words, "Strong 
in Faith." (Romans 4:20.) Price, postpaid, 50c per dozen; 
5c each. 



THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

We have the Diaglott only in leather binding, at the reduced 
price of $2. All back orders have been filled. We 
still offer THE WATCH TOWER for a year, as a premium, to 
any one not a TOWER subscriber, who orders the Diaglott; 
this introduces to him THE WATCH TOWER literature. 



NO EXCEPTIONS TO THIS RULE 

All cheques, drafts, money orders, etc., should be made out 
to WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JANUARY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
January follow: (1) 34; (2) 302; (3) 303; (4) 84; (5) 67; (6) 
6; (7) 105; (8) 102; (9) 155; (10) 15; (11) 280; (12) 188; (13) 
332; (14) 113; (15) 153; (16) 10; (17) 19; (18) 144; (19) 130; 
(20) 95; (21) 194; (22) 267; (23) 196; (24) 249; (25) 229; (26) 
283; (27) 4; (28) 145; (29) 28; (30) 8; (31) 207. 



A POPULAR BOOKLET ON HELL 



No other booklet is so much in demand as the one entitled, 
"WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL?" We have these 
now in good supply at 5 cents each. By the dozen, in booklet, 
50 cents; in TOWER form, 40 cents per dozen, 25 for 75 cents, 
$2.00 per hundred, postpaid. 



R5805 : page 355 

VIEW FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

WAR MAY END IN EXHAUSTION 

THE renowned German Socialist paper Vorwaerts 
calls on warring nations to announce 
their aims and makes the following 
stirring appeal: 

"Premier Asquith's exposition of the objects 
of the war last Fall was lacking in 
clearness and full of phrases, but at any 
rate, it was more specific than his assurance 
now that England is determined to continue 
the war to a successful end and to exhaust 
all her resources to attain the common highest goal. Less 
hazy is France's new man, Briand, in stating the object 
of driving the enemy out of the occupied provinces, including 
Alsace-Lorraine; but Briand, too, soon loses himself 
in clouds of rhetoric when he says that France will 
not make peace till justice is reestablished by victory and 
all the guarantees of a lasting peace obtained. 

"One would think that after fifteen months of the 
world's most terrible war, statesmen would be able to 
give a more specific answer to the question, and make it 
clearer to the peoples for what purpose they are shedding 
their blood— what goal has been set, and for what prize 
they are struggling. The defense of the Fatherland, 
freedom, justice, kultur— all that no longer suffices today. 
These are words which each may interpret as he likes, 
and it is really high time to speak more intelligently and 
to the point. 

"It seems almost as though both parties to the war 
feared to betray their plans to each other, for it is not 
only France and England that shroud their war goal and 
peace conditions in fog; the German Government is no 
less reticent; and still more, whenever expressing itself 
as to the purposes of the war, confines itself to generalities 
which may be in place in firing soldiers with courage 
before a charge, but which do not serve to disseminate 
the necessary clarity as to Germany's final intentions, 
either at home or abroad. 

"Stories about peace wishes and peace efforts of the 
German Government are being officially branded as false. 
Von Bulow is in Switzerland for rest and recreation, and 
Solf [the Colonial Secretary] only wants to visit his dear 
friends in Holland and once again eat good white bread. 



It isn't true, either, that the imperial Chancellor, in presence 
of Tom, Dick, or Harry, named the acquisition of 
Belgium to the Meuse line, the annexation of Courland, 
and 30,000,000,000 marks indemnity as peace conditions. 
Well, for the past twelve months we have heard what 
isn't true; can they take it badly of us if we would like 
for once to hear what is true, what the German Government 
really does consider its object in the war game? 

"It cannot be the case forever that battle after battle 
is fought, that great armies are led against one another 
in new theatres of war, without the people learning what 
has been attained, and what still must be achieved in 
order that the peace bells may ring. 

"The others, they tell us, must sue for peace, for we 
are the victors; but unfortunately the others don't consider 
themselves vanquished, and no result is reached. 
The war continues indefinitely because both parties fear 
to place limits to their demands and speak them out for 
fear that the announcement of the object for which they 
are fighting will be interpreted as a sign of weakness. 
It may go so far that this war will end with the complete 
exhaustion of all parties, because no one cared to say 
under what specific conditions it was prepared to end it. 
If this is to be prevented, then all the Governments must 
at least leave the realm of rhetorical generalities, and 
confess their concrete programs, and if, confused by the 
changing fortunes of war, they are not able any longer 
to picture to themselves clearly the objects of the war, 
let them open up the floodgates of public discussion. 
Then we shall soon have clarity and, we hope, peace." 



Too much courage, too much pride, is surely leading 
those in control of the world's affairs— in harmony with 
the Divine prediction— on to exhaustion. We behold the 
ripe manhood, the flower of Europe, going down to the 
Valley of Jehoshaphat— the Valley of Death— the cemetery 
valley of Jerusalem. (Joel 3:2,12.) And while we 
see the wealth of the world being wasted, our hearts 
would be so very, very sick if we did not have the assurance 
of God's Word respecting the grand outcome of 
universal blessing through Messiah's Kingdom, which is 
to follow the great turmoil of Armageddon! Well did 
Jesus predict that men's hearts would be failing them for 
fear and for looking after the things approaching ! Well 
did He say to us as His followers, "When ye see these 
things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up 
your heads; for your deliverance draweth nigh!" (Luke 21:25-28.) 
We rejoice not in the trouble, which surely 
saddens every tender heart. But we do rejoice that, since 
the world will be prepared for the grand change of government 
in no other way than through "a Time of Trouble 
such as never was since there was a nation" (Daniel 12:1; 
Matthew 24:21), Messiah is about to stand forth, 
clothed with Divine power, to take to Himself His great 



power and reign for the blessing of all the families of 
the earth. 



PROPER MORTIFICATION OF THE BODY 

"For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through 
the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live."— 
Romans 8:13. 

MANY times have the children of the Lord 

read these words of the Apostle. Many 

times have His true saints pondered over 

their solemn import. Many times, too, 

have those less saintly read them, and instead 

of taking the lesson to themselves, 

have applied it to their worldly neighbors 

and allowed the lesson to lose its force 

upon themselves. But the most saintly of 

God's people need, as the Prophet declared 

of Israel of old, "precept upon precept, line upon line, 

here a little and there a little." (Isaiah 28: 10,13.) Our 

poor earthen vessels are very leaky and fragile, and need 

constant replenishment from the great Fountain of 

Truth and Life. 

So let us again ponder over these gracious words of 
the Lord's mouthpiece and have their lesson impressed 
more deeply upon our minds. St. Paul is here addressing 
the Church of Christ only. He is not addressing the 
world. The Church have entered into a solemn Covenant 
with the Lord to lay down in sacrifice earthly things, the 
earthly nature. The Apostle assures us that if we succeed 
in faithfully laying down our earthly life with all 
its hopes and prospects, we shall live. It is not merely 
that we shall covenant at the beginning of our Christian 
course to do this, but we must carry out to its completion 
this mortification of our body— the deeds of the body. 

The body with its deeds represents all the human 
interests— not merely the weaknesses and infirmities of 
our fallen condition, and our sinful tendencies. Those, 
of course, we are to mortify. We are to deaden these 
at once, as far as is possible. But we are also to sacrifice 
the earthly interests which are not sinful, but which 

R5806 : page 356 

would prevent our attainment of the glorious hope set 
before us, which would in any degree handicap us in the 
Heavenly race. Are we all doing this day by day? As 
we mingle with others and come into contact with the 
world and its influences, as we engage in the affairs of 
life, are we continually mortifying the deeds of the body? 
Are we crucifying the flesh? Are we dying daily to the 
things of earth? Are we living more and more fully 
each day as New Creatures in Christ? 



IMPROPER MORTIFICATION OF THE FLESH 

Day by day we shall find opportunities to mortify the 
deeds of our flesh; and this we must do, if we would live 
and grow as New Creatures. Some very mistaken 
notions are held by many in the world as to the proper 
mortification of the body. Some of our Catholic friends 
make a mistake in their zeal to do what they consider 
mortifying the flesh. For instance, many of them lie 
on a stone floor instead of on a bed; some will lie down 
to be walked upon and to be made a mat for others to 
wipe their feet upon; some will whip themselves until 
they have lacerated their flesh and then wear a hair 
jacket, with all the torture that means. These have certain 
sins in their minds of which they have been guilty, 
and for which they think they should do penance. With 
others this penance is not voluntary, but of compulsion 
by those who are in authority over them. The difficulty 
with these individuals is that their heads are wrong; they 
lack the spirit of a sound mind. They mean right; but 
they have been mistaught, and their consciences are 
perverted and falsely trained. 

The heathen also practise such mortification of body. 
Some of the zealots among them will hold up their hands 
for hours at a time, or sit or lie down upon spikes to 
mortify their flesh. Some imprison themselves for years 
in a cramped position in a box, being fed through an 
aperture. This they do to show that they are very holy, 
and they think thus to appease their god, or to bring 
themselves into a condition where their individuality and 
sensibilities will become lost and that they may in this 
manner be absorbed into the Diety— a condition of 
Nirvana, as it is called. They want to be pleasing to 
their deities; but we know that the true God is not 
pleased with any such sufferings and tortures. He is not 
a God of that kind. What manner of God would it be 
who would delight in seeing His children lying upon 
spikes or doing any other such senseless thing? Such 
is not the God of the Bible. Such a disposition could 
belong only to a demon, and practises of this nature are 
actuated by demons or are the vagaries of a disordered, 
untutored or misdirected brain. 

SELF DISCIPLINE FOR A PURPOSE 

The God of the Bible has, during the Age now closing, 
been calling out of the world a very special class of mankind. 
We have faith in this God because the instructions 
of His Word are reasonable, and because the results 
of following these instructions are in every way most 
satisfactory and gratifying. The wonderful fulfilments of 
its prophecies in the past and in the present are most 
convincing. The manifestations of His providences and 
His guidance in the lives of those who have served Him 
—this God of the Bible— are likewise so marked as to be 



unassailable. He has given to these "exceeding great 
and precious promises," which relate to the life which 
now is and also to that which is to come, and which sustain 
and strengthen the children of God in all their pilgrimage 
through this vale of tears to the Heavenly City, 
"whose Builder and Maker is God." 

We are assured in the Holy Word that if we are 
faithful to our God under present unfavorable conditions 
and environments, if we are loyal to the principles of 
Truth and righteousness and to our Covenant of Sacrifice 
made with Him, we shall have quite a conflict with 
ourselves and with the sins that are entrenched in our 
mortal bodies. He tells us, too, that such loyalty to Him 
will bring persecution and misunderstanding, because of 
the condition of darkness which now envelops the world 
of mankind. Yes, we well know that our faithful endeavor 
to serve the Lord and His Truth will now bring 
opposition from the world, from our own flesh, and from 
the great Adversary and all his hosts of darkness; for 
all these are leagued against us as followers of Christ— 
our Savior, our leader, our Pattern. 

We are to mortify the deeds of the body, but not the 
body itself without a purpose. There must be a reason, 
a Scriptural reason for so doing, a definite and worthy 
object before us in all our work of mortification. We 
might just as well go out and commit suicide at once, 
drink some poisonous acid, and think, "Now I have mortified 
my body," as to inflict torture upon ourselves, 
thinking through it to correct our sins or weaknesses. 
Only a greatly perverted mind and conscience could 
entertain such a wild idea. Whatever mortification is 
practised by the child of God should be actuated by the 
Spirit of God, the mind of God. "If ye through the Spirit 
do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live." 

There is today a meaning in the word mortification 
as ordinarily used, which is altogether different from the 
sense of the word as used by the Apostle. We sometimes 
say in speaking of a certain experience, "I was greatly 

R5806 : page 357 

mortified"; meaning that the experience produced humiliating 
or embarrassing results. But the deeds of the body 
are not thus dealt with. We are to mortify in the sense 
of putting to death the deeds of the flesh. This is the 
primary meaning of the word. 

We are striving day by day to develop the fruits of 
the Holy Spirit— fortitude, meekness, gentleness, patience, 
self-control, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, love. It 
is while endeavoring to put these qualities of character 
into practise, to increase this blessed fruitage in our 
hearts and lives, that the mortification, the killing, of the 
deeds of the body is accomplished; for all the conditions 
about us are unfavorable. If conditions were favorable, 
if every one about us should encourage us in the good 
way and commend us for our course, the mortification of 



our flesh could not so well be brought about. It is in 
struggling against adverse influences, in encountering 
opposition and by conquering its power over us, that we 
gain strength and development as New Creatures in 
Christ. There will be no mortification of the flesh in the 
Millennial Age. But there is now. And it is this mortification 
of the deeds of the body, the crucifying of the flesh 
with all its earthward tendencies, that will, if persevered 
in, bring us the eternal life— the glory, honor, immortality 
—promised to the overcoming saints of the Gospel Dispensation. 
But if we take any other course we shall not 
gain the prize which has been offered to us in this Age. 

NO SECOND PROBATION FOR THE CHURCH 

There is in our text no intimation of a second probation 
for any of those addressed. These words were 
spoken to those who in the present existence are on trial 
for life. The Apostle does not say, If ye live after the 
flesh ye will lose the prize now offered, but you will 
have another trial for life later on. Neither does he say, 
If ye live after the flesh ye shall suffer endless torment. 
But his words speak of a present probation, the issue of 
which will be life or death, an eternity of existence in 
bliss and happiness or an endless cessation of existence. 
Nor is the Apostle here discussing the terms of salvation 
by the exercise of faith in the atoning blood of Christ. 
All this is taken for granted. He is speaking here, not 
of what we believe, but solely of how we are to live. 

Shall we, because of this, spring to the conclusion 
which many take, that it is immaterial what we believe, 
so long as we live well? By no means; and those who 
would so construe these words of the Apostle take but 
a very shallow view of his teachings, one which would 
rob them of all their import. But noticing that his words 
were addressed to those who have already exercised saving 
faith in Christ, and not to the world in any manner, 
we can get a proper understanding of what he meant. 
The heedless Christian who applies this warning to 
everybody, allows it to lose all its force upon himself. 
This is the very reverse of the Apostle's intention. He is 
talking to the saints, to consecrated believers in the redemption 
which is in Christ Jesus, those who have been 
begotten of the Holy Spirit of God to a new nature, even 
the Divine. It is for this reason that he says nothing 
here about the Ransom nor about the Millennial Age of 
trial for the world. Those who are addressed here are 
having their trial now, and the decision in their cases 
will be rendered before the world comes into judgment. 

The Apostle's warning, therefore, is not at all applicable 
to the world, but is full of solemn import to the 
Church. These, having presented their bodies a living 
sacrifice with Christ, acceptable through Him, having 
made a sacred covenant with God to live henceforth after 
the Spirit and to seek those things which are Above, are 
not at liberty to annul or ignore that covenant. They can 



never again claim the human nature which they have laid 
down, for to this they have relinquished all claim and 
title. If they make any such endeavor, either by ignoring 
or despising their covenant with God, they forfeit all right 
and claim to the spiritual nature and reward, which can 
be attained only by faithfulness to our Covenant of Sacrifice 
even unto death. 

It is therefore logically manifest, even if the Apostle 
had not so declared, that if we, consecrated believers, turn 
back again to live after the flesh, we shall die; that for 
us to be carnally minded is death, while to be spiritually 
minded is life and peace. Our Master's words in 
Matthew 16:24,25 are to the same effect— "Whosoever 
[of My disciples] will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever 
will lose his life for My sake shall find it." 

R5807 : page 357 

THE WORKS OF THE FLESH 

An important question then is, What is it to live after 
the flesh? Our reply is, to live after the flesh is to live in 
gratification of even the legitimate cravings of the human 
mind and the human body, when such gratification will 
prevent our necessary progress in the narrow way and 
take time which we should use in our development as 
New Creatures or in the laying down of our lives for the 
brethren. And this is a very easy thing to do. Let us 
just cease our efforts to crucify the flesh, to mortify the 
deeds of the body, and listlessly abandon ourselves to the 
natural inclinations of the flesh; and at once we begin 
to gravitate downward, and soon we find resistance more 
and more difficult, and the path more and more slippery. 
Then, unless we make heroic and prayerful efforts to 
regain our lost position, we shall continue to go downward; 
and the end will be death. 

St. Paul defines the works of the flesh thus: "Now 
the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these: 
Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, 
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, 
strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, 
revelings and such like." (Galatians 5:19-21.) 
What moral filth and pollution this describes! But such 
is the tendency of fallen human nature. Just cease to 
strive against the old nature, and presently some of these 
noxious weeds will be flourishing and crowding out the 
good that remains. 

"Ah, well," says one, "I have not all those mean qualities." 
Well, we are very glad you have not; very few 
have them all. But, beware, you may not know what 
manner of spirit you are of, naturally. Be sure that your 
old nature is not free from inherited, and perhaps a 
formerly cultivated, tendency in some of these directions. 
The only safe way is to watch and pray against them, to 
fill the mind with the things of the Spirit of God, lest 
ye enter into temptation. 



Consider the blessed fruits of the Spirit— love, joy, 
peace, long-suffering, meekness, gentleness, goodness, 
faith, self-control. "Against such there is no law." To 
live in the cultivation of these fruits and graces is to 
"live in the Spirit," and to "walk in the Spirit." Thus do 
we not only possess our souls in safety, but we constantly 
progress in the development of the character of Christ. 
Indeed, we are only safe while we are growing; there is 
no safety in standing still. If we cease to grow, we 
begin at once to retrograde. 

THE USES OF DISCIPLINE 

We see, therefore, that the Christian life is of necessity 
a warfare, a battle, between our new nature and the 
tendencies of the flesh, supplemented by the attacks from 
the outside, from the world and the Adversary with his 

R5807 : page 358 

hosts. It is a conflict which we dare not relinquish; for 

not only is the prize of our High Calling dependent upon 

it, but also the issues of life and of death are in it. How 

solemn a thing it is, therefore, to live under these circumstances; 

for daily and hourly we are standing before 

the bar of judgment! "If we live after the flesh, we 

shall die; but if we through the Spirit, do mortify [put 

to death, refuse to gratify] the deeds of the body, we 

shall live." All true sons of God will so live; for, says 

the Apostle Paul, "As many as are led by the Spirit of 

God, they are the sons of God."— Romans 8:14. 

If we wilfully refuse the leading of God's Holy 
Spirit, we forfeit the blessed relationship of sons. If we 
listlessly disregard this leading, we greatly endanger that 
relationship; and as surely as we are sons we shall receive 
chastisement for our correction and discipline. But 
while we should be grateful for such a restraining hand, 
for this rod of correction, if we need it, yet we should 
be very careful to require as little of it as possible. "If 
we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged" of 
the Lord. (1 Corinthians 11:31.) However, with the 
most careful and prayerful watching against the uprisings 
of the old will and of the flesh, we will doubtless 
make many mistakes and need some chastening experience 
from the Lord; "for what son is he whom the Father 
chasteneth not?"— Hebrews 12:5-12. 

Let us, then, remember the exhortation, "My son, 
despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint 
when thou art rebuked of Him. For whom the Lord 
loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He 
receiveth." (Hebrews 12:5,6.) In the difficult course 
before us, and in view of all the dangers that beset us, 
the pitfalls laid for our feet, the weakness of our own 
unaided efforts, how blessed is the promise of our Father 
in Heaven to give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him; 
how precious the assurance that if we are filled with the 



Spirit we shall not fulfil the desires of the flesh, but shall 
be enabled to mortify the deeds of the body that we may 
live! How necessary it is to live very near to the 
Fountain of all grace, to pray without ceasing and to 
watch with perseverance! 

If at times we know not whether to turn to the right 
or to the left, know not wherein to walk, let us lift 
our hearts to the Lord, and wait before Him, remembering 
the Divine assurance, "Delight thyself in the Lord; 
and He shall give thee the desires of thine heart. Commit 
thy way unto the Lord; trust also in Him; and He shall 
bring it to pass." "In all thy ways acknowledge Him, 
and He shall direct thy paths." (Psalm 37:4,5; Proverbs 3:6.) 
Thus His dear voice brings comfort, strength, rest, 
in the midst of all the cares and perplexities of the way. 
"As many as walk according to this rule, peace be on 
them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God!"— Galatians 6:16. 



R5807 : page 358 

EDITOR'S ANSWERS TO INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

TWO ORDINATIONS-ONE OF GOD, ONE OF MAN 

QUESTION.— When, by whom and how were 
you ordained a minister of the Gospel? 

Answer.— Before answering this question, 
I would call attention to the Scriptural 
teaching on the subject of ordination. 
From what we believe to be the Bible 
standpoint, there are two ordinations 
proper. One is of God; one of men. The 
ordination of God is the begetting of the 
Holy Spirit. Without this no one is authorized 
to preach the Gospel. If any are preaching without 
this ordination they are, to our understanding, preaching 
without Divine ordination. They are doing something 
that they are not authorized to do. 

Our Lord told how He was ordained to be a preacher; 
and the Scriptures tell us that we are to walk in His steps 
and to have experiences similar to His own in many respects. 
As ministers of the Cross, we are to copy our 
Lord Jesus Christ as fully as we are able to do. But He 
was perfect, and we are imperfect. Consequently we are 
to have the forgiveness of our sins, while he had no sins. 
He, therefore, constitutes the basis of forgiveness of all 
who come unto the Father through faith in His blood. 
He mentions His own ordination, saying, "The Spirit of 
the Lord is upon Me; because He hath anointed Me to 
preach good tidings to the meek." (Isaiah 61:1.) As 
that ordination came upon Jesus, it still later came upon 
the disciples at Pentecost; and all down the Gospel Age 
it has come upon the followers of Christ, anointing them 
to preach the Gospel.— Luke 4:17-21; 1 John 2:27. 



All who have received the ordination of God have the 
authority to preach according to their opportunities and 
abilities. Some of them may be deaf mutes and cannot 
preach audibly. Others may be limited by sex; sisters 
cannot preach as do the brethren; but they can preach, 
nevertheless, in "showing forth the praises of Him who 
hath called them out of darkness into His marvelous 
light." (1 Peter 2:9.) Moreover, they are fully ordained 
to make known the good tidings, but, according to 
the Apostle Paul's statement, not in a public way. There 
are some men who cannot preach publicly on account of 
lack of talent or opportunity, but all men, by their lives 
and conversation, can proclaim the glory and honor of 
the great and loving God who lifted them out of darkness 
into light, out of a horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and 
placed their feet upon a Rock and established their 
goings.— Psalm 40:2. 

There comes, however, another special ordination of 
those who are called ministers of the Gospel, in which 
class I count myself. This is ordination by the Church, 
and is recognized by all denominations everywhere. By 
some it is considered a mere form, by some it is performed 
with great ceremony, by others with less ceremony. 
But to our understanding, each congregation 
should have those whom it has chosen ordained in a 
Scriptural way— by the stretching forth of hands— by a 
vote. 

The form of the statement in Acts 14:23, with other 
frequent references to elders in connection with all 
churches, justifies the inference that ordination was the 
invariable custom in the early Church. The term "elders," 
as seen in this text, includes evangelists, pastors, teachers, 
and prophets— public exponents. Hence it is important 
that we learn what is meant by the word "ordained." 

At the present time the word ordination is generally 
used in reference to a ceremony of installation; but this 
is not the significance of the Greek word cheirotoneo, 
used in this text. It means "to elect by stretching out the 
hand," still the usual form of voting. This definition is 
given in Professor Young's "Analytical Concordance to 
the Bible." As this may be considered a Presbyterian 
authority, we give also the definition set forth in Strong's 
"Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible," which may be 
considered a Methodist authority. The latter defines the 
root of the word— "A hand-reacher, or voter (by raising 
the hand)." 

R5808 : page 359 

The Scriptural method of ordaining elders in all the 
churches is by congregational election— by stretching 
forth the hand in a vote. To insist upon such an election 
before serving is to follow Scriptural order; it fortifies 
the elder, and, additionally, reminds the congregation of 
its duties and responsibilities as appointees of the elders 
in the Lord's name and Spirit— as expressing God's 



choice, God's will. Additionally, the Scriptural arrangement 

interests the members of the congregation in all the 

words and deeds of the elders, as their servants and representatives. 

It opposes the too prevalent idea that the 

elders own and rule the congregation, and puts an end 

to their thinking of them as "my people"— rather than as 

"the Lord's people, whom I serve." 

Whoever has not been ordained in these two ways is 
not an ordained minister of the Gospel in the Scriptural 
sense. First, the Divine ordination is necessary; second, 
the earthly ordination is necessary. By the grace of God 
I have both of these. 

In the case of those who are doing a public work in 
the name of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
they are ordained as a whole. They are sent forth 
by the officers of the Society; and as a majority of the 
classes everywhere are recognized by the Society, and 
as they in turn recognize the Society, they therefore 
recognize this ordination through the Society. 



Question.— Where did the Society get the authority 
for sending out preachers? 

Answer.— It gets its authority primarily from the 
Lord, who authorizes all His people, who receive the 
Holy Spirit, to go forth. Secondly, the Society is a 
business organization for religious work in the service 
of the Lord, by printing books, pamphlets, charts, etc., 
and by sending out its representatives to preach— by 
word of mouth and by printed page. This is its only business. 
It is acting in the same way as did the Church at 
Antioch, who especially chose Paul and Barnabas to do a 
missionary work, and who voted these to be representatives 
of that Church. -Acts 13:2,3. 

When Paul and Barnabas went forth, they did not 
say, "We preach in our own name." They would have 
had a right to go in the name of the Lord and preach; 
but, in addition, they had the financial backing, we understand, 
of the Antioch congregation, just as today our 
representatives have the backing of the Society. When 
they go to a place, they can say, "Here is a letter which 
shows that we are acting for the Society." So they do 
not go simply in the name of Christ, but they go as representatives 
of this Society, which is known to be doing 
an evangelizing work. 



Question.— As to the name of the Association: Is it 
the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY? or the 
INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION? 

Answer.— It is both. They are virtually the same 
thing. The INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION, 
the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY and 
the PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION are in many respects 



identical. Why have three names? For the same reason 
that there are in the various churches different Societies 
—the Home Missionary Society, the Christian Endeavor 
Society and the Epworth League, etc., etc. Are they not 
all doing the same work and trying to help people to live 
a Christian life, etc.? Yes. Why have different Societies? 
For the reason that each has a different branch 
of the work to which to attend. 

So it is with us. The parent Association is the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, chartered 
under the laws of the State of Pennsylvania. Its purpose 
is to publish the Truth, to send forth missionaries, etc., 
etc. The property that was necessary to transact business, 
etc., was in its name; for no other was necessary in 
the State of Pennsylvania. 

When we moved here to New York, we were informed 
that the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY could 
not hold title to property here. We were told, "You 
can do business in a personal way, but not as a Society. 
So if you want to do any business here, you must be 
chartered as an Association." "Very well, then," we 
said, "we will organize the PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION." 
This is merely another name for the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, for New York business. 

Later on, in Great Britain, we were informed, "Your 
American Charter does not count for anything here." 
Consequently we took out a Charter there for the INTERNATIONAL 
BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION. This reads 
practically the same as the Charter of the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

These three different Societies were made necessary 
by the law of different states and countries. For some 
things the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY is 
the preferable name. It is the parent Society and the one 
to which contributions are made. Whoever makes a 
donation is expected, if he will, to make it in the name of 
the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

The PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION is the only one of 
the three that can do business here in New York, and the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY deals with the 
PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION as though they were two 
independent organizations. Nevertheless they are the 
same— just as with the different Societies of the nominal 
churches, which would have, perhaps, the same treasurer. 

Thus the whole management is by the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, and these auxiliary organizations 
merely help in carrying on its work. We sometimes 
use one name and sometimes another, just as any one 
would have the right to use any names appropriate to his 
work. It is equally appropriate to say that we are the 
INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION. We are 
Bible students, and are helping Bible students in all parts 
of the world, by the printed page, by financial assistance 
and in other ways. It is also appropriate to use the name 
PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION in connection with persons 
who are engaged in preaching and are acting under guidance 



of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

In other words, the PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION cannot 
transact business except through the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. The WATCH TOWER BIBLE 
AND TRACT SOCIETY has the management, and the 
PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION does the work-absolutely. 

The INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION 
has no legal status except in Great Britain; the PEOPLES 
PULPIT ASSOCIATION has none except in New York State. 

We keep the "WATCH TOWER" prominent in letterheads, 
etc., so that the friends would not misunderstand 
us and think that the "WATCH TOWER" has gone out of 
the work. We use one name or another, as would seem 
to be most convenient in the work. For instance, we 
now have on the title page of the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES the name INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS 
ASSOCIATION, instead of WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT 
SOCIETY, as formerly. Here we have a distinctive name, 
different from others. There are Bible Teachers Associations, 
Tract Societies, etc., etc.; but here we have a 
name especially appropriate to put on our publications, 

R5808 : page 360 

because it represents exactly the thought which we desire 
to express. 



Question.— From what School of Theology were you 
graduated? 

Answer.— I am still in the School of Christ and have 
not yet been graduated. We get our theology from the 
BIBLE. Some of our friends have taken their theology 
otherwise, have taken it from human instructors, and 
have afterwards found that they had wasted their time. 
Some things which they were taught were Scriptural, and 
some things were sectarian. We are simply trying to find 
out what the BIBLE teaches. As the Apostle Paul said to 
Timothy, so we desire to do: "Study to show thyself 
approved unto GOD, a workman that needeth not to be 
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth."— 
2 Timothy 2:15. 

The Apostle did not tell Timothy to go to some 
Theological School, or tell him which would be the proper 
one to attend if he wished to get confused. He merely 
told the young man to rightly divide the WORD OF TRUTH 
—to see which portions refer to Natural Israel and which 
refer to Spiritual Israel; which are earthly promises, belonging 
to the natural man, and which are spiritual promises, 
belonging to the Christian; which belong to the 
present time, and which to the future. 

Some of our number have been graduated from a 
theological seminary. At the time of their graduation 
they thought that their school was the best there was. 
But since they entered into the School of Christ, they 



find that really they would have been much better off if 
they had not gone to the seminary at all; for it took many 
months and years to get out of their heads the errors 
which were there drilled in. 



Question.— How should we understand the Apostle's 
advice to Timothy to "Lay hands suddenly on no man"? 
Does not this imply a formal ordination? 

R5809 : page 360 

Answer.— The Apostle Paul's words to Timothy might 
be variously understood. If we should read in tomorrow 
morning's paper that some one suddenly laid hands on a 
man we would understand that he had been assaulted. 
We are to remember that this is not the way the expression 
would be understood in the Greek, but that the translators 
gave us what they thought the proper meaning. 
The early Church had a ceremony of formally laying 
hands on the heads of their elders, deacons, etc. When 
the Apostles did this, it was the indication of the impartation 
of the Holy Spirit. None but the Apostles 
could bestow this. The Churches may have had some 
custom amongst themselves in the way of appointing 
ministers, however, that in thus doing they might indicate 
that they approved of such persons. 

There would be nothing improper in a similar ceremony, 
if a Pilgrim were sent forth by the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY for a special service of some 
kind. The officers of the Society might step forward, 
lay their hands on the Pilgrim's head and say, "You are 
the representative of the Society." The priests in olden 
time laid their hands upon the head of the animal that 
was to be offered— to show that it represented them. 
So some one might be sent forth by the Society; but a 
ceremonial laying on of hands would be merely an appeal 
to the eye, carrying with it no other authority than the 
words, "You are appointed for such and such service," etc. 

This leaves each little company of the Lord's people 
to use whatever ceremony they choose. Episcopalians and 
Catholics use a great deal of ceremony; other denominations 
use less. We believe that we also have the right to 
use as much or as little ceremony as we choose. The 
meaning of the word ordination is to authorize. True 
ordination is, first, of the Holy Spirit; second, of the association 
sending forth its servant with the Gospel Message. 



R5809 : page 360 

DECORUM IN THE HOUSE OF GOD 
[REPUBLISHED BY REQUEST.] 



"Keep thy foot when thou goest to the House of God, and 
be more ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools; for 
they consider not that they do evil."— Ecclesiastes 5:1. 

THE WISE MAN was undoubtedly not talking 
about literal feet or literal steps, but giving 
some wise counsel, which his hearers might 
appropriate, just as we do. They understood 
him to mean that they must be circumspect 
in their daily lives. 

"Keep thy foot." Notice where you 
are going. Do not go to the House of God 
as you would go to the market-place or to 
some place of amusement. Go as to the 
place where God will meet with His people. The wise 
man goes on to assume what would be heard in the House 
of God. Be not ready "to give the sacrifice of fools," 
he says. This would seem to refer to laughter, levity, 
foolish talk and jesting. 

This Scripture is one which may very properly be 
taken to heart by all of God's people at the present time. 
Reverence is very becoming. We have lost the fear that 
God will cast us into eternal torment. We know our 
Heavenly Father better than to suppose that He would 
have any such evil intention toward any of His creatures. 
But we should not go to the House of God as we would 
go to the market-place. Many of the Lord's people do 
not appreciate the fact that decorum is necessary in every 
place where God is worshiped. 

It is for us to realize that we have God in the Church 
today in a sense that He never was in the typical temple. 
Wherever there is a meeting of the members of the 
Church, the Lord has declared that He will be there. 
The living stones constituting the Temple of God should 
be as fully reverenced as temples made of literal stones. 

Whether we meet in a parlor or in a church or in an 
opera house, the fact that God's people are there makes 
that building, whatever it may be, a holy place. Therefore 
whoever approaches it should do so with a watchfulness 
of his feet. When he arrives, he should be appreciative 
of the place where he is, and should be ready to 
"hear"— listen— not full of mirth. All conversation 
should be of a kind that would edify— build up— along 
spiritual lines. If we cannot talk along such lines, it 
would be better for us to hear the discourse, join in the 
singing, and then withdraw. 

Whatever conversation be carried on, it should be with 
reverence, not merely for the place, but for the occasion. 
There should be no turning about and saying, "Here 
comes Brother So-and-so, Sister So-and-so. We shall 
hear them sing." Such conduct is very improper. 

We do not know any lesson the Lord's people need to 
learn more than that of reverence. The Lord will not 
call any one devoid of reverence, and He wants that quality 
to grow strong. But when fear is banished, the tendency 



is to less reverence. Special care in this respect is 

to be observed when we go to the House of God, or to any 

place where Divine service is to be held. 

R5809 : page 361 

CONSIDERATION OF RIGHTS OF OTHERS 

Not only should we watch our feet in going to the 
House of God, but we should watch what we take with us. 
We should see that we go there clean; that we take no 
vermin in our clothing; that we have no bad odors about 
us. We should also see that we do not take children who 
are not properly trained. Thus we shall not be in danger 
of annoying others. 

There may be occasions when children may be left 
alone at home. When this is impossible, it would be better 
for the parents to take turns in coming to the meetings. 
No one has a right to take children to the meeting, when 
their presence would be detrimental to the spiritual interests 
of others. We believe, however, that a way could be 
devised whereby the child could be left at home until of 
such an age as not to disturb the Class. The majority of 
parents become so accustomed to the ways of their children 
that they do not realize that others are being annoyed— 
when probably every motion of the child is disturbing 
others. The others have their own trials to tax 
their patience without additional ones from us. 

PUNCTUALITY A MARK OF CHARACTER 

It would seem that some need to watch, not only their 
feet, but also their watches. To come into the meeting 
late is out of harmony with the principles of both justice 
and love. All who attend ought, in justice to others, to 
see that they arrive in time. They ought so to arrange 
their affairs that they can be at the meeting promptly at 
the hour appointed. 

Doubtless the Lord would view our efforts to be punctual 
and not to annoy others as marks of Christian character-development, 
which would have His approval, and 
which would help to prepare us for the Kingdom. He 
who is indifferent to the rights of others manifests that 
he is lacking in the spirit of love, the spirit of Christ. 
And whoever has not the spirit of Christ, well developed, 
will not have a place in the Kingdom. 

Hence these matters— unruly children, tardiness at 
meeting, etc.— will have to do with our fitness for a place 
in the Kingdom. By this we do not mean that we are 
being judged according to our work, or that we have any 
right to judge others according to their work. The Lord 
said, "Judge not." We should show that our endeavors 
to do the Lord's will are equal to the desires of our hearts. 
If we exercise determination in trying to live up to these, 
we shall be glad when we experience our change in the 
Resurrection. 



R5809 : page 361 

GOD'S LOVE FOR ISRAEL 

--DECEMBER 12.-HOSEA 11:1-11.- 

ISRAEL TREATED AS A SON BY GOD-REBELLIOUS, SELF-WILLED, 
UNFAITHFUL-GOD'S MERCIES PURSUED THEM FOR CENTURIES 
-ISRAEL'S CAPTIVITY IN BABYLON 
-RETURN TO GOD'S FAVOR FORETOLD. 

"I drew them with cords of a man, 
with bands of love."— Verse 4. 

HOSEA prophesied in Israel— the ten-tribe 

kingdom— prior to the Babylonian Captivity, 

dying about the time that Samaria 

capitulated. The name Hosea signifies salvation 

and corresponds well with the 

prophecy. The Lord through Hosea made 

plain to Israel that their national destruction 

and captivity was at hand; that it was 

a punishment for sin; but that it also told 

the people of God's sympathy for them, of 

His many loving forbearances, etc., and assured them 

that He would continue to love them to the end, and 

eventually bless them and recover them from the land 

of the enemy. 

Hosea's own experiences in life in some degree pictured 
the Lord's experiences with Israel. Hosea's wife 
was unfaithful to him, as Israel had been unfaithful to 
the Lord. Following the Lord's direction, Hosea took 
back his wife, reclaiming her; and his message to Israel 
was of God's continued love for that people— that although 
they had been unfaithful to the Lord, He would 
nevertheless loyally receive them again when they should 
have learned their lesson and be glad to come back as a 
bird from Egypt and a trembling dove from Babylonia. 

"THE LORD LOVED THEE" 

Love is the keynote of the Bible, notwithstanding the 
fact that it contains threatenings as well as promises, and 
declarations and manifestations of justice as well as of 
mercy. If God's character were devoid of Justice— if 
His Love should override His Justice— it would be a terrible 
calamity for all those dependent upon Him. It 
would testify weakness of character instead of strength. 
It is the fact that God's Wisdom, Justice, Love and 
Power operate in full harmony— in coordination— that 
gives us admiration for Him, confidence in Him, love for 
Him; and all these appreciations are intensified as we 
realize His unchangeableness. 



From the beginning God foreknew His Plan as we 
see it gradually ripening. He foreknew that man, allowed 
to take his course, would fall deeply into sin and 
be overwhelmed in its penalty, death. He foreknew His 
own purpose to provide in due time the Lamb of God as 
a Ransom-Sacrifice for the sins of the whole world. He 
foreknew the ultimate blessing of all the families of the 
earth, purposing that the glorified Redeemer should be 
the Deliverer of mankind. He foreknew and arranged 
a thousand years of restitution work, when under 
Messiah's glorious Kingdom all mankind should be 
brought to a full knowledge of God and a full opportunity 
for returning to all that was lost in Eden, all that was 
redeemed at Calvary; and when the ultimately rebellious 
should be destroyed. He foresaw from the beginning the 
glorious result when every knee would be bowing and 
every tongue confessing the glorious work of Messiah's 
Kingdom. This entire Program was to be of the Father 
and through the Son.— 1 Corinthians 8:6. 

It was incidental to this great Plan that God foresaw 
the wisdom of having a saintly company associated with 
Jesus in the great work of His Millennial Kingdom, 
which is to govern and bless thousands of millions. God 
determined to have two saintly companies. One class was 
to be of the earth, earthy, samples of what mankind 
might all eventually attain to through the assistance of 
the Kingdom. The other class of saints, still more highly 
exalted, were to be the Bride of Messiah and His Joint-heir 
in the Kingdom on the spirit plane. God could have 
filled these honorable positions with angels, who would 
have been glad of the opportunity of thus serving. However, 
instead, He chose to gather these companies from 
amongst men— from amongst the sinners themselves. 

CALLING ABRAHAM'S POSTERITY 

Many ways were open before the Lord for the gathering 
of the Elect for the future service. The one which 
He chose and has been carrying out was undoubtedly the 

R5809 : page 362 

wisest, the best. First of all, God called Abraham— a 
sinner like others, but one whose heart was full of 
trust in God and who delighted in the right ways of the 
Lord to the extent of his ability. God's Promise to 
Abraham was that his seed should constitute the Elect, 
and that through that seed all nations would receive a 
Divine blessing. 

The period of nearly four thousand years since God's 
Covenant with Abraham has been devoted to the development 
of Abraham's seed— a natural seed and a Spiritual 
Seed. The two were mentioned to Abraham indirectly 
when the Lord said, "Thy seed shall be as the stars of 
heaven and as the sand of the seashore." (Genesis 22:17.) 
The stars of heaven thus are used to represent 



the Spiritual Seed of Abraham; the sand of the seashore, 
the natural seed. 

For more than eighteen centuries God dealt with the 
natural seed of Abraham. His promises to them and the 
Law Covenant made with them were great blessings, 
inspirations, assistances. For although the Israelites, like 
others, were unable to keep the Law Covenant, being 
imperfect, sinners, nevertheless the endeavor to obey was 
helpful. The various chastisements of Israel, including 
their Babylonian captivity, were lessons intended for their 
good, and eventually made that nation, at the time when 
Jesus came to be the Redeemer, the most holy people in 
all the world— the only people recognized of God. 

"HE CAME UNTO HIS OWN" 

Nevertheless, much of the holiness of Israel in Jesus' 
day was merely a form of godliness, which did not stand 
the test. Only Israelites indeed— pure in heart, in motive 
—were enabled to appreciate the Gift of God and to 
become Jesus' disciples— probably 25,000 in all. Then the 
door of opportunity to become fellow-heirs with the 
Jewish saints was thrown open to the Gentiles; and God's 
Message was given them, inviting them also to joint-heirship 
with Christ. The gathering of this class has 
proceeded for eighteen centuries, while the nation of 
Israel has been rejected from God's favor. Now we are 
entering the great Time of Trouble which is to inaugurate 
Messiah's Kingdom. During this trouble the Church is 
to be glorified in the First Resurrection. Then the 
thousand years of Messiah's Reign with the elect, spiritual 
Bride, drawn from both Jews and Gentiles, will begin. 

Still God's favor will pursue the natural seed of 
Abraham. Their lessons and chastisements will fit and 
prepare them more quickly than others of the world to 
receive the Messianic blessing. The earthly phase of 
Messiah's Kingdom will be Israelitish, in that Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob and all the Prophets and saintly ones 
down to John the Baptist are to be made "princes in all 

R5810 : page 362 

the earth" (Psalm 45:16)— the earthly representatives in 
human perfection of the spiritual Kingdom of Messiah. 

Naturally enough, Israel will then in a natural way 
come first into harmony with the Divine arrangement 
and be the first to get the blessing. However, during the 
thousand years of the Kingdom, as the Scriptures declare, 
all nations shall bless themselves in becoming Abraham's 
seed— in coming into relationship with the Kingdom, 
which will have an Israelitish basis. (Jeremiah 4:2; 
Isaiah 65:16; Genesis 12:3.) Eventually, all will be destroyed 
who do not thus become true Israelites. Thus 
Abraham's seed will eventually include all the families of 
the earth— all for whom God has provided life eternal. 
As for Gentiles— strangers from God— none will remain. 



R5810 : page 362 

A LITTLE TALK BY THE WAY 

"Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be like-minded, having the same love, 
being of one accord, of one mind. Let nothing be done 
through strife or vainglory; but in lowliness of mind let each 
esteem other better than themselves. Look not every 
man on his own things, but every man also on the things 
of others. Let this mind be in you, which was 
also in Christ Jesus."— Philippians 2:2-5. 

THE CHURCH at Philippi, as is well known, 
was the first Ecclesia established in Europe. 
It had a very small and humble beginning. 
Philippi was one of the principal cities of 
Macedonia. (Acts 16:9-14,20,21.) In 
seeking an opportunity for service for the 
Lord in this place, the Apostle went on the 
Sabbath day down to a river bank, where a 
few women habitually resorted for prayer; 
and he spoke to them the Word of God. Dr. 
McLaren, commenting upon the small beginning of the 
Church at Philippi, says: "Not blowing of trumpets, not 
beating of drums of any sort; a few women and some 
worn-out travelers talking together by the banks of the 
rushing river. How scornfully the great folk of Philippi 
would have smiled, if they had been told that the chief 
title of their city to be remembered at all would be the 
presence in it of that one insignificant Jew, and his letter 
to the Church founded on that morning ! " 

The general character of the Philippian Church is revealed 
in St. Paul's Epistle, written to them at a later 
period. We find in it nothing like correction or reproof, 
as we note in most of the Epistles written by the Apostle 
to other Churches. His Philippian letter is a particularly 
beautiful and loving one, and indicates a very close bond 
of sympathy between him and this Church. On four different 
occasions that are recorded, this Church rendered 
practical sympathy and service to St. Paul, by financial 
assistance, as well as by words of comfort and cheer. 
Twice he received gifts from them for his support while 
he was at Thessalonica. Again, while he was at Corinth, 
they ministered to him. When he was a prisoner at Rome 
this loving Church did not forget the Apostle. It was 
their messenger, Epaphroditus, who brought to him the 
last touching memorial of their love. 

Epaphroditus, it will be remembered, was the brother 
who was brought "nigh unto death," for the Gospel's sake 
—because of his faithful service in the assistance of the 
Apostle in the work of the Lord when there seemed little 
help coming from other sources. Upon his recovery from 
this severe illness, the Apostle Paul sent by him to the 



Church at Philippi this beautiful letter known to us as the 
Epistle to the Philippians. See Philippians 2:25-28; 4:14-19; 
2 Corinthians 11:9. 

THE APOSTLE'S LOVING COUNSEL 

The other Churches may possibly have ministered to 
the Apostle also; and we know that this was true in the 
case of certain individuals, among whom were Aquila and 
Priscilla. But we have no record of any Church that 
ministered to St. Paul as did the Church at Philippi. Apparently 
other Churches missed a great opportunity. We 
may be sure that while the Apostle urged the Churches to 
contribute to the relief of the poor saints at Jerusalem, 
etc., he made no request for personal assistance, however 
much he may have been in need, or however much he 
might have appreciated any small manifestation of their 
love for him and the cause of the Lord whom he served. 

The lesson respecting love and humility which we find 
in the passage of Scripture under consideration does not 
intimate that these graces were lacking among the Philippians; 

R5810 : page 363 

but it indicates that the Apostle recognized the 

great importance of these fruits of the Spirit, and the 

need for their continual cultivation, in order to a continued 

growth in the likeness of Christ. The opening 

words of the chapter are an exhortation to brotherly love 

and affection among themselves. He says, "If there be 

any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any 

bowels and mercies." The bowels were formerly considered 

the seat of the tender emotions, pity, compassion 

of heart. It would seem that the Apostle would put the 

Church at Philippi to the test, would let them answer as 

to whether these graces appertain to all who are New 

Creatures in Christ— as if he would say, "If you have 

found these blessed fruits to be a part of the character-likeness 

of Christ, let these be more and more developed 

in you all." 

Then, as though they had assented to this proposition, 
had conceded that there is comfort, love, fellowship, sympathy, 
consolation, in Christ toward one another, he adds: 
You can fill my joy to the full by being thus minded 
toward each other, by having love one toward another, by 
having one mind, or purpose, or will, as a Church— the 
Lord's will. How grand an expression this is! His joy 
would be full; not by knowing of their mere professions, 
but by knowing that they loved, sympathized with, and 
consoled one another, that they had the proper fellowship 
as members of the Body of Christ. These things filled his 
joy more full than anything else that he could know concerning 
them. And he knew that these conditions would 
be most pleasing in the sight of their Lord and Master. 
The Apostle John emphasizes the same thought saying, 
"He that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how 



can he love God whom he hath not seen?"— 1 John 4:20. 
LOOKING ON THE THINGS OF OTHERS 

To this end— that such a spirit of perfect unity and 
fellowship might obtain amongst the disciples at Philippi 
—the Apostle exhorts that each one cultivate the grace 
of humility; that in every matter each shall take heed that 
"nothing be done through strife or vainglory," that self-laudation 
and strivings for preeminence be thoroughly 
put away as the greatest enemies to the Spirit of the Lord 
and to the attainment of His blessing. He urged that each 
should have that lowliness of mind which could see the 
good qualities and talents of the fellow members of the 
Body; and that they should appreciate these qualities as, 
in some respects at least, superior to their own. 

Lowliness of mind does not necessarily signify an 
ignorance of any talents or graces which we may ourselves 
possess; but so long as the Church is in the present imperfect, 
or tabernacle, condition, we may never expect to 
find all the abilities, all the talents, all the graces of the 
Holy Spirit in their highest development, in any one 
person. So, then, each may, if he be lowly of mind, see in 
others of the brethren certain desirable qualities or graces 
superior to his own; and these he should delight to 
recognize and to esteem their possessors accordingly. 

For each to look merely on his own things, his own interest 
or welfare or comfort, or his own talents, and to 
ignore or forget the interests and comfort or talents of 
others, would be a manifestation of selfishness and a 
dearth of the Spirit of Christ, which is a spirit of love, 
consideration and generosity. In proportion as we are 
filled with the Holy Spirit of love, we shall find ourselves 
interested in the welfare and happiness of others. This 
was the mind, the disposition, which was in our dear Redeemer 
when He walked the earth, a disposition which 
He so wonderfully manifested; and we are sure that He 
has not since changed. And if we would be like Him we 
must develop in our characters these traits. If we are to 
be ultimately of the Bride class in glory, we must become 
copies of "God's dear Son." 

The Apostle Paul not only holds up the Lord Jesus 
before us as the great Example of proper humility, self-abnegation 
and love, of a forgetfulness of self in the 
interests of others, but he also holds up before our vision 
the result, the reward, of our Lord. He reminds us of 
the high exaltation of the Master by the Father, that we 
also may be encouraged, and may realize that, if we are 
faithful in following the footsteps of our Redeemer, in 
sacrificing the advantages of the present, in crucifying 
self, in laboring as far as we are able in the advancement 
of the Cause of God and His Truth, in developing the 
fruits of the Holy Spirit, we may expect also to be 
glorified with Him, to share His name and His Throne of 
glory and His great work throughout the eternal future, 
as His Body, His Bride, His joint-heir. 



A CLOSING WORD OF EXHORTATION 

In verses 12-17, following our text, the Apostle pays a 
beautiful tribute to the Church at Philippi, and expresses 
his great love for them. How he reveals his confidence 
in their loyalty! And how glad he was to pour out his 

R5811 : page 363 

own life on their behalf (see margin v. 17) that they 

might attain unto the fulness of the likeness of Christ! 

He lovingly exhorts, "Do all things without murmurings 

and disputings." In following the Master in the narrow 

way, we are not to murmur as we go, finding fault with 

its difficulties and its narrowness; nor are we to dispute 

respecting it, nor to seek to have any other way than 

that which Divine providence marks out before us. On 

the contrary, we are to realize and believe that the Lord 

knows exactly what experiences are necessary to our development 

in the School of Christ; that He is supervising 

our experiences for our highest good and His glory; that 

He is not forgetful of His promises to those who are His, 

but will, as He has promised, cause "all things [that come 

to us in the line of faithfulness] to work together for 

good" to us. And even our blunders or stumblings, if 

properly received, will be overruled for our blessing. 

We are glad to see this disposition of trust and loyalty 
in so many of the Lord's dear saints. Thus following the 
Master, dearly beloved, we shall "be sons of God without 
rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, 
among whom we shine as lights in the world, holding 
forth the Word of life." Thus shall those who are over 
you in the Lord "rejoice in the Day of Christ [when our 
'change' shall come] that we have not run in vain, neither 
labored in vain." 



THE SECRET OF HIS PRESENCE 

"In the secret of His presence 

How my soul delights to hide; 
Oh, how precious are the lessons 

Which I learn at Jesus' side. 
Earthly cares can only vex me, 

Trials never lay me low, 
And when Satan comes to tempt me, 

To the secret place I go. 

"Would you like to know the sweetness 

Of this secret of the Lord? 
Go and hide beneath His shadow, 

This shall then be your reward. 
And whene'er you leave the silence 

Of that happy meeting place, 



You must mind and bear the image 
Of the Master in your face." 



R5811 : page 364 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
"BEFORE AFFLICTED, I WENT ASTRAY" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am happy this day to be able to address you as a brother 
by the grace of God. I am trying to write you, dear Brother, 
under much difficulty; but I want to let you know what a great 
blessing you have been to me. First of all, dear Pastor, if you 
will kindly excuse me for taking up a few minutes of your 
time, I would like to tell you a little about myself. 

Six years ago I met with an accident in the coal mine, 
receiving a fractured spine, which left me with extreme 
paralysis; and for six years I have never been one moment 
free from pain. I lie on a water-bed, and almost everything 
has to be done for me. I am terribly crippled, even to my 
fingers, in which I have no grip. I hold my pen by means of 
an elastic band around my fingers and the pen-holder. I have 
a wife and a child eight years old; and by the guidance of 
our Heavenly Father we keep our home going, on a little compensation 
from the colliery. 

Well, dear Brother, I have lived through a lot of pain, but 
I feel handsomely rewarded by being spared to see the Divine 
Plan of our loving Father. Soon after my accident I got converted, 
as I then understood conversion; and as the Methodists 
were very kind to me, I became a member of their Society. 
I have striven hard to live a life pleasing to God; and for 
five years I have studied religion, being a lover of books and 
my Bible, which was my greatest comfort; not because I 
understood much of it, but because in it I found sweet, comforting 
promises of a better life to come. 

As I read after great religious leaders and endeavored 
to take a deep interest in the nominal Church, I soon discovered 
that there was a terrible confusion being made of 
God's Word. Everybody seemed to believe anything and 
nothing at the same time; and the only difference I could see 
between most of those around me who professed Christianity 
and those who did not, was that the former lived for the lust 
of the flesh under a cloak, while the latter did not care who 
saw how they lived. 

I thought at that time that the Churches were the representatives 
of Christianity on earth, and that ministers must 
be right because they had been to college; and besides, didn't 
they often tell me when I asked for explanations that I was 
not learned, and so could not expect to understand God's 
mysteries in the Bible? 

But after the war broke out, and I saw how the nominal 
Church completely threw over the chief principles of Jesus 
to support their earthly gods, I began to doubt whether there 



was really anything in religion after all. After having learned 
of the meek and lowly Jesus, and then to hear men from the 
church which bore His name, crying out from its pulpit for 
revenge and the blood of their fellows, I felt at a loss what 
to think. In the end I became very skeptical in my thoughts 
and began to feel that all my hopes were shattered; and I 
knew so little of the Gospel and felt so helpless for the want 
of a teacher! But where was I to find one? So I thought to 
throw up all and believe nothing. 

At this point, dear Brother, your STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
were introduced to me by an old friend who used to 
call with a book on health, once a month. He was a Seventh 
Day Adventist, who had been to see the PHOTO-DRAMA and 
had read some of the STUDIES. As he told me of this grand 
light which had come upon him, I was astonished. Eventually 
he made me a present of the first volume. I thought I 
was going to find gold galore. But it was not until my friend 
had given me the second book, and I had partly read it, that 
my mind opened as it were all at once and I prayed God to 
lead me and teach me in His Holy Word. 

I cannot tell you, dear Brother, how I seemed to fill with 
joy and gladness as the Word of God was unraveled before 
my mind. Sometimes as I read I had to put down the book 
a few minutes to pray the Father to keep me calm in my joy. 
I did not then know who had written the books; but I loved 
him and thanked my God as I read and feasted upon the good 
things the Father had permitted him to set before me. 

After I had read the second book, I longed to have the rest 
of them; and as my friend had no more to part with and had 
no means with which to buy them, he advised me to write the 
good people at our London Office and state my case. I did 
not like to do that; for I could not believe, all at once, that 
there were people so kind in London as all that. But when 
my friend came again, he persuaded me to try them. Eventually, 
half-heartedly, I did so; and to my great joy and comfort, 
three days afterwards I received the other four volumes, 
and I should like them to know what joy their gift has brought 
to my painful life. 

I am the only I.B.S. in this town; but the dear brothers 
and sisters from several towns round about have visited my 
home and have not forgotten to bring food of both kinds 
with them. I also receive THE WATCH TOWER from Brooklyn. 
It comes as a message of love to me. As I read it, dear 
Brother, I feel that you are in my room and all the brethren. 
"Blest be the tie that binds our hearts in Christian love!" 

After the Heavenly Father accepted me as a son, I soon 
met with opposition; and eventually I felt obliged politely, 
but in a right spirit, to withdraw from the "Nominal." Some 
of my dearest friends said that Pastor Russell had turned my 
brain. To that I quite agreed, only I said that God had turned 
my brain through Pastor Russell, and had turned it in the 
right way, too. 

I wish to thank you, dear Brother, and all the dear brethren 
through whom I receive THE WATCH TOWER— gratis. I would 
be glad to receive THE TOWERS so as not to be a burden to 
the brethren. But our Heavenly Father has willed it that He 



Himself shall provide for my every need. So be it. I go 
over our beautiful Vow each day, and I pray the Father to 
keep and guide you and our dear brethren. Will you please 
pray for me that I may go on by His grace to make my calling 
and election "sure?" 

I hope, dear Brother, that I have not taken up too much of 
your valuable time by asking you to read this letter, which 
after all only partly expresses the joy and gratitude that is 
within me. If I am not asking too much I should love to 
have a line of comfort by your own hand. I close thanking 
God for preserving me long enough to become 

Your Brother in the Lord, A. W. JENNINGS. 



R5812: page 364 

THE PROGRESS OF THREE MONTHS 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I am writing to ask your advice on a few questions. I 
was brought up a Catholic and attended church till I was 
married, thirteen years ago. My husband was a Methodist, 
although he never attended church until two years ago, when 
an evangelist came here. He then joined the Methodist 
church. He often asked me to go, but I did not care to. He 
took our three little girls to church. I prayed God night 
after night to direct me so that I could see which was really 
the right church. 

A year ago I found a tract under the door of our home 
which I believe was an answer to my prayer. The tract was, 
"End of the World in 1914-Not the View of Pastor Russell," 
and oh, how happy I was after reading it! I also read it to 
my husband and he thought it grand. I then took his Bible 
to find out if those things were so. 

My mother had then been dead about a year. I often 
wondered why God had taken her away from us and oh, that 
little tract did set my mind free and at rest! My husband 
thought it so grand he had to tell the Methodist minister 
and his friends about it. 

A little later the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION came to our 
community and we attended it. I commenced attending the 
meetings for Bible study and my husband did not object. 
About a month later his minister handed him two books 
about you for me to read. I had gotten just enough of the 
Truth to know that these books were lies they were telling 
about you. One item was that Pastor Russell did not believe 
in Jesus Christ! 

The minister came for the books and I told him we do 
not deny Jesus Christ; that "To us there is one God and one 
Lord Jesus Christ"— two separate Persons; that it was he 
who was denying Jesus Christ, by the little book he had given 
my daughter. He asked me to explain and I showed him 
where it said, "Jesus is the God-man; He was truly man and 
also truly God;" they deny Him by calling Him God. 

I told him God was from everlasting to everlasting and 



had no beginning; that Jesus was "the First-born of every 
creature," that He said, "My Father is greater than I." The 
minister replied, "That is a mystery to me and we ought to 
leave anything we don't understand to God." But I replied 
that God directs us to "Search the Scriptures" and find out 
if the things told us are true. 

Five months ago my husband moved us to a farm four 
miles from the city, telling me if I attended any more of 
those meetings against his wishes I would be sorry; but I 
would not stop attending. He refused me the horse; recently 
I took the horse and he ran away with me, breaking my foot. 
I am now recovering and long to go again to the meetings. 
What would you advise me to do? My husband wants me to 
go to church with him. 

Your Sister in the Truth, . 

[LETTERS CONTINUED ON PAGE 367.] 



R5812: page 367 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
[CONTINUED FROM PAGE 364] 
THE BLESSING OF A FAMILY ALTAR 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

I desire to write you how much I appreciate your work of 
love for us and tell you of the blessing we are receiving from 
our family altar. 

As soon as breakfast is over we read the Vow, the Morning 
Resolve, the prayer meeting topic and comment, then the 
text for the day with comment. Then either Brother White 
or myself leads in prayer, followed by all joining in "the 
Lord's Prayer;" then we sing the Bethel hymn. 

We have two daughters, of thirteen and eight years, respectively. 
We do not insist on their being present at the 
early service, though they almost always are present, and are 
as quiet as if they were in regular church service. 

It is of the special service that I have with the children 
alone that I wish to tell you: Just before schooltime I have 
them take their turn to have their hair combed. One sits on 
a low stool before me, and while I comb her hair she reads a 
Bible story while the other listens, and then the other one 
does the same. Then we three kneel and I put them into the 
Hands of the Lord, asking His blessing upon them and their 
teachers for the day. Then I kiss them good bye and send 
them to school. 

This is proving a great blessing to us all and I am surprised 
at the amount of reading they accomplish. The older 
girl has read the PHOTO-DRAMA SCENARIO through twice. I 
think she will be ready for the first volume of STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES soon. She also voluntarily goes several 
squares from home every week to read to a dear old Sister 



who is nearly blind. She generally reads your sermons from 
the newspapers and never forgets to go, always asking me, 
"Mama, what shall I read to Sister H.?" 

The other daughter reads more simple stories and talks 
about the pictures. We certainly have blessed times together. 
I am not telling this boastfully, but it has come to my mind 
several times to write it to you, thinking it might be of 
comfort to you as well as to us. 

I often wonder if parents realize the blessing they miss in 
not instructing their children in the Scriptures and I have 
found this a most helpful way. On Sunday mornings we go 
over the Sunday School lesson with them. I certainly wish 
to thank you, and praise the dear Lord that He is using you 
to help us understand His Word. 

Yours in His love and service, 

MRS. F. D. WHITE.-Ohio. 



CONDITIONS NOW VERY DIFFERENT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in our dear Redeemer's name. Knowing your 
time to be filled with the Lord's work, I hesitate to infringe 
upon it; but I would appreciate it very much if you would 
make it plainer as to what you see to be the Lord's will in 
regard to the Lord's poor. Some time ago there was an 
article in THE WATCH TOWER regarding friends availing 
themselves of public institutions. Would that mean that you 
considered it the Lord's will for an Ecclesia to permit an 
aged sister to go to the poor-farm [where she has no fellowship] 
when by just a little self-denial some, if not all, 
could put by a little each week to care for her? 

In the early Church they brought what they had, and no 
one went without. I would like if you would either answer 
my letter personally or put an answer in the TOWER. 

The STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES have been a great blessing 
to me, and I know that God will continue to bless and 
strengthen you. 

Your sister in Him, . 

EDITOR'S REPLY 

Conditions have greatly changed since the times of our 
Lord and the Apostles. The teachings of Jesus have greatly 
broadened the world's sympathies. Now it is considered a 
disgrace for any community to fail to make provisions for 
its poor, its aged, its imbecile, its sick. The provision made 
for these through public taxation is much better than the 
provision that was made in the early Church, and much better 
than the majority of people have at the present time. Visit 
your own County Homes for the poor, etc. See how clean 
they are, how reasonably comfortable, and how, in a majority 
of cases, the inmates are better off than they were at 
their own homes. Applying the Golden Rule to himself on 
this subject, the Editor would be quite willing to go to 



such public institutions as he knows of, if the Lord's providence 
so arranged. He would prefer so to do rather than be 
burdensome to others. 

The child of God, on the alert to serve His King, would 
probably find many more opportunities for service in a public 
institution than if he were shut up in a private home. Who 
knows but that there are hungry hearts needing the bread 
of life, and that the Lord's providence might guide some of 
us to the feeding of these, and thus furnish opportunities for 
their blessing through association with them? 



A WORD TO THE WISE 

MY DEAR PASTOR:- 

Grace and peace be multiplied unto you ! About two years 
ago this past summer, there appeared an article in THE WATCH 
TOWER, the title of which was something like this: "Proper 
Decorum in the Church of God."* It seemed to me at that 
time to be just what was needed. Since then large numbers 
have been added to all the classes and a reprinting of this 
same article might prove very helpful. 

My reason for thinking so is this: At a Sunday afternoon 
service of a large class of Associated Bible Students which I 
attended recently, the confusion before the service was so 
great that the leader, in order to make himself heard in announcing 
the first hymn, had to resort to the undignified means 
of pounding the Hymnal with his fist. 

After the service, a newly interested lady was overheard to 
remark— "Yes; I enjoyed the sermon very much; but the 
people here have not the reverence for God that they have in 
the churches. There, they enter quietly, and wait on the Lord 
until the service begins, and thus prepare themselves for the 
blessing of the hour." One cannot help but deeply regret that 
thoughtlessness on the part of the friends is permitted to cast 
a reflection on the cause they love to serve. 

It always has seemed difficult for the dear friends to realize 
that the same reverence and dignity should characterize their 
words and actions in a Hall as in a Church building. 

In writing this, dear Brother, I am voicing the sentiments 
which I have heard expressed by others; and I trust it will 

R5813 : page 367 

not seem like a complaint, but instead, a service in behalf of 
the cause we all love so well. With warmest love in the Lord, 
Yours in His service, 



TIME ENOUGH FOR PROTEST 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In reading and rereading the first article of Sept. 1st 
TOWER; i.e. "Christian Duty and the War," we have been 



greatly helped and encouraged. We especially wish to speak 
of the last part of the article and the advice given therein. 
We gladly accept and appreciate this advice. You seem to have 
said just what was in our hearts and minds. 

We are desirous, however, of asking a further question. 
Would you think it proper and wise to place before the government 
at this time, before they become involved in the war, 
our determination in case they do? "Be it known unto thee, 
O King, we will not serve thy (War) gods." Would not a 
perfectly frank and honest position on our part require such 
action? As for instance, the sending of a resolution to this 
effect signed by all who wished, to President Wilson and the 
public press. 

Greatly thanking you for your continued labors of love and 
praying the Master's richest blessing upon you and the glorious 
work you are doing, we remain, 

Yours faithfully in the Anointed, . 

We advise that no protest be made until there is some 
demand; and then only a quiet, modest, declaration of our 
consciences on the subject. EDITOR. 



"LIFT UP YOUR HEADS AND REJOICE!" 

Question.— Should the Lord's people be grieved, or should 
they rejoice, over this present great international war? 

Answer.— Our Master said, "When ye see these things begin 
to come to pass, then lift up your heads and rejoice!" We 
cannot think that the Lord meant that we should rejoice in the 
sufferings of those engaged in this war, nor in the sufferings of 
the wives and children, the bereaved ones, nor in the loss of 
those whose homes are destroyed, nor in the sorrows of millions 
here who are without homes in consequence of the war. 
We cannot think that he meant this! He says that we are to 
sympathize with those who are in trouble, to rejoice with those 
who rejoice and to weep with those who weep. The reason why 
we rejoice is that we know what the outcome of this trouble 
upon the nations will be, as foreshown in the Scriptures. We 
rejoice not in the sorrows, the difficulties, not in the war, and 
what is to follow in its wake, but in the fact that all these 
things prefigure the end of the reign of Sin and Death and 
the inauguration of Messiah's glorious Empire! 



*The article will be found elsewhere in the columns of this issue. 



page 365 

YOUR "GOOD HOPES" FOR 1916 

[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 



hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan has proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of Truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both of these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

--TO THE- 
"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the STUDIES and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested in 
the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and breadths, 
the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed for us 
in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of His people— those 
blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 
for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 
naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 
righteousness, the unjustified, who stand, at best, in 
the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 
that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 
so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 
and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 
to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 
during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 
to the several parts of the Lord's work specified on 
the back of this letter. Of course, I cannot in advance judge 
or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 
me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand the 
sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 
upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 
than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 
well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 
of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some idea 
of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this, my 
highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating SCRIPTURE STUDIES in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY 
in various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 



brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as Lecturers to preach the Divine Plan of Salvation, and 
in general to be expended as the officers of the Society may 
deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for WATCH TOWER sent to the Lord's poor or others, as the 
Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., BROOKLYN, N.Y. 
or, London Tabernacle, Lancaster Gate W., England; or, 
Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne, Australia. 

(Name) 

(Post Office) (State) 

page 366 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 

ON "GOOD HOPES" ACCOUNT. 

The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
THE WATCH TOWER to friends who are not yet interested 
enough to subscribe for themselves, or to deeply interested 
friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward about 
accepting our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give us 
such addresses below— the expense to be deducted from their 
donations. Give full name and address, and write very 
plainly, please, mentioning the length of the subscriptions: 



WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION RENEWALS 

Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take 
this opportunity to remark that we shall be glad to hear 
promptly from such as desire the visits of THE WATCH TOWER 
continued. The Lord's Poor friends have been requested to 
send their applications in May. When names are dropped and 
afterward renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. When 
desiring to know date of expiration look on your TOWER 
wrapper. Date is given in lower left-hand corner. 

A PRIVILEGE AND A SERVICE 

We are convinced that THE WATCH TOWER lists do not 



contain the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its 
teachings. The total is small enough surely, and we are not 
content that the name of any should be missing. We believe 
that all such will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow 
way" by its semi-monthly appearance on their table, 
reminding them afresh of spiritual matters which the world, 
the flesh and the Devil continually tend to crowd out of mind 
and heart. 

We have at times required that all desiring THE WATCH 
TOWER on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make 
personal application; now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in Present 
Truth, and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their 
subscriptions either on credit or free, as their circumstances 
may necessitate. Any getting it on credit may at any future 
time request that the debt be canceled, and we will cheerfully 
comply. We desire that as nearly as possible THE WATCH 
TOWER lists shall represent all deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and 
to come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the 
cooperation of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
coworkers with us in this ministry. 

CREATION DRAMA SCENARIO 

This is a condensed statement of the Divine Plan of the 
Ages— profusely illustrated— much information in little space. 
The ninety-six short, pithy lectures of the CREATION DRAMA 
can be supplied in print as follows: 

IN ENGLISH: 

*De Luxe, gold edges, embossed, 400 illustrations 

$1.00 postpaid 

Cloth, burnished edges, embossed, 400 illustrations 

50 " 

*Paper in three booklets, complete; per set 25 " 

A Newspaper edition in 4 Parts FREE 

IN SPANISH, ITALIAN, GREEK, POLISH, ARMENIAN 
AND GERMAN:+ 

Cloth bound, complete 25 postpaid 

Paper " " 15 " 

Newspaper edition, 3 Parts, 2c ea.; per set 05 " 

IN FINNISH (glossed paper, embossed like English 
Ed.): 

De Luxe, gold edge 1.00 " 

Cloth, red edge 50 " 

Paper, 3 Parts; per set 25 " 

Newspaper edition, 4 Parts, 2c ea.; per set 05 " 

IN SWEDISH: Newspaper ed. only, 2c ea.; per set 05 " 

Colporteurs and Class Secretaries may deduct one-half 
from above prices if shipment is ordered charges collect. 

CHOICE MOTTO CARDS-1915-1916 

We have, as usual, very choice sorts. These cards are 



made in Europe, hence subject to heavy expenses for freight 
and duty, especially since the war began. Nevertheless, we 
can supply them in the United States and Canada at less than 
retail European prices, because we supply them at about cost 
price— that is to say, about one-half the usual American prices. 
Besides this, we prepay postage or express charges. Our 
object is to encourage the embellishment of the homes of the 
Lord's people with faith-stimulating and courage-inspiring 
texts tastefully prepared. To facilitate the handling of these 
motto cards we assort them in packets, carefully packed, at 
the following prepaid rates: 

Packet Ma— Ten mottoes, small and medium, postpaid 50c. 

Number Mb— Eight medium-sized cards, $1. 

Number Mc— Two large, and two medium cards, $1. 
Where $5 worth of these are sent to one address the saving 
in packing and expressage would be 50c, making the price 
$4.50. Order by number only. 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 

Those who use this book as we recommend are surely 
being blessed. It should be on your breakfast table regularly. 
Its daily text should be read and commented on freely by all. 
Then the MANNA comment should be read. This book contains 
the same texts and comments as all former editions. 
Every alternate leaf is blank -ruled for use as an autograph 
and birthday record. Its value increases as additional autographs 
of friends are secured. It is printed on fine bond paper. 

The following wholesale rates postpaid are granted to all 
WATCH TOWER subscribers: 

Purple cloth, gold embossed, gilt edges $0.35 

Dark blue cloth, silver embossed, German 35 

Leatherette, blue edges, Swedish and Norwegian 35 

Leatherette, gold edges, Swedish and Norwegian 65 

Genuine Morocco, gold edges, English and Norwegian... 1.10 

MISCELLANEOUS 

Bible Students Manual (Berean Helps), karatol, 50c; full 

leather $1.00 

Hymns of Dawn, with music (cloth) 35 

Hymns of Dawn, without music (flexible) 06 

Poems of Dawn, leather, 50c; karatol, 35c; cloth 25 

CHARTS (Blue Prints, soft cloth): 

Plan of the Ages, 5 ft., $1; 8 ft 1.50 

Chronology of the Bible, 8 ft 1.50 

Tabernacle of the Wilderness, 8 ft 1.50 

BINDERS for THE WATCH TOWER; Spring Back (holds 

1 year) 50 

CROSS AND CROWN PINS (Gold, with Red Enamel): 
5/8"-No. 1 Ladies' Style, No. 2 Gents', each.... 1.15 
l/2"-No. 3 Gents' Style, No. 4 Ladies', each.... 1.00 

5/8"— Celluloid, per dozen, 25c; each 03 

Missionary Envelopes, per hundred, 25c; per M 2.00 

Vow Bookmarks (paper), 25c per 100; (silk) each 05 

"Dove" Poem and Vow Bookmarks (celluloid), 5c; per 



dozen 50 

Booklets (on Hell, Spiritism, Evolution, Tabernacle 
Shadows, Our Lord's Return), also Berean Question 
Booklets on each volume of SCRIPTURE STUDIES and on 

The Tabernacle, each 5c; per dozen 50 

Report on Foreign Missions, each 05 

Judge Rutherford's Defense of Pastor Russell (illus.), 

10c; 25 for 2.00 

Tracts in all languages FREE 



*On the De Luxe and Paper Editions of the English SCENARIO we 
now offer to all, Class Secretaries or otherwise, two copies for the price 
of one, and ten sets of the paper edition (30 Parts) for $1 postpaid. Get 
them into the hands of the public. 

+The German SCENARIOS are temporarily out of stock. They are now 
being printed here and will be ready for delivery about Jan. 1. 



page 368 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 369 

VOL. XXXVI DECEMBER 15 No. 24 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

W.T.B. &T. Society Annual Report 371 

The Colporteur Work 371 

Creation Photo-Drama 371 

Eureka Drama Successful 372 

The Newspaper Work 372 

Free Literature in Many Languages 373 

Financial Sinews of War 373 

The Carol of the "Bride" (Poem) 373 

Upheld in the "Evil Day" 374 

Subtle Testings 374 

The Glorious Proclamation 376 

Logic of the Message 377 

From Glory to a Manger 379 

God's Mercy to Israel and to Others 379 

God's New Nation 380 

Labor of Love to Be Rewarded 380 

Perseverance in This Ministry 381 

Some Interesting Letters 382 



Harvest Workers Successful 382 

Index to "The Watch Tower"-1915 384 

page 370 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5819 : page 370 

OPPORTUNITIES FOR SERVICE BY COMPETENTS 



By competents we mean Brethren and Sisters who have 
the proper qualifications, namely, good address, clear knowledge 
of the Truth, and ability to present it wisely and interestingly. 

We have lists from all over the country of people who 
have sent in their cards requesting literature, thus manifesting 
more or less interest in Present Truth. Our suggestion 
is that these all be called upon by the competents of the 



Brethren and Sisters, with a view to seeing whether they have 
been side-tracked, or whether their interest continues and 
grows— and to help them. If they have not the STUDIES in 
the Scriptures they can be supplied them at the very low 
prices at which they are sold in any language. If they have 
no money the books can be loaned to them. Those who have 
purchased often need merely a wise call and an invitation 
to attend the Class of Bible Students. Thus their interest in 
Present Truth is fanned into a flame— a zeal for God and for 
the Truth. 

We are carrying on such a work here in New York with 
excellent results. We suggest it to all the dear friends who 
have the necessary qualifications. It is better, in our judgment, 
than too frequent Volunteering. The Volunteering 
four times a year we believe enough. 

Classes willing to undertake this campaign of visitings will 
be supplied with cards showing the addresses of their fellow-citizens 
who have written or who have purchased books 
within a year or two. Drop a postal card to THE WATCH 
TOWER Office, Brooklyn, requesting the addresses in your 
town or city and giving us the names of those who will participate, 
with assurances that they will be discreet and not 
seek to bore the people to buy the books if they do not wish 
them when brought to their attention. 



R5820 : page 370 

VOLUNTEER LITERATURE READY 

Our first Volunteer literature for 1916 is now ready, B.S.M. 
No. 7-7. The principal articles are "A Great Prophecy Nearing 
Fulfilment"— "The First Resurrection"— "Consumption 
and the Good Tidings"— "Fatal Ambition vs. Noble Ambition" 
—"The Outward and the Inward Man." 

We believe that this will be a very acceptable number for 
general circulation. Classes and individuals where there are 
no Classes are invited to place their orders immediately— for 
not more than they will be sure to distribute promptly, faithfully. 
In estimating the quantity do not exceed one paper to 
each family; that is, a total of one-fifth of the English-speaking 
population. 

Volunteer numbers are supplied free of charge and sent by 
freight, collect. After receiving it in good order send us the 
receipt and we will promptly reimburse you. We find that 
sometimes we have had difficulty when we prepaid. Sometimes 
deliveries were less prompt and sometimes freight charges 
were collected at both ends. 

We remind the dear friends everywhere that we pay the 
freight on Volunteer matter only. These alone are supplied 
in large quantities. Other numbers, for use amongst your 
friends and neighbors, but not in general Volunteering, we 
supply free, but you are expected to pay the postage or expressage. 
We do not keep these outside numbers in large 
quantities. Where not more than eight copies are ordered by 



mail we pay the postage, making no charge. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF JANUARY 
Questions from Manual on Series Third of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDIES II.-III. 

Week of January 2..Q. 51 to 57 Week of January 16... Q. 1 to 7 
Week of January 9..Q. 58 to 64 Week of January 23. ..Q. 8 to 14 
Week of January 30. .Q. 15 to 20. 

Question Manuals on Vol. III., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each; 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



R5813 : page 371 

WATCH TOWER, BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
ANNUAL REPORT FOR FISCAL YEAR-- 19 15 

ALTHOUGH the year 1915 falls considerably 

short of previous years in respect to 

the Society's activities in the promulgation 

of Truth; nevertheless, this is one of the 

best reports the Society has ever been privileged 

to render. It so impresses us because 

many of the dear friends who have been 

active supporters of the work in the past 

have been so generous, so fervent, so 

zealous, that they left themselves with 

merely enough of this world's goods to properly maintain 

themselves and those for whom they had responsibility. 

Our expectations that the Lord's consecrated people might 

be taken beyond the veil by October, 1914, had much to 

do with these previous activities; leading the friends to 

spend and be spent in the most marvelous way in the interest 

of the King and the brethren, heirs of the Kingdom. 

True, for two years preceding the date mentioned, 
THE WATCH TOWER pointed out that the grand climax 
of our hopes seemed not likely to be fulfilled at that time. 
Nevertheless, the fervent zeal of the brethren led many 
of them to serve to their limit. And during the year 
preceding, the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION so greatly 
appealed to the brethren as a providential arrangement 
of the Lord for the scattering of the Truth that it quite 
made up for any loss of expectancy in regard to the time. 
We therefore consider it very remarkable that in the face 
of these circumstances the work has gone on, practically 
uninterrupted— some features of it even increasing, notwithstanding 
the financial depression of the earlier half 
of the fiscal year. 

First of all, we note the beautiful spirit manifested 



by the Lord's people in every part of the Harvest field. 
A deep work of grace in the hearts and minds of the 
brethren is everywhere manifest. Their possession of 
the Holy Spirit in increasing measure is manifested, as 
the Apostle declared it should be, in the fruits of the 
Spirit; i.e., meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly kindness, love. We know of these prevailing 
conditions, not merely through the dear brethren who 
represent the Pilgrim work and by whom reports are 
continually sent in in respect to every Class visited; but 
we have information of the same thing from every part 
of the world, through the Correspondence Department. 

As an illustration of how the work goes grandly on, 
we note the fact that in the New York City Congregation 
the number immersed during the year— 208— exceeded 
those of the preceding years. We have similar 
reports from all over the world, witnessing to an increasing 
number, coming under the influence of the Truth, 
and "presenting their bodies, living sacrifices," in consecration 
to the Lord and His service. 

THE COLPORTEUR WORK 

The financial strain of the early part of the year 
discouraged many of the Colporteurs, and led them to 
leave the Harvest work temporarily and enter business 
pursuits— it being impossible for them, for a time, to 
meet their expenses. Now, however, the great improvement 
in business everywhere, resulting from the manufacture 
of munitions of war for Europe, is encouraging 
many of these brethren to return to the Harvest work. 
There surely never was a more encouraging time for 
engaging in this blessed service. 

Not only are the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES supplemented 
by the CREATION SCENARIO; but additionally and 
especially, the minds of the people are open as never 
before, to know something about the meaning of the war, 
and to consider the relationship of God and the Divine 
Plan to the terrible war now in progress. We have the 
thing they need, the thing they crave; and no one else 
has it. We are hoping that many of the dear friends who 
became temporarily discouraged will perceive the hand 
of the Lord beckoning forward for a further gleaning in 
the Harvest field before "the night cometh when no man 
can work." The circumstances mentioned will account for 
the decrease in the output of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
as shown in this report. 

THE PILGRIM WORK 

While various circumstances and conditions have 
seemed to make it advisable that some of the Pilgrim 
brethren be dropped from the active service, others have 
been brought into the work, and still others are expected 
to enter it in the near future. The results of the year, as 
shown in the tabulation, certainly compare very favorably 



with the year 1914. We consider this one of the 
most important branches of the service, and continue to 
commend to the love and special consideration of all the 
Lord's people the Pilgrims whom the Society sends forth. 
A special blessing seems to be going with this feature of 
the work at the present time. The public have an ear to 
hear, and the Lord seems to be giving His faithful ones 
more and more of wisdom and grace in the presentation 
of the Message. The results are gratifying. 

CREATION PHOTO-DRAMA 

This branch of the work, having been pushed for a 
year most persistently at great expense, yielded such 

R5813 : page 372 

bountiful results that we were loth to see the great activity 
in this direction curtailed. Nevertheless, it was the only 
wise and possible thing under the circumstances— the 
financial stringency. For a time, all but three of the 
DRAMAS in the United States were discontinued; and 
these were not run as continuously as before. Various 
endeavors were made to put the DRAMA on a financial 
footing to yield its own expenses. It was found, however, 
that in order to make it attractive to the Theater people, 
the DRAMA was so shortened that the main object was 
largely frustrated. The Society, on the contrary, had the 
special interest in the slides and records, because by these 
the great Gospel Message was delivered— the moving pictures 
merely being introduced to draw the audience and to 
hold their attention. All such exhibitions of the DRAMA 
have been discontinued. Hereafter it is to be shown only 
in its full four parts, without any curtailment. And the 
Lord's blessing seems to be returning to the DRAMA on 
the free basis. 

We have now, practically, all of our DRAMA sets in 
operation, though not showing usually, except Sundays, 
in the Theaters. And the friends can usually obtain the 
Theaters at a very low price. In cities where ordinary 
Photo-Drama entertainments are not permitted by law, 

R5814: page 372 

CREATION is welcomed by the Theater managers at 
about the cost of janitor service and lights; and we are 
finding that in cities where moving pictures are permitted, 
the Theater people are willing to give Sunday forenoon, 
10:30 to 12:30, to the DRAMA, at practically no cost, except 
that of janitor service and light. This does not 
indicate the interest of the managers in the DRAMA, but 
merely their desire to have something which will help to 
give moral tone to the Theaters. 

THE EUREKA DRAMA SUCCESSFUL 



We have been very pleasantly surprised to note the 
splendid results secured by the EUREKA DRAMA outfit- 
tinted slides, phonograph, records, scenarios, etc. These 
of course meet with their greatest success in suburban 
places, where the people are not so satiated with moving 
picture exhibits. Although the pictures are not so fine 
as in the PHOTO-DRAMA, they are nevertheless good, and 
highly appreciated. It is freely recognized that we have 
the largest variety of religious pictures ever exhibited; 
and these are introduced in a chronological and historical 
arrangement, which adds to their value. 

To our surprise, it is found that the people really 
seem to give closer attention to the EUREKA DRAMA than 
to the PHOTO-DRAMA. Our wonderful records, so clear, 
so distinct, are a special attraction. Never before, we believe, 
have such records been put forth, giving the human 
voice in its full power, and so distinctly that many people 
have inquired why the speaker did not come forward on 
the platform to be seen and receive applause, some even 
refusing to believe that the records were those of the 
phonograph, insisting that no phonograph ever produced 
such a result. 

There are 86 of these EUREKA DRAMA outfits in the 
hands of the Brethren in various parts, and we trust that 
they are all being used at least every Sunday. Many of 
them, we note, are used almost constantly, every night in 
the week. We regret that we do not have an accurate 
report on these. We are deeply interested in knowing 
that they are all actively engaged and noting the results. 
Only fourteen Classes are giving regular reports; seventy-two 
we know nothing about. And yet we do know, that 
thus far we have had 5,560 exhibitions reported, with a 
total of 1,012,268 in attendance. The interest aroused by 
these may be indicated to some extent by requests for 
literature other than that which was freely distributed— 
the number of card requests for literature being 30,645. 

Surely with such amount of interest manifested, with 
the people sitting listening to every word of the Message, 
while viewing the pictures illustrating the same, we would 
hardly ask for better opportunities for presenting the 
Truth— the Gospel Message. We trust that each of the 
DRAMAS is being kept busy; and we again express the hope 
that we may be informed of the activities and results. 

THE WATCH TOWER 

We continue to consider THE WATCH TOWER lists 
our best criterion in respect to the general progress of the 
Harvest work. The brethren will all be gratified to know 
that we are now printing an average of 55,000 copies of 
each issue. This indicates a deeper and larger interest 
in the Truth than ever before. Besides this, there are 
issues of the journal in the German, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian 
and Polish languages. 

While we have reached and passed the mark that we 
some time ago set for the list— fifty thousand— we are 



not yet content. We have every reason to believe that 
our list should be double what it now is, if all the interested 
knew fully about THE WATCH TOWER and realized 
their need of its regular visits. We are dependent 
upon the zeal and loyalty of the brethren everywhere to 
make known to the interested ones, just what THE 
WATCH TOWER is, and to recommend to them that they 
send in their subscription. We believe that many are 
missing the blessing, and would therefore stir up into 
active cooperation the pure minds of all the dear brethren 
to this Department of activity in the Master's Cause- 
to the intent that the brethren may be "built up in the 
most Holy Faith"— into Christ, their living Head. 

THE NEWSPAPER WORK 

The financial stringency has interfered more with 
the newspaper work than with any other branch of the 
service. Had we the money, we would have representatives 
traveling continuously, visiting the newspapers, 
showing the publishers the difference between the Sermon 
reports furnished by the Pastor Russell Lecture Bureau 
and all other Sermon reports. Editors and publishers believe 
that very little interest is taken in the Sermons by 
the majority of their readers. They need to be made 
aware of the fact that these Sermons are different, and 
that they appeal to the public where others do not. But 
financial conditions have not permitted activities along 
this line. Hence, there has been quite a falling off in 
the list of papers publishing the Sermons regularly. 
Nevertheless, there is still a goodly number of these. 

Anybody desiring to obtain the Sermons weekly can 
be accommodated by addressing the Society's Office. Not 
many now are publishing the three-column service. 
Nevertheless, we can supply these to those who desire 
them at any price they may choose to pay. Some publishers 
give to the Society as low a rate as 15c per year; 
others 25c; others 50c; others $1. Such subscriptions 
sent in to us are distributed between the different papers, 
according to your desires, and according to the reasonable 
proportions that would go to each paper. 

VOLUNTEERING ACTIVITIES INCREASED 

The term Volunteering we apply to the voluntary 
distribution, by the friends, of special issues of THE 
BIBLE STUDENTS' MONTHLY-systematically distributed 
by Classes cooperating or sometimes by individuals. 
Where there is a Class, a Volunteer Captain is chosen, 
by whom the home town is districted, a portion of service 
being given to each one of the Class able, and desirous 
of participating, the shipments being made to said Captains. 
These activities are usually extended gradually to 
the suburbs of the town or city, and in some instances to 

R5814: page 373 



neighboring towns or cities where there may be no 
Classes. The Society provides this volunteer literature 
without charge, and with the promise of repayment of 
the freight charges. 

In the past, the charges were sometimes prepaid and 
afterwards demanded upon delivery. Now, all are to be 
paid on delivery and the receipt to be sent to THE WATCH 
TOWER Office, that the amount of the freight charges may 
be reimbursed to the Captain of the volunteers. In addition 
to this regular volunteering, we supply in limited 
quantities, any number of the "B.S.M."— not for promiscuous 
circulation, but rather that the Class may have 
these on hand to be given to visitors, or to those who 
make inquiry for answers to certain questions. We do 
not keep these in very large quantities. While we desire 
to supply them freely, we do not consider them the volunteer 
matter for general distribution. They are sent free, 
but with charges collect. 

We are sure that it will surprise many of you, as it 
did us, to find that the zeal of the dear brethren was unabated; 
that the demand for this free literature for 1915 
exceeded that of any previous year. In the report, this 
might not seem to be true, because the figures are less 
than those of last year. We call attention, however, to 
the fact that the figures include the free SCENARIOS of the 
PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION and that this free literature 
practically stopped with the stopping of the DRAMA. So 
far as the BIBLE STUDENTS' MONTHLY is concerned, the 
year 1915 stands at the very top of the list. The total 
amount, including distributions in Great Britain and in 
foreign lands, reaches to about 50,000,000 copies. 

FREE LITERATURE IN MANY LANGUAGES 

Have in mind, dear friends, that the Society is publishing 
free literature in nearly every language, and that 
the SCRIPTURE STUDIES are now to be had in twenty different 
languages. We cannot undertake to enumerate all 
of these, nor is it necessary. Whatever you have use for, 
write to us, explaining your needs. 

Under this heading we mention the work for the 
blind. We have the first Volume of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, and many Sermons and WATCH TOWER articles 
prepared for the blind in raised characters— the 
American Braille— the English Braille— the New York 
Point. If you know of any blind people who desire to 
read, they can be supplied without charge— books being 
loaned, subject to return, postage free. Such orders may 
be sent direct to this Office, or addressed to "Gould Free 
Library," South Boston, Mass. 

FINANCIAL SINEWS OF WAR 

To a certain extent, the Christian soldiers are engaged 
in a great warfare against sin, against error, 



against superstition— against the Adversary of men who 
is specially the Adversary of the light and of the Lord 
and the faithful followers of Jesus. All of the Society's 
activities are opposed by the Adversary, and are necessarily 
in opposition to him and his course, and in favor 
of the Lord and His Message. 

The Lord has very wonderfully, through His people, 
supplied the sinews of war— money— and that without 
solicitation on our part. Those who receive the Truth 
into good and honest hearts seem to be so impressed by 
it that many of them are in danger of giving more than 
they might reasonably afford to give, to send the Good 
Tidings to others. We believe that the Lord is very appreciative 
of such loving zeal; and that in due time those 
who are supporting the work financially, as well as those 
who are supporting the cause with their other talents, 
will all meet with a share in the great reward: "Well 
done, good and faithful servant, enter into the joys of 
your Lord." 

R5815 : page 373 

We are sure the financial conditions, all being taken 
into consideration, our readers will agree that the report 
shown in this issue is an excellent one— even though being 
far short of last year's. A summary of the work follows: 

SUMMARY OF SOCIETY'S ACTIVITIES IN UNITED STATES 
AND CANADA 

Letters received 181,834 

Letters sent out 332,773 

LITERATURE SUPPLIED AT COST 

Output of SCRIPTURE STUDIES-Vols 362,344 

" " Bibles and other books 53,355 

" " Booklets 88,447 

" " DRAMA SCENARIOS (bound) 55,630 

" " WATCH TOWERS 1,406,000 

LITERATURE SUPPLIED FREE 

Free SCENARIOS-output 1,528,000 

Free BIBLE STUDENTS' MONTHLY 39,289,000 

Sermons in newspapers 214,777,060 

PILGRIM SERVICE FREE 

Number of Pilgrims 65 

Miles traveled 505,957 

Towns visited 6,233 

Public meetings held 1,843 

Semi-public meetings held 2,735 

Parlor meetings held 8,971 

Total attendance 833,522 



FINANCIAL REPORT FOR FISCAL YEAR 

Pilgrims' Expenses $22,675.58 

Free Literature, Sermons, etc 180,823.69 

Assistance to Foreign Branches and helpers 30,841.85 

DRAMA Expense in forepart of year 53,788.65 



Total Expenditure $288,129.77 

Cash balance from 1914 $1,677.12 

Good Hopes, Tract Fund, etc 185,739.56 

Special donation to balance 100,713.09 

3,129.77 



THE CAROL OF THE "BRIDE" 

Cant. 4:12-16. 

The North Wind blows cold o'er my Garden today- 
Its fierce blasts rush mad on their pitiless path; 

The trees bend and sway in their giant grasp, 

And cower and shrink from their furious wrath. 

They plant their roots deep, and still deeper; their arms 
Take on sinews of strength as they writhe in the blast. 

O bitter North Wind, thy fury is vain! 

For strength born of need brings the victory at last! 



Today o'er my Garden the South Wind plays, 
And gently it kisses the blossoms fair; 

Their soft petals tremble in glad response, 

And their perfume flows out on the quivering air. 

The soft breeze caresses each glistening leaf, 
It whispers a message to each blushing rose; 

And sweet, timid violets look up at its touch— 
The touch that only the South Wind knows. 

It sings to the trees a low, murm'ring refrain, 

And steals thro' the branches with tremulous sigh; 

They clap their soft hands as they dance in their glee, 
For old Winter has fled and the Summer is nigh. 



O South Wind, O North Wind, ye both brought rich gifts ! 

My fair flowers are sheltered, my trees great and strong ! 
And sweeter my blossoms, and richer my fruits; 

To North Wind and South Wind I carol my song! 

My Beloved has come to His Garden— and lo, 

Sweet spices and perfumes and blossoms most fair, 



And ripe, golden fruitage I lay at His feet! 

What joy could be greater! What priv'lege so rare! 
October 21,1915. ALICE G . JAMES . 



R5815 : page 374 

UPHELD IN THE "EVIL DAY" 

"He shall give His angels [messengers] charge concerning thee, 
to guard thee in all thy ways; they shall bear thee up in 
their hands, lest thou dash thy foot 
against a stone."— Psalm 91:11,12. 

THE introduction of this Psalm seems clearly 

to indicate that it applies exclusively to the 

consecrated people of God during the Gospel 

Age, the spirit-begotten ones— those who 

abide under the shadow of the Almighty, in 

the secret place of Jehovah. This same 

thought is represented symbolically in the 

typical Tabernacle. The secret place where 

the saints abide is the Holy. None were 

allowed to enter the typical Holy and Most 

Holy except the high priest and the under priests. All of 

the people of Israel, so far as they were living in close 

harmony with this arrangement, were blessed. But the 

secret place, the Holy, is the one referred to in this Psalm. 

Coming down to Jesus' day, we see that He was the 
first to enter the antitypical Holy and the Most Holy. He 
entered the first of the Holies when He offered up Himself 
at Jordan. When He made His consecration at 
baptism, instantly He was in the Holy, instead of being 
outside in the Court. If He would abide in the Holy and 
continue under the Shadow of the Almighty, all of God's 
providences would be favorable to Him and all things 
would work together for His good. So when Jesus had 
finished His course victoriously, He passed beyond the 
Second Veil, and entered into Heaven itself— the Most 
Holy. (Hebrews 6:19,20; 9:24.) While in the flesh He 
was kept in all His ways; He was guarded of God, and 
not suffered to be tempted above that which He was able 
to bear. In the Garden of Gethsemane, the Father revealed 
Himself in some manner not specifically stated, 
except that we are told that angels came and ministered 
unto the Master. God "maketh His angels spirits; His 
ministers a flaming fire."— Psalm 104:4. 

God can use anything or anybody as His agency, His 
messenger. But there were very few of the human family 
in Jesus' day capable of being used as God's comforting 
angels to our Lord. Mary of Bethany was one of these, 
who, just prior to the Master's crucifixion, anointed His 
feet with a fragrant, costly perfume, and wiped them with 
her hair. She was one who gave Him consolation when 
His mind was agitated with the thought that five days 



thence He would be crucified. He realized that none of 
the people understood, that none of them were able to 
enter into His feelings. But Mary's service was very 
precious to the Lord— very encouraging to Him. 

SUBTLE TESTINGS PECULIAR TO OUR DAY 

So the Lord has also used spirits— angels— and at times 
various other agencies, human beings and even the powers 
of nature, as His ministers. If the Father were wishing 
to send some message to us, His children, He could use 
the electric power that we are learning to use in wireless 
telegraphy and telephony. But He has not chosen to use 
this power as His messenger to speak to us directly. Our 
text gives us the thought, however, that the Lord's special 
supervision is over all His saints, the class which He has 
been selecting since Pentecost, with a view to their preparation 
for the Heavenly Kingdom through growth in the 
graces of the Spirit. But we see that this Psalm as a 
whole has a special application to our day, when "a thousand 
shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right 
hand," and when the pestilence shall be abroad. When 
pestilence is in the air, it inoculates a person without his 
being conscious of the fact, and it is thus that we, "the 
feet" members of the Body of Christ, are exposed to special 
trials and dangers— spiritual pestilence. 

This is the time to which all the prophets pointed as a 
time of special persecution. In the past there have been 
times of persecution to the professed people of God; but 
they were times when the right was more manifest, when 
a sharp line was drawn between the right and the wrong. 
When the question was raised, "Will you serve the Lord, 
or will you serve Baal?" it was not difficult to see the 
right and decide, "I will be on the Lord's side." In the 
days of the early Church, the question was, "Will you 
curry favor with the Roman power, or will you suffer 
persecution by following Christ?" It was Christ or the 
Emperor. Still later down, when the question was as to 
one's choice between one denomination or another, the 
issue was clearly drawn: "Am I on God's side, or am I 
on the side of the Adversary?" But during the past forty 
years the differences between the denominations have 
been practically ignored. 

Sometimes those who were being persecuted were 
somewhat to blame for their persecution; for they held 
errors that were more or less atrocious. But all the way 
down, the trials and temptations were, it would appear, 
less subtle than they are at the present time. Today these 

R5816 : page 374 

great denominations that formerly fought one another are 
trying to be one body. It would seem on the surface as 
though the Millennium had come, and that the lion and 
the lamb were lying down together. In general there 
seems to be among Christian people a feeling of amity and 



a desire to do good rather than evil. The cases in which 
violent persecution is indulged are far between, and 
not appreciated by the masses. 

For the past forty years, then, there has been a condition 
that is constituting a crucial test to all Christian 
people. The subtle doctrines of Spiritism, of Christian 
Science, of Theosophy, and of New Thought of different 
kinds, are prevalent. Likewise the theory of Evolution is 
widely proclaimed. Learned men formulated the theory 
of Evolution, and then the Higher Critics began to pull 
the Bible to pieces, because of "the oppositions of science, 
falsely so-called." (1 Timothy 6:20.) These false 
theories have constituted a miasma that has spread in 
every direction. There are four hundred millions of 
Christians, according to some; seven or eight hundred 
millions, according to other authorities. These include 
all the infants, the feeble-minded and the insane. Whether 
they are one minute old or fifty years old, they are reckoned 
members of the Church, if they have had certain 
drops of water sprinkled on their heads and certain words 
said over them. 

But amongst the most intelligent of those who name 
the name of Jesus there has been a great falling away 
from the Word of God. This testing has been the most insidious, 
the more injurious, because it has come from the 
theological seminaries. Thousands have fallen. They are 
not about to fall, they have fallen. They have lost all 
anchorage to the Word of the Lord. Out of the two hundred 
thousand professed ministers of Christ, probably not 
more than ten per cent, believe in the Bible as the inspired 
Word of God. Ten per cent, would be twenty thousand, 
leaving one hundred and eighty thousand who have fallen 
from faith. If they have fallen from faith in the inspiration 
of the Bible, we may be sure that they have in a 
measure fallen from relationship to God. Some probably 
never were in relationship with the Lord in any sense. 

UNFOUNDED HOPES OF THE MANY TODAY 

What revelation has God made except that given in the 
Bible? "Having no hope and without God in the world," 
represents the condition of the many. They have hopes of 
their own, but not a Bible hope. The Theosophists have 

R5816 : page 375 

a hope, the Spiritualists have a hope, the Christian 
Scientists have a hope, and so have the Evolutionists; but 
the hope of all these is without foundation and will surely 
fail them in this testing time. 

The hope of the Evolutionist is not that he can himself 
survive everlastingly; but that, as he learns more day 
by day, he may be able to beget better children, who will 
be more noble of character and more wise of head than he 
has been. In turn, these children may be able to live 
longer and have children yet more wise and strong. These 



Evolutionists believe the time will come in the distant 
future when their children will be so wise as to be able 
to take advantage of all the circumstances of life, and may 
continue to live forever. From our viewpoint these people 
are without God, without hope. 

It is true that these ministers speak of Jesus, but the 
message that they give is not the Bible Message. They 
say, indeed, that there was a great deal of good in the life 
of Jesus worthy to be copied, that He was a good Example, 
etc. We think that they speak after this manner 
simply for its moral effect upon the people. If these men 
lived such a life as Jesus lived, they would reprove the 
people and tell them that they are living very foolishly, 
that they are living for self and neglecting the Word of 
God. These same ministers who hold Jesus up as an Example 
know very well that it is because of the way that 
He lived that He died at thirty-three years of age— died 
instead of living everlastingly. They admit that He was 
a very fine character, but the majority of them have no 
place in their scheme for His Ransom-sacrifice. And in 
urging their people in respect to following the example 
of Jesus, this class apparently do not urge them to lay 
down their lives for the Truth and in the service of God. 

They tell their people not to go to war, unless their 
country calls them, and not until the ministers preach it; 
but that if it ever becomes popular to go to war, then go 
to war and make all the cannon possible. Meantime the 
preachers will train the little boys, and form of them Boys' 
Brigades and Boy Scouts. When war comes, then let the 
boys be noble Boy Scouts, shoulder their rifles and do 
their best to kill. Let them help uphold the war, and fight 
on their own side. Let their people care for and help to 
heal the wounded— all who have not been killed outright. 
Let them bind up their wounds, and get them ready as 
quickly as possible to go out to the trenches and fight 
again, and perhaps be killed. 

SKEPTICISM NOW RIFE EVERYWHERE 

All this is a confusion of religious instruction. It 
comes because these people are fallen from faith in the 
Bible. Some of them, seeking to hedge when inquired of 
on the subject of their faith, will say, "Well, we believe 
all the words of Jesus." And some publishers, following 
along the line of this growing sentiment, have published 
New Testaments with the words of Jesus printed in red 
text, so that those who wish to read His words alone have 
there before them these words lettered in red. But if 
asked whether they believe in the words of Jesus in regard 
to Jonah and the great fish, and in His words about 
the Flood in Noah's day, they will retrench and answer, 
"No; we believe as much as our minds tell us is reasonable, 
and we think the rest is all nonsense." The truth is 
that they have no real faith in Jesus, nor in what He declared 
His life in the flesh was for. They do not believe 
that He was a sacrifice for sin, and say so freely. They 



have fallen from the position of faith. 

Now if the teachers of the people have fallen, what 
shall we say for the people themselves, the four hundred 
millions or the eight hundred millions? Some have been 
in one denomination and some in another, but in general 
the whole procedure has been to keep them in ignorance. 
That may not seem to be strictly true when we think of 
how many schools and colleges there are. But the fact is 
that only a small portion of the people ever get as far as 
a collegiate course, or even a high school course. Before 
that time they are supposed to be on the side of the deceived 
ones. Many of our great universities today are 
hotbeds of infidelity. Bible Truth is being kept from the 
people. With the colleges endowed with millions of 
money and with learned professors, and the whole Christian 
world, so called, under the tutelage of the two hundred 
thousand ministers of the nominal church, the wonder 
is that the people are not all infidels. 

With this view, then, of the past forty years, we see a 
fulfilment of this Psalm. We see that thousands and tens 
of thousands have fallen. We see where they have fallen. 
We see why they have fallen. We see that the few are 
standing— "the feet" of Christ. As we look out over the 
world and see these thousands, we perceive that the few 
who have come into covenant relationship with the Lord 
are the only ones who are standing. But many even of 
these, because of having been overcharged with the cares 
of this life and the deceitfulness of riches, and false teachings, 
are in a trembling condition and are quite unable to 
stand firmly. These need our immediate help. 

URGENT NEED OF THE WHOLE ARMOR 

The Apostle Paul urges all the Lord's people to "put on 
the whole armor of God." Some of them have not had on 
much of the armor of God, but that of the creeds of the 
Dark Ages. Some of them, under the false teachings of 
modern Higher Criticism, Evolution, etc., have only a 
wavering faith. They are weak, instead of being "strong 
in the Lord and in the power of His might," as they 
should be. Now is the time for all these to be strong, in 
order that they may "be able to stand in the evil day," 
now upon us. They need to have on "the breastplate of 
righteousness," to be "shod with the preparation of the 
Gospel of Peace," to have "the shield of faith," and "the 
Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God."— 
Ephesians 6:10-17. 

We who have put on "the whole armor of God," who 
have become measurably skilful in the handling of the 
Sword of the Spirit— the truths now due from God's 
Word— need to use this now in the interest of all who 
may be succored. They need to be assisted to put on the 
whole armor quickly, that they may be protected from 
the darts of the Adversary now flying thick and fast, that 
they may be saved from the errors now abounding on 
every hand, that they may be uplifted from their temporary 



fall and made strong in the Lord. 

MINISTERING ANGELS 

This 91st Psalm, then, seems to be a picture of the 
present time; and we are to strive to be the angels mentioned 
in our text. These angels, or ministers, are preeminently 
the children of God. They are to minister to 
the brethren. This is the high honor God has given to 
His people throughout the Gospel Age. In our Lord's 
case angels, spirit beings, ministered to Him; and in 
the cases of some of the Apostles the angels appeared 
and ministered to them at certain times. The Scriptures 
declare, indeed, that the angels are "all ministering spirits, 
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of 
salvation." But we have very little reason to expect that 
God will use any of the spirit beings to do a service that 
may be done by His people. 

According to this Psalm we see that now is the time 
when the "feet" members are in special danger of 

R5817 : page 376 

stumbling, and hence require special assistance. After 

the various snares of this day have been described with 

particularity, we read, in the words of our text, "He shall 

give His angels charge concerning thee,. ..lest thou 

dash thy foot against a stone." Our Lord spoke of Himself 

at the First Advent as the Stone of Stumbling to the 

House of Israel, foretold by the Prophet Isaiah. (Matthew 21:42-45.) 

The Apostle Paul refers to this prophecy that 

Jesus would be a Stone of Stumbling to both the Houses 

of Israel.— Isaiah 8:14; Romans 9:32,33. 

Our Lord was a Stone of Stumbling to the Natural 
House of Israel in their forty years of Harvest. Similarly, 
we see that He has been, as foretold, the Stone of 
Stumbling in this Harvest, during these past forty years. 
His presence and His work were neither understood nor 
appreciated in the Jewish Harvest; and so here, the fact 
of our Lord's parousia, presence, is disbelieved and His 
Ransom-sacrifice repudiated. The events of today are 
manifestations of His presence. These things and the 
vital truths of Scripture, now more clear and luminous 
than ever, are stumbling-stones to the world, but are 
blessings to the faithful, watching ones. The true people 
of God, mounting on this Stepping-Stone, are lifted up to 
a higher view -point and kept from stumbling. The doctrine 
of the Ransom and the evidences of the Master's 
Second Presence at this time are unspeakable advantages 
to the saints of the Lord. 

PRESENT FULFILMENT OF OUR TEXT 

We see that the "stone" of our text is a symbolic stone. 
Satan tried to apply it literally in His temptation of Jesus, 
when he urged Him to cast Himself down from the 



pinnacle of the Temple. But Jesus said, "Get thee hence, 
Satan," and refused to make any such application of the 
Scripture. But we see the fulfilment of it in this our day. 
We believe that the Lord has raised up messengers, 
agencies, which have been very helpful to all of the "feet" 
class. These agencies have been various. The printed 
page with its Message of Present Truth has gone in many 
languages to all parts of the earth, to seek out and to sustain 
the members of "the feet" of Christ. Thousands are 
writing us continually that they have been recovered when 
they have been in great danger. Some of these had already 
gone into infidelity; many had lost all faith in the 
Bible as the Word of God. But they are strong in the 
Lord and in the power of His might today. 

God has used these agencies, then; and these have been 
His ministering spirits, which have ministered to His 
people. We do not say that there have not been invisible 
agencies also, but we know the agencies that we have 
seen. So our text has a good message for us all. "He 
shall give His angels charge over thee, to guard thee in 
all thy ways." Whatever may be the difficulties of the 
Lord's children in the near future, there will be a special 
comfort in remembering that the Lord is able to make 
full provision for all His true-hearted ones, and that He 
will do so. He will continue to use these agencies, and 
there will be the strengthening of His people to the end of 
the way. If there are any who will not be thus led, it 
must be because there is something wrong in themselves. 
We should each see to it that we are of the "thee" class. 
"No evil shall come nigh thee." (Psalm 91:10.) That 
will mean Divine protection to the very end of our course. 



R5819 : page 376 

THE GLORIOUS PROCLAMATION 

--DECEMBER 19. -LUKE 2:1-20.- 

THE ANGELIC MESSAGE OF THE FIRST CHRISTMAS DAY-"GOOD 
TIDINGS OF GREAT JOY"-TO BE ACCOMPLISHED DURING 

THE MILLENNIUM-THE BLESSING TO COME FIRST TO 
THE CHURCH AND THEN TO THE WORLD-THEN "PEACE ON 
EARTH, GOOD WILL TO MEN" FOREVERMORE-'GLORY TO 
GOD IN THE HIGHEST!" 

"For unto you is born this day in the City of David 
a Savior, who is Christ the Lord."— Verse 11. 

THE Message of the angels to the shepherds 
on the plains of Bethlehem becomes more 
and more precious to each child of God in 
proportion as he grows in grace and knowledge. 
As his ears and eyes of understanding 
open more widely to the lengths and 



breadths of God's great Plan of the Ages, 

that prophetic Message is the more highly 

esteemed as an epitome of the entire Gospel. 

Nor can our attention be called too 

frequently to the great event which lies at the foundation 

of that Message— the Savior's birth. 

It matters not that December 25th is not the real 
anniversary of the Savior's birth, but probably the anniversary 
of the annunciation by the angel Gabriel, the 
anniversary of the Virgin Mary's conception, our Lord 
being born nine months later on the calendar, or about 
October 1. One so great, whose birth, death and resurrection 
from the dead mean so much to the human 
family, may be remembered and celebrated any day, every 
day, by all who appreciate what He has done for our race. 
Since, then, the majority of Christian people have become 
habituated to the celebration of December 25th as 
our Lord's birthday, we need make no protest, but join 
with all in celebrating that day with rejoicing of heart, 
giving gifts and remembrances one to another, thus 
copying Divine favor, which gave to mankind the Son 
of God as a gift of mercy and love for our redemption. 

For more than four thousand years the promises of 
God, clothed in more or less obscurity, had been given to 
mankind, intimating that ultimately the great curse of 
sin and death that had come upon the world through 
Father Adam's disobedience in Eden would be rolled 
away, and instead of a curse, a blight, would come a 
blessing of the Lord with life-giving refreshment. In 
various types, figures and shadowy promises this lesson 
had come down through the ages to the time of our 
Lord's birth, especially amongst the Jews, who were the 
Divinely favored and covenanted people. 

Since the Jews were a people of commercial spirit, 
many of them were to be found in all parts of the 
civilized world. Thus amongst every people the faith 
in the one God and the hope of Israel through a Messiah 
were more or less made known, so that at the time of 
our Savior's birth, we read, "all men were in expectation" 
of a coming Messiah. Doubtless this expectation 
was based upon the interpretation of Daniel's prophecy, 
which we now see clearly marked the year of our Lord's 
majority, when He was thirty years of age and made 
His consecration to His work and received the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit, His anointing as the great antitypical 
Priest and as the great antitypical King over Israel and 
the world. -Daniel 9:24-27. 

FROM BETHLEHEM TO NAZARETH 

In olden times there were honorable cities and mean 
cities. Nazareth was generally recognized as one of the 
latter, while Bethlehem was distinctly one of the former 
—the City of David, Israel's beloved king. The Scriptures 
explain that Mary, our Lord's mother, and her 
husband Joseph were both of the lineage of David, and 



R5819 : page 377 

that in a seemingly accidental manner the prophecy was 
fulfilled which foretold that Messiah would be born in 
Bethlehem. -Micah 5:2. 

At that time the Roman Empire bore rule over the 
whole world, the Jews being subject to it, but waiting 
expectantly, restlessly, for the coming Messiah, who 
would deliver them from being a subject people and 
make of them the ruling caste in His Kingdom, which 
would have dominion over the whole world. The great 
Roman Emperor Caesar Augustus was in power at this 
time, and had sent forth his decree for a polling or 
census, of the whole world for the purpose of taxation, etc. 

St. Luke informs us that it was in response to this 
royal decree that Joseph and Mary went up to their 
native city to be enrolled; that thus it was that Jesus 
was born in Bethlehem; that on account of the great 
concourse of people at the same time and for the same 
purpose, accommodations were scarce and the stable of 
the khan or inn, was used by some as a lodging; and 
that Joseph and Mary, being late comers, were forced 
to occupy these humble quarters. Thus it was that the 
King of Glory, whose Kingdom is by and by to rule the 
world, was in the time of His flesh born in a stable and 
cradled in a manger. 

THE ANGELS AND THE SHEPHERDS 

Noble shepherds those must have been to whom the 
Almighty sent the angelic Message respecting the birth 
of Jesus, the Messiah— the Message which has rung 
down the ages and reached our ears, the Message which 
thrills us the more in proportion as we are able to grasp 
its meaning. First, an angel appeared to the shepherds 
and allayed their fears, saying, "Fear not; behold, I 
bring you good tidings." It would appear that fear is 
one of the dominating impulses of the human mind, 
especially in conjunction with Divine revelations. 

Men realize— even the best of the race— that they are 
imperfect, and that the Almighty and His laws are perfect. 
Instinctively the world seems to realize that a 
curse, or condemnation of the Almighty, rests upon it; 
and instinctively it fears a further curse, a further condemnation, 
realizing its continual and increasing sinfulness. 
The same is true today with all except the comparatively 
few who are well informed respecting the 
Divine Plan. Thus the subject is generally obnoxious 
to the world— a subject which they prefer to avoid, because 
of a feeling of guilt and a dread of further knowledge 
and condemnation. 

It is for the true children of God today, as it was for 
the angels at that time, to assure the world that God is 
better than all their fears— that God so loved the world 
as to redeem mankind from the just sentence of death, 



the curse that came upon all as inheritors of Adam's 
imperfection and sentence. 

"Good tidings" is another translation of our word 
Gospel. How beautiful is the thought that the Gospel 
is really and truly good tidings! Alas, for the misrepresentations 
of God's Plan, because of which so many of 
His professed people misrepresent His character and His 
Word, and apply the term Gospel to their various messages 
from the Dark Ages, teaching purgatory and 
eternal torment as the portion of the race! 

Let us get away from this false thought and get the 
truth that the Gospel is good tidings. The angel elaborated, 
saying that his Message was "good tidings of great 
joy, which shall be to all people." Ah, thank God, His 
Plan is wider, deeper, higher and grander than anything 
which we had ever conceived! The Gospel Message is 
not merely to be good tidings to the comparatively few 
that now have ears to hear and eyes to see its beauties, 
but in God's due time it is to be good tidings of great joy 
to all people the world over. 

As every member of Adam's race shared in his fall 
and in the curse of death which came upon him as a 
result of his disobedience, so every member of the race 
was included in the great redemptive sacrifice which our 
Lord Jesus offered and which was finished at Calvary. 
God's Plan in Christ, as it is being worked out and shall 
ultimately be accomplished, will mean great joy for all 
people; and the tidings of this fact were given at the 
very moment of our Lord's birth, because He was the 
One through whom all the glorious things of the Divine 
Purpose and Plan shall ultimately be accomplished. 

THE LOGIC OF THE MESSAGE 

The Message took cognizance of the fact that it was 
to reasonable people, who would wish to know why the 
unchangeable God, who had once pronounced a curse 
upon the race, should at any time so amend and alter 
matters as to supplant the curse with a blessing. The 
messenger stated the philosophy of the Divine Plan— 
"Unto you is born this day in the City of David a Savior, 
who is Christ [Messiah] the Lord." There we have the 
key to the entire Gospel statement of how God could be 
just and yet be the Justifier of sinners who accept Jesus. 
—Romans 3:26. 

The word Savior here signifies Life-giver. How 
beautiful is the thought that as death is the wage of sin, 
the curse upon the race, this Messiah who was born is 
to be the One who will rescue the race from the sentence 
by giving them life again! The explanation of how He 
would give them life was not made, nor was it necessary 
at that time. But now, in the light of the developments 
and with the explanations furnished through the Holy 
Spirit in the New Testament, we see that our Lord's 
voluntary sacrifice of His life, dying "the Just for the 
unjust," settles the claims of Divine Justice against 



Adam, and thus incidentally against all who share his 
death sentence, namely, all mankind. 

Truly, the more we see of the Divine Plan for our 
salvation, which began to take shape in the birth of Jesus, 
the more we feel like shouting with the angelic choir 
praises to the God of Heaven, thankfulness for His 
mercy to the children of men! It mattered not that the 
babe born in Bethlehem was the Savior only in prospect, 
that He could not even be anointed to do His work until 
He reached manhood's estate thirty years later. It mattered 
not that even then it would be necessary for Him 
to lay down His life gradually during the three and a 
half years of His earthly ministry, to be finished at Calvary. 
Nor did it matter that His resurrection was still 
three days after His death, and His ascension forty days 
later; and that the blessing in general would be deferred 
for nearly nineteen centuries thereafter. As the angels 
could sing and rejoice at the first budding of the Divine 
Plan of Salvation, so also can all who have faith in the 
ultimate outcome rejoice with joy unspeakable and give 
praise to God in the highest and to His Son our Lord. 

"SAVED BY HOPE" 

Although nearly nineteen centuries have rolled away 
since that angelic Message was delivered, it has not yet 
been fulfilled except in a limited measure by faith to 
those who have the eye and the ear of faith— in all, a 
"little flock." But the bad tidings of great misery for 
nearly all people have been spread abroad in the name 
of Christ, much to the discredit of the Divine Plan and 
to the dishonor of the Divine character. Instead of 

R5819 : page 378 

carrying joy, the message has very generally carried 
grief and sorrow, especially to the kind-hearted and more 
generously disposed. Indeed we may say that no message 
of the Lord Jesus has ever reached all people. 
Even today, after nineteen centuries of propaganda, only 
a comparatively small portion of the human family have 
ever heard of the only name given under Heaven and 
amongst men whereby we must be saved— "nor is there 
salvation in any other."— Acts 4:12. 

What, then, shall we say of the salvation which has 
come to those who have truly accepted Christ as their 
Savior, who are today rejoicing in Him as such, and who 
by faith are seeing the salvation of God begun in their 
own hearts and yet to be fully accomplished under the 
whole heavens? This the Apostle calls the salvation by 
hope. His words are, "We are saved by hope."— 
Romans 8:24. 

We are not saved actually; we are still surrounded by 
sin, pain, sighing, crying and dying; the curse is not yet 
rolled away. All that the best of the Lord's people have 
yet received is salvation by hope, by faith. Yet this 



anticipation of the future salvation, of the resurrection 
from the dead, of a participation in the glory, honor and 
immortality of the Divine nature promised to the faithful, 
is so strong, so clear, that those who possess it are 
enabled to rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 
even in the midst of trials, difficulties, weaknesses and 
unfavorable conditions incident to the curse which still 
rests upon the world of mankind. 

A PROPHECY OF GOOD THINGS 

The angelic Message was a prophecy of good things 
to be accomplished for the Church and the world during 
the Millennial Age. The Church is to have the first 
blessing. The First Resurrection is to be composed only of 
the blessed and holy who shall live and reign with Christ 
during the thousand years. Then Satan shall be bound, 
and the good influences of truth and righteousness shall 
enlighten the whole earth. (Revelation 20:1-6.) The 
declaration of the Scriptures is that the deliverance of 
the Church will come early in the morning of the Millennial 
Day. As the prophet declares, "God will help 
her early in the morning."— Psalm 46:5, margin. 

But much as we rejoice in the glorious hopes of the 
Gospel set before us who now see, who now rejoice with 
joy unspeakable, we are glad that the Divine mercy and 
love are of such lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths as to encompass the whole world of mankind, and 
to provide a blessing for every member of Adam's race 
through Him who loved us and bought us with His 
own precious blood. 

During the Millennium this prophecy will have fulfilment. 
The great Savior who has already redeemed 
us by His sacrifice will stand forth as the King, the glorified 
Messiah, and establish His dominion of righteousness 
in the world for the blessing and uplifting of every 
member of the race. In harmony with the words of the 
Apostle, those will be Times of Refreshing, "Times of 
Restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of all the 
holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.) 
If the Lord had based the hope of the world upon some 
works of merit or righteousness of the world's doing, 
then indeed we might have feared— indeed, the more we 
know of the world, the less hope we would have. But, 
on the contrary, the Lord has based the entire proposition 
for the future blessing, not upon our worthiness, 
but upon the worthiness and sacrifice of His Son. To 
you is born a Life-giver, which is Messiah the Lord. 

How it adds to our enjoyment of the blessings of the 
coming Age to know that the trials and difficulties of 
the present Gospel Age are subject to the Divine supervision 
in the interest of the Little Flock that is now being 
gathered in advance from amongst men— the Elect, 
the Church! We see how the present trials and difficulties 
are the chiselings and polishings necessary to our 
development in the fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit 



in character-likeness of God's dear Son, our Lord, our 
Hope, our Bridegroom. How joyful the thought that 
soon the elect number called from the world to be "the 
Bride, the Lamb's Wife," will be completed and enter 
into her glory! How precious the thought that then 
they shall be privileged with their Lord and Master to 
extend the Divine favor of blessing and uplift to the 
world! What higher honor or privilege or blessing 
could possibly come to any one? 

THE ANGELS' SONG 

It was after the giving of the Message of good tidings 
of great joy by the Heavenly one that a host of 
angels appeared to the shepherds, saying, "Glory to God 
in the highest, and on earth peace, good will to men." 
This, too, is a prophecy. It is not yet true, but will be 
fulfilled in every particular in God's due time, which we 
believe is now nigh, even at the door. Not yet does God 
receive glory in the highest. Not yet is there peace 
amongst men. Quite to the contrary. God's name is 
blasphemed, not only by those who vulgarly and in ribald 
jest take the Divine name in vain, not merely by the 
heathen who worship devils and think that these are 
gods, but even by Christian people. Every day God's 
name is blasphemed by those who profess to be His 
people, who profess to uphold the Holy Name. 

For be it known that blasphemy is any dishonorable 
misrepresentation of another. God be merciful to us ! for 
at some time or other doubtless every one of us has 
blasphemed His holy name in this manner— by misrepresenting 
the Divine character and the Divine Plan, by 
picturing the God of Love, of Mercy, of Justice and of 
Truth as the originator, the planner, the perpetrator of 
the eternal torment of the great mass of His human 
creatures, born in sin, misshapen in iniquity, prone to sin 
as the sparks to fly upward! 

But the Lord had mercy upon us because we did it 
ignorantly. Therefore we should have compassion upon 
others who still ignorantly misrepresent our God; and 
our energies should be continually bent to their assistance, 
that the eyes of their understanding might open 
more widely to perceive the lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths, and to know the love of God, which 
passeth understanding. 

Noting that peace on earth and good will to men have 
not followed the Savior's birth thus far, and not discerning 
that this is a prophecy of what is to be accomplished 
during the Millennium, many have been inclined to 
change the translation of this verse so as to have it read, 
"On earth peace amongst men in whom He is well 
pleased." However, by this change the statement would 
not be true; for even the Lord's people have no peace 
upon earth. Whatever peace they have is in their hearts, 
and is based upon their faith in God and in the glorious 
things which He has promised. Our Lord Himself and 



the Apostles testified to this, assuring us that whosoever 
in this present time would live godly should suffer persecution, 
and that a man's foes should be they of his own 
household.-2 Timothy 3:12; Matthew 10:36. 

Let us not confuse ourselves nor abridge the testimony 
of the Word, but with the eye of faith look forward 
to the Day of Christ, in which all these glorious 

R5819 : page 379 

prophecies will have their fulfilment, in which peace shall 
indeed fill the whole earth with the knowledge of the 
glory of the Lord, bringing Divine favor and rolling 
away the curse from the entire groaning creation, as 
pointed out by the Apostle.— Romans 8:22. 

FULFILLED IN GOD'S DUE TIME 

Not even with the inauguration of the Millennium 
will this prophecy be fulfilled. Not until its close, when 
the human family shall have been lifted by the Kingdom 
regulations out of sin, sickness, pain, sorrow and death, 
up, up to all that was lost in Adam— not until then will 
there indeed be glory to God in the highest, not until 
then will there be peace amongst men. Nor are we to 
understand that the entire race will be appreciative of 
the Divine love and favor even after they have fully 
seen the righteousness of God in Christ manifested. On 
the contrary, the Scriptures seem to teach clearly that 
there will be a class who will then prove unfit for life 
eternal, unappreciative of the Divine favor. And it is 
with satisfaction that we learn that all such shall be 
destroyed from amongst the people in the Second Death. 

Thus eventually, by the close of the Millennium, 
Satan and all wilful wrongdoers having been destroyed, 
the time will come, as declared in the Scriptures, when 
all voices in Heaven and in earth and under the earth 
shall be heard praising God and the Lamb forever. 
Hosanna! Glory to God in the highest! Peace and 
good will to men! This will be the final shout of a 
redeemed race when the great Plan of Salvation shall 
have been fully outworked according to the Divine Purpose 
from the beginning, as set forth in the Scriptures. 

FROM GLORY TO A MANGER 

The time of our Lord's birth is quite clearly fixed. 
In STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. II., we have gone 
into the subject in detail, and will not here repeat our 
deductions. The notable census made by order of Caesar 
Augustus included the civilized world of that day; and 
according to Jewish custom each family and tribe had 
their names enrolled therein. 

Both Joseph and Mary, being of the Davidic line, 
went to the City of David— Bethlehem— to be enrolled. 
The city is a small one, located on a hillside. The inns 



or hotels of that land are very different from ours. They 
are neither hotels nor drinking saloons, but are entered 
from a court-yard. Various large, unfurnished rooms 
are at the service of the traveler, who carries with him 
his wraps, in which he sleeps, and also his food and 
utensils for such light housekeeping as he may choose 
to do. Stalls for horses, camels, etc., are provided on 
the ground floor; and in the event of a crowd, as on 
such an occasion, it is no uncommon thing for people, 
finding the upper rooms crowded full, to make themselves 
nearly as comfortable in the stabling department. 

Thus it came that our Savior was ushered in a most 
humble manner into the world which, as the Logos, He 
had made. (John 1:10.) It was there in the stable of 
the overcrowded inn that the shepherds found the babe, 
as predicted by the angels, and went forth proclaiming 
the fact. Mary made no boasts, however, but waited 
for God's due time. 



R5817 : page 379 

GOD'S MERCY TO ISRAEL AND TO OTHERS 
--DECEMBER 26.-QUARTERLY REVIEW- 
IS RAEL A FAVORED NATION-GOD'S MERCY IN THE LAW COVENANT 

-SPIRITUAL ISRAEL A NEW NATION-THE ROYAL 
PRIESTHOOD-OTHER NATIONS UNRECOGNIZED BY GOD-HOW 
DIVINE MERCY WILL EVENTUALLY REACH ALL PEOPLE. 

"Jehovah is merciful and gracious, slow to anger and 
abundant in loving-kindness."— Psalm 103:8.— R.V. 

ONE difficulty with us as Bible students has 

been that in the past we took too narrow a 

view of the Divine character and of the 

Bible. For more than twelve centuries the 

Bible was not studied. Instead, certain 

Bishops, thinking themselves to be Apostles 

of equal authority with The Twelve whom 

our Lord Jesus appointed (St. Paul taking 

the place of Judas), thought that they had 

full right, as Apostles, to make up a substitute 

for the Bible. These substitutes were styled creeds 

—Confessions of Faith. These were studied, and the 

Bible was neglected. 

Under these circumstances it is not surprising that 
God's people got far away from the true teaching of His 
Word. Even when the Bible began to come back to the 
people in Reformation times, their poor heads were so 
badly clogged and confused with the false doctrines of 
twelve centuries of human theorizing that they were not 
prepared to see the Bible in its own light, but rather in 
the light of these creeds. Besides, they had been long 



taught that to doubt the creeds would constitute them 
heretics, and that the punishment for heresy is eternal 
torment. Hence the endeavor to keep in line with the 
creeds in all subsequent Bible study. 

Now Bible students see that this was all a mistake- 
that the Bible should have been studied in its own light. 
They see that the creeds are full of confusing errors, 
which really make the Word of God of none effect where 
they are recognized. Now our Bible studies are different, 
because of our clearer knowledge of these matters, 
as well as because we are living in the dawning of the 
New Age— at the time when God promised that His people 
should understand His Word— "The wise shall understand." 
-Daniel 12:10. 

GOD'S DEALINGS WITH ISRAEL 

Our Text was addressed, primarily, to the nation of 
Israel. On account of disobedience, God cut off Father 
Adam, Mother Eve and all their children from special 
fellowship with Him, sentencing them to death— as not 
worthy of everlasting life— "Dying, thou shaltdie." 
(Genesis 2: 17, margin.) But even this sentence God did 
not hasten. The sinners might live as they could. 

God's Mercy was manifested toward the posterity of 
Abraham— Isaac, Jacob, and then all of Jacob's children. 
God made the twelve tribes into one nation, cementing 
them together by His promises to them in connection with 
the Law Covenant instituted by Moses at Mount Sinai. 
If they would keep God's Law, they would live forever— 
not die at all. Moreover, they were to be blessed in all 
of their affairs— their health, their flocks, their herds, their 
cattle. Everything would be blessed. 

But they could not keep this Law Covenant, because 
of having been born in sin, like the remainder of the race. 
Nevertheless God purposed that through endeavoring to 
keep the Law that nation should be greatly blessed. And 
it was so. True, He chastened them for their wrongdoings 
and shortcomings, but always with loving interest 
and care, never wholly casting them off. Their national 
distresses and captivities were in the nature of chastisements, 

R5817 : page 380 

with a view to teaching them necessary lessons. 

Thus God's favor continued with that one nation— and 
with no other nation— from the death of Jacob down to 
the death of Jesus, a period of 1845 years. Even then, in 
casting off the nation when they rejected Jesus and 
crucified Him, the Lord made provision for all of the Jews 
who were spiritually inclined, that they might not only be 
retained in His favor, but might come into still greater 
favor at Pentecost and onward, being there begotten of 
the Holy Spirit— no longer to be a House of Servants, 
under Moses, but the House of Sons, under Jesus. 
(Hebrews 3:5,6.) Even when rejecting the nation, God 



intimated clearly that the time would come when His 
favor would return to them— after the establishment of 
Messiah's Kingdom-Amos 9:11,12; Acts 15:13-17. 

GOD'S NEW NATION 

Meantime, the saintly Jews who were "Israelites indeed" 
became the nucleus, or start, of Spiritual Israel. Of 
this Spiritual Israel St. Peter says, "Ye are a Royal Priesthood, 
a holy nation, a people for a peculiar purpose— that 
ye might show forth the praises of Him who hath called 
you out of darkness into His marvelous light." 

We see, then, that the Church is God's New Creation, 
the new nation with which He has been dealing exclusively 
during the Gospel Age. He is dealing with these with a 
view to their education and development, that they may be 
associated with our Lord Jesus in His great Millennial 
Kingdom. Then for a thousand years He and His saintly 
company, gathered from every nation under heaven, will 
bless Natural Israel and all the nations of the world with 
light, with knowledge, with assistance and uplifting, for 
the purpose of delivering them from the bondage of sin 
and death, back to the likeness of God, lost by Adam and 
redeemed on Calvary. 

It is because of this special work that God has for the 
Church that He has made her trials fiery ones, declaring, 
"Through much tribulation ye must enter into the Kingdom 
of God." (Acts 14:22.) This class of fully consecrated 
ones, regardless of sectarian lines, have all been 
begotten of the Holy Spirit. None others are recognized 
of God. This Church have their names written in the 
Lamb's Book of Life— in Heaven— and are in the present 
life demonstrating their faithfulness, their loyalty to God. 
When the foreordained number shall have taken the step 

R5818 : page 380 

and shall have demonstrated their loyalty even unto death, 
then this holy nation will be complete. 

It is the Spiritual Seed of Abraham to whom belong 
the great promises of God. Of this class St. Paul says, 
"If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs 
according to the Promise." (Galatians 3:8,16,29.) The 
Promise was made to Abraham, and declares, "In thy 
Seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed." 
(Genesis 22:18.) We have St. Paul's word for it that 
Christ and His Church are this Spiritual Seed, whose 
mission it will be, in God's due time, to bless all mankind 
—"all the families of the earth"— not only those who are 
alive and remaining at the time of the establishment of 
the Kingdom, but all who have ever lived. God's mercy 
referred to in our Text is especially toward this Spiritual 
Israel— even more so than toward Natural Israel. 

THE BREADTH OF DIVINE MERCY 



Now we come to the grand climax of God's mercy and 
grace. The Jewish nation was small. The Church, the 
Spiritual Israel, is small. But God's grace and mercy are 
to extend to the whole world of mankind— every creature 
for whom Christ died. The time for dealing with the 
world and giving them their opportunity of sharing in 
God's grace and mercy has already been appointed by the 
Father. It will be during the Millennium— the thousand 
years of Christ's Reign. He will be the great spiritual 
King of the earth; and His Church will be associated 
with Him as His joint-heirs and assistant rulers, teachers, 
healers, uplifters, rewarders and punishers of mankind 
during the Millennium. All this service of the world will 
be with a view to bestowing upon them, if they will, the 
grace of God, the mercy of God, which He purposed from 
the beginning, and which is to be brought to mankind 
through Messiah's Kingdom of Glory. 

For a thousand years the rising Sun of Righteousness 
will bless the world, flooding the earth with the light of 
the knowledge of God. For the same thousand years 
Satan shall be bound, that he may deceive the people no 
more. For the same thousand years the work of blessing 
and restitution will progress— Times (or years) of Restitution 
the entire Millennium will be. Every creature will 
have his eyes of understanding opened to see, to know 
and to understand the Love of God, His tender Mercy 
and His Wisdom, all centered in and manifested through 
our Lord Jesus Christ. God's Mercy will be exercised 
toward the world with a view to its release from the 
bondage of sin and death to the full liberty of the sons of 
God— the same that Adam enjoyed before he sinned.— 
Romans 8:19-23. 

Thus we see "a wideness in God's Mercy, like the 
wideness of the sea." Thus we see that His grace, while 
limited first to one earthly nation, then later to an elect 
company from all nations, is finally to be extended to 
every human being the world around, bringing all to the 
fullest privileges and opportunities of knowledge, love, 
obedience and blessing. 



R5818 : page 380 

THE LABOR OF LOVE TO BE REWARDED 

"God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love 
which ye have showed toward His name, in that ye have 
ministered to the saints, and do minister."— Hebrews 6:10. 

DISCOURAGEMENT is a hindrance to growth 

in grace; St. Paul was seeking to encourage 

his readers. The context implies that they 

had experienced some setback, some discouragement. 

He intimates that while they 

had begun well, their zeal had cooled to 



some extent. In this chapter and on to the 

tenth inclusive, he points out the danger of 

falling back and away after we have become 

Christians. And to those who are likely to 

become discouraged he gives the exhortation of our text, 

"God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of 

love." We might inquire, What great work, or labor of 

love, could they do that would constitute it unrighteous 

for God to forget to reward it? Are not good works the 

proper course for all mankind? How would it be unrighteous 

for God to forget these good works? 

The answer of Scripture would seem to be that the 
world cannot do any good works that God could acknowledge— 
"There is none righteous, no, not one." But "God 
is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love," 
writes the Apostle. What does he mean? We reply, He 
is addressing Christians, those who have become God's 
children by entering into a covenant with Him. They 
were children of wrath, even as others; and still, according 
to the flesh, they are imperfect. But God is not dealing 

R5818 : page 381 

with these according to the flesh. He has received 
them into His family under a special arrangement, a 
Covenant of Sacrifice. In that Covenant He agreed that 
through Christ He would make allowance for their weaknesses, 
and deal with them according to the intentions of 
their hearts and minds, according as they would seek to 
please Him as His children. God has thus bound Himself 
of His own free will by entering into a Covenant with His 
people. He is bound to them, on the one side, and they 
are bound to Him, on the other side. Neither can escape 
the conditions of that Covenant. 

DANGER OF LOSING THE REWARD 

These Covenanters were members of Adam's fallen 
race, condemned to death. Ah, yes! but this is the race 
for whom Christ died, and who will be recovered from 
death and from the condemnation of sin that came through 
Adam's disobedience. And this merit of Christ's death 
was applied first for a choice class who during the Gospel 
Age should long after God and gladly accept His arrangement 
through Christ. This being so, when these heard of 
Christ as the Redeemer, they believed on Him, they sacrificed 
their earthly hopes, aims, ambitions— all— in order 
that they might enter into this Covenant with the Lord. 
The thought which inspired them to take this step was the 
hope that they might attain to the spiritual inheritance, to 
be joint-inheritors with Christ in the Kingdom to be set 
up on the earth. This was something to which God had 
opened up the way, through His provision in Christ. They 
gave up the earthly things for the grander, the Heavenly. 
They voluntarily sacrificed all earthly rights and interests. 
They bound themselves irrevocably to the Lord. 



Now if they should make a failure in this matter, they 
would lose absolutely everything. The Apostle is pointing 
out this fact. They have acknowledged God's arrangement, 
and there is a great reward coming to them 
under their Covenant with Him. Do not, he urges, forfeit 
this reward by turning away from the Lord and 
becoming cold or lukewarm, which condition might lead 
on to entire rejection of God. Rather go on, and be of 
good courage; and the Lord, Jehovah Himself, shall 
strengthen your hearts; wait expectantly on Him. 

In the 10th Chapter, the Apostle tells them of how 
some of them had in the past endured a great fight of 
afflictions, and of how others had suffered with those in 
affliction in that they had been sympathizers and companions 
of those who had been so persecuted. All this 
was endured for the Lord's sake, for love of the brethren, 
and in harmony with God's arrangement. Therefore they 
should have confidence in God, that He loved them and 
appreciated all they had borne for Him. The Apostle exhorts 
them again not to turn back, not to be discouraged, 
but to be encouraged; and again he assures them of his 
confidence that they would persevere to the end. 

THE BLESSEDNESS OF MINISTERING TO THE SAINTS 

St. Paul declares that their labors of love were shown 
toward God's name. This honor toward God's name consisted 
in their ministering to the saints. This was a proof 
of their love for the Lord. This ministry, too, had been 
kept up. The saints represent God in the world. Whatever 
is done for the saints is, therefore, done for God. 
There is a distinction to be noted in the Bible as respects 
those who are in covenant relationship with God and those 
who are not in covenant relationship with Him. We have 
certain duties toward the world. We have responsibilities 
toward them. The Golden Rule is to operate always 
and toward all men. But we have not the same obligation 
toward the world that we have toward the saints. Whoever 
honors the saints and serves them, honors and serves 
God. This seems to be the Apostle's thought in the matter. 

We are not to understand that the Lord would be displeased 
that we should do good to all men. Rather the 
Apostle urges, "Let us do good unto all men as we have 
opportunity." Be generous, be kind to everybody, but 
especially to the saints. (Galatians 6:10.) This is what 
is particularly pleasing to God. Every service lovingly 
and gladly rendered to the saints is rendered unto His 
glory. This is true in a very special sense; for there are 
people in the world who might be naturally more admirable 
in character, and it might be more pleasing to 
serve them than to serve many of the saints, who might 
be ruder, cruder, in some respects. But in the service to 
the saints there is a special blessing from the Lord. We 
are to have this in mind when meeting and fellowshiping 
with those who have become children of God, and when 
we have opportunities to assist or comfort them. They 



must have our love, our cooperation, our sympathy, our 
aid. There may be more or less option in respect to 
others, but not in respect to our brethren in Christ. 
This same principle, to some extent, holds good 
amongst worldly people. For instance, an Odd Fellow 
would show favors toward an Odd Fellow, whether rich 
or poor, learned or unlearned, that he would not show to 

R5819 : page 381 

others. And the same with Masons. A Mason would 
show favor to a Mason the world over, whether he be 
rich or poor, black or white. If these are the human 
standards, much more so should it be thus with those who 
have become children of the Lord. The fact that they 
are disciples of Christ makes it incumbent on whoever is 
a follower of the same Master to do a brother's or a 
sister's part. "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of 
the least of these, ye have done it unto Me." This does 
not apply now to the world, but it does apply to the 
Church, the Lord's faithful followers. 

PERSEVERANCE IN THIS MINISTRY 

The Apostle says, "In that ye have ministered unto the 
saints, and do minister." This signifies that they were 
still in this proper attitude. Although somewhat discouraged 
in the good way, they were still helpful to one another. 
Another thought— it was not merely the amount 
of good works that they did that counted; for many good 
works are done by many people which would not in any 
sense be recognized by God or be bound to be rewarded. 
The works of the world are works of sinners. The world 
are not in covenant relationship with God. If any one 
does a good work, he by an unwritten law gets more or 
less blessing out of it. Whoever does a good work with 
a worthy motive will receive some reward, some blessing. 
It will ennoble his character and help to fit him for the 
blessings of the next Age, when all the world will be on 
trial for life before the Judgment Seat of God. The 
nobler the character in that Day, the fewer corrective 
stripes will be necessary. But in order to get the present 
blessing of the Lord, His special blessing, he must be in 
covenant relationship with Him. 

The work now being done by those in such relationship 
with God will be worthy of His notice and reward. In 
the 13th Chapter of 1st Corinthians, the Apostle points 
out that, with the Body of Christ good works alone are 
not sufficient to indicate God's favor. He declared that 
if he should give his body to be burned, and should give 
all his goods to feed the poor, there would be no real 
merit in it unless it was done from the motive of love. 
"Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, 
and have not love, I am become as sounding brass and a 
tinkling cymbal," was his further declaration. One might 



R5819 : page 382 

do these good works to have the honor of men. If they 
were done for any such reason, God would not consider 
them good works to be rewarded. The works that God 
recognizes as good works and worthy of His approval and 
reward are those done by His faithful people, who are 
justified and sanctified, and who serve from love to Him, 
to His people and to His cause. 

And so St. Paul says here to these, "God is not unrighteous 
to forget your work and labor of love." This is 
important to have in mind. It is important for us to see 
to it that our motives are those of love toward the Lord 
and His Cause and His brethren. Such good works, if 
persevered in according to our ability and opportunity, 
will not fail of a blessed reward. 



R5819 : page 382 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
HARVEST WORKERS SUCCESSFUL 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We want to thank you very much for fixing the price of 
the cloth-bound SCENARIO at 68c. It is really wonderful what 
a difference the increased price makes in our sales. It was 
very hard to sell them for 50c, but the people bite quite 
readily at 68c. How they love a bargain, even if it does 
cost them 18c more to secure it! The very fish that would 
probably be scared at the mere sight of a hook baited with a 
half dollar, now gather around waiting their turn to bite at 
the 68c morsel. We want to please the people. We are convinced 
that Mr. Barnum was right when he said "The public 
should be pleased." So if it pleases them to pay 18c more, 
we are glad to work in harmony with their wishes! Yesterday 
we tried the SCENARIOS exclusively in the afternoon for about 
3-1/4 hours, and sold 21 copies— 7 for cash (we fill our pockets 
with them), and 14 for later delivery. It is very easy to sell 
them; and the Colporteurs and friends should be able to put 
them out in enormous quantities, especially with the whole 
world open territory. It seems as if all the Colporteurs could 
handle them as a side-line, at least. 

Have just received reports from several others who are 
trying the SCENARIOS at the increased price. One brother who 
was having a hard struggle to make ends meet for himself 
and wife and child (at 50c) is now averaging 14 per day, and 
is catching up fine. Another reports 20 to 25 copies in a 
morning's work. This is the average of a married sister, 
working in territory where work is booming— war materials. 
Another reports 100 orders in four days. 

Apart from the fact that the increased price is enabling 
some to make out so well financially, we might mention that 
we are seeing some results from the SCENARIOS. One sister 



immersed during our recent Convention had her interest 
aroused chiefly through reading a SCENARIO some months ago. 
Yesterday we found a lady who said her husband was very 
much interested in the three books they got from us three 
years ago, and she ordered the last three as well as the 
SCENARIO. A man told us his wife had three books she was 
enjoying very much. But we must not tire you. Evidently 
there is work for all in the Harvest field yet. 

We continue to have many opportunities for service here 
in connection with the local and neighboring classes, and 
appreciate our privileges in this connection. But we always 
feel that the Colporteur work is our work, and that the holding 
of meetings is incidental. Still, the latter sometimes help 
to get out the books. It is our delight to have the books up 
on the stand, and tell the people where we get all these 
things which so refresh and cheer our hearts even in the 
midst of the present troublous conditions. Have put out 
quite a few in this way, and in some instances, we trust, into 
the hands of those who have appreciated them. 

In joyful service, J. & L. HUTCHINSON. 



TWO GOOD TRUTH TESTIMONIES 

MOST DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER IN THE ANOINTED:- 

I am constrained to inform you that in God's hand you 
have been the means of blessing me and my late beloved wife. 
I have been intending to write you several times to let you 
know that the Lord has led me step by step, and also of the 
love and blessings He has bestowed upon me. 

I was brought up in the doctrine of Swedenborgianism 
and was not satisfied with the life I was leading. Having no 
time for the creeds, I kept away from them and was at a 
loss to know what to do. Asking the Lord for guidance in 
the matter, I started to read my Bible as an ordinary book 
although believing that no man could understand the same 
on this side of the Veil. 

In the Lord's providence, I saw an advertisement announcing 
an address by Brother R. R. Hollister— "Where Are the 
Dead?"— which I went to hear, but did not understand much 
about it. When he mentioned the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
as being "Keys" to the Bible, I straightway ordered the six 
volumes; and when I had read the first of these, did not my 
heart burn? Yes it did, and with great joy. So happy was I 
that I ordered several copies of Volume I., to let all my friends 
have one, and told them of the blessings and joy received. 
But they told me that I had gone mad and that I had an evil 
spirit about me. I did not then believe in such a being as 
Satan; so this troubled me a great deal, and I really thought 
I was going mad. Every one turned against me; but still 
asking the Lord to help me, I fully made up my mind to read 
all the STUDIES through. When I had about finished the fifth 
volume, my dear wife, seeing the change it had made in me 
and in all my affairs of life, got inquisitive and also desired 
to read the volumes. The reading had the same effect upon 



her as it had had upon me, and we both grew in grace and in 
knowledge, and our home soon became a new home. 

We desired to consecrate ourselves to the Lord, and were 
both immersed and took the Vow, etc. I feel sure such testimony 
will gladden your dear heart. 

About a year later my dear wife became ill, and was 
ordered to undergo an operation, from the effects of which 
she never recovered. All through her illness the dear Lord 
gave her all the necessary grace as promised, and so wonderfully 
did she keep up that it was a big blessing to me and to 
all of our friends. On Sunday, July 4th, she realized that 
the Lord had decided to call her Home. Yes; she said that 
the Lord had done most of His healing on the Sabbath day, 
and that being "Testimony Sunday," she said: "This is my 
testimony to the Lord, 'All the way my Savior leads me.'"— 
Hymn 12. After singing this hymn through, she said: "I am 
dying, and oh, I feel so happy; oh, it is so glorious to die! 
Oh, I feel so happy! 'Perfect peace to me is promised in my 
Father's House above!'" Then she called each one of us by 
name and said, "Give me the last kiss. Good bye!" and 
passed beyond the Veil. 

To witness such a death as this, dear Brother, has so 
increased my faith that it is almost impossible to express my 
love and feeling to my Heavenly Father for the strength He 
gave me. My praise went up to the Lord then and ever 
since, thanking Him from the bottom of my heart for the 
light and grace He gave me at such a time. 

My wife's relations, and even the nurse in attendance, not 
seeing as I do, could not understand it. It was such a blessing 
to them all; and I had so many inquiries as to what faith I 
believed in, and was asked for copies of "that beautiful 
hymn" she sang at her death. 

Your brother in Christ, 

FRANK O'C. FITZGERALD.-West Australia. 



WOULD REVOLUTIONIZE THE WORLD-IF 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

We had a grand meeting here on the occasion of Brother 
Russell's recent visit, and are so thankful for having had the 
privilege of hearing our dear Pastor again. 

The newspapers announced, after Brother Russell was here, 
that Dr. J. Wilbur Chapman, the great Evangelist, would tell 
his audience, at his Monday evening meeting, some things 
about Pastor Russell. 

There were about 5,000 present to hear what Dr. Chapman 
had to say. This was in substance as follows: 

"I wish that every minister in Atlanta had as much zeal as 
Pastor Russell. I wish that every minister was as untiring in 
his efforts as Pastor Russell. I wish that every member was 
as loyal to his church as the followers of Pastor Russell are 
to the teachings he proclaims. If all the ministers were as 
zealous as Pastor Russell, and if all the church members were 
as liberal in the support of the church as Pastor Russell's followers 



are of the support of his teachings, we would revolutionize 
the world within a year's time." 

Thus we can see from the above remarks that even our 
enemies are taking note of the wonderful work that is being 
accomplished. 

Yours in fellowship and service, W. E. HOPKINS.— Ga. 



page 383 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CLASSES 

STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 384 



INDEX TO "WATCH TOWER" 
VOLUME XXXVI., 1915 



