From Our Readers
What Does the Future Hold for Christianity? (February 2007)  Much of what you say is true to God’s Word, and I do concur with you. There are, however, two issues in your magazine that make me feel uncomfortable. One is how you put the Christian churches down, and the other is the way you seem to lift yourselves up above the rest. It would be wonderful if we all agreed and were of one faith, but that isn’t the case. I don’t consider any one church or denomination better than the other.
S. S., United States
“Awake!” responds: Jehovah’s Witnesses are not against people of other religions as individuals, nor do we view ourselves as being better than others. We recognize that “all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God.” (Romans 3:23) With that in mind, we expend ourselves and our resources, devoting much time to calling at homes to share Bible truths, including the wonderful hope the Bible contains. However, just as Jesus and his disciples boldly spoke out to expose hypocrisy and religious error, Jehovah’s Witnesses do likewise.
How Would You Answer?  In the past I seldom went through this section with my two children. Now I see it as a mighty tool that I can use to implant Bible truth in the hearts of my children. Moreover, I enjoy it myself as a tool to strengthen my faith.
I. H., Czech Republic
I am very grateful for this fascinating feature, which gives me topics for personal study. Everything is so well thought out, even to the smallest detail! It brings me even closer to my wise Father, Jehovah.
A. S., Russia
“Jehovah, Please Let Me Serve You” (July 2007)  My faith in Jehovah was strengthened by reading the life story of Danielle Hall. As a young child, she was not afraid to tell all in her school that she was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I am sure that many Witness schoolchildren will do the same.
A. R., Madagascar
I am nine years old. My mother and I have just finished reading Danielle’s experience. It made me realize that I’m fortunate because my parents are in the truth and it’s not difficult for me to serve Jehovah. I really liked the point that “no matter where we may live, Jehovah is always near to us.” I also appreciated that when Danielle got back from school, she would sit on her bed and talk to Jehovah about her day, as if he were her dad. I want to learn from this!
A. D., Italy
“Young People Ask . . . Why Am I Always Left Out?” (July 2007)  This article was so great because I felt like it was written just for me. I also enjoyed the questions it asked and the spaces left for writing an answer. Thank you. It helped me very much.
C. A., Canada

