Are You Ready to Attend?
▪Attend what? The “Godly Obedience” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses! A series of these three-day conventions, which began in the United States the last weekend in May, is scheduled to be held for months to come in hundreds of cities throughout the world. Likely one will be held in a city near you.
In most places the sessions begin at 9:30 a.m. with a musical program. Friday’s theme is “Obey My Voice, and I Will Become Your God.” (Jeremiah 7:23) After the morning’s talks entitled “We Are ‘Wonderfully Made’” and “Resurrection—Why That Hope Should Be Real to You,” the session concludes with the keynote address, “Follow the Model in Your Obedience to God.”
Friday afternoon’s session features the discourses “Keep ‘Minding the Spirit,’ and Live,” “Guard Against Every Sort of Covetousness,” and “Do Not Follow ‘Artfully Contrived False Stories.’” Then a two-part symposium presents highlights from the Bible books of Haggai and Zechariah. The day’s sessions conclude with the talk “All Suffering Soon to End!”
The theme for Saturday’s program is “Obedient From the Heart” “in All Things,” based on Romans 6:17 and 2 Corinthians 2:9. The morning session includes a three-part symposium entitled “Happy Are the Families Observing Godly Principles.” It features demonstrations and interviews and focuses on how members of the family—husband, wife, and children—can contribute to family happiness. The morning program concludes with the part “Let Your Yes Mean Yes,” after which there is opportunity for qualified ones to be baptized.
Saturday afternoon’s talks include “Pass On From Seeing What Is Worthless” and “Return to the Shepherd of Your Souls.” A two-part symposium called “Be Obedient to Those . . . Taking the Lead” follows. The concluding talk of the afternoon, entitled “What Does the Bible Really Teach?” is a convention highlight.
Sunday morning’s program develops the theme “Obey All These Words . . . That It May Go Well With You,” based on Deuteronomy 12:28. A three-part symposium entitled “Help Others Obey What the Bible Teaches” provides practical help in starting and conducting effective Bible studies.
The morning session concludes with a full-costume drama entitled “Pursue Goals That Honor God.” It is preceded by the talk “Youths—Are Your Goals Leading You to Success?” This talk sets the stage for the Bible drama, which is about young Timothy, who set an example of selfless service that modern youths are urged to imitate. The convention’s final session Sunday afternoon features the public discourse, “To Whom Does Our Obedience Belong?”
Make plans now to attend. To find the location nearest your home, contact the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses or write the publishers of this magazine. In its issue of March 1, our companion magazine, The Watchtower, has a list of all convention locations in the United States, Canada, Britain, Ireland, and Malta.

