The Bible’s Viewpoint
Is It Wrong to Be Ambitious?
“WHAT is wrong with fame, fortune and power anyway?” This question appeared in a report from a religious association under the heading “Ethical Dilemmas.” The account referred to God’s words to Abraham: “I shall make a great nation out of you and I shall bless you and I will make your name great.”—Genesis 12:2.
While noting that “ambition should not be pursued to the detriment of others,” the write-up quoted a famous first-century rabbi, who said: “If I am not for myself, who will be for me?” and then concluded: “If we do not realize our potential no one else will.” Does ambition present a dilemma for those who desire to serve God? What is involved in realizing our potential? Is it wrong to be ambitious? What is the Bible’s viewpoint?
Was Abraham Ambitious?
Abraham is noted in the Bible as an outstanding man of faith. (Hebrews 11:8, 17) God was not encouraging Abraham to be ambitious by promising that He would make a great nation out of him and make his name great. God was stating his purpose to bless mankind through Abraham, a purpose that transcended mere human aspirations.—Galatians 3:14.
In pursuing his devotion to God, Abraham left an apparently comfortable, prosperous life-style in Ur. (Genesis 11:31) Later, for the sake of peace, Abraham willingly relinquished power and authority when he offered his nephew Lot the choicest part of the land in which to settle. (Genesis 13:8, 9) Nothing in the Bible record portrays Abraham as an ambitious man. Rather, his faith, obedience, and humility are what endeared him to God as a real “friend.”—Isaiah 41:8.
A Different View of Rank, Fame, and Power
Ambition is defined as an “ardent desire for rank, fame, or power.” In ancient times King Solomon had rank, fame, and power, along with great wealth. (Ecclesiastes 2:3-9) Interestingly, though, he did not set out with an ardent desire for them. When Solomon inherited the kingship, God invited him to ask for anything he wished. Solomon humbly asked for an obedient heart and the discernment needed to rule God’s chosen people. (1 Kings 3:5-9) Later, after describing the full extent of the wealth and power he had come to possess, Solomon declared that “everything was vanity and a striving after wind.”—Ecclesiastes 2:11.
Did Solomon say anything about humans reaching their potential? In a way he did. After examining his many experiences in life, his conclusion was: “Fear the true God and keep his commandments. For this is the whole obligation of man.” (Ecclesiastes 12:13) Humans reach their potential, not by achieving rank, wealth, fame, or power, but by accomplishing God’s will.
Humility Leads to Exaltation
Granted, there is nothing wrong with a modest love of self. The Bible commands us to love our neighbor as we love ourselves. (Matthew 22:39) It is natural to desire comfort and happiness. But the Scriptures also encourage hard work, humility, and modesty. (Proverbs 15:33; Ecclesiastes 3:13; Micah 6:8) People who are honest and reliable and who work hard often get noticed, find good employment, and earn respect. Surely, following this course is better than resorting to the manipulation of others for personal gain or competing with others for position.
Jesus cautioned his listeners against choosing for themselves the prominent place at a marriage feast. He advised them to go to the lowest place and leave it to the host’s discretion to reposition them. Clearly stating the principle involved, Jesus said: “Everyone that exalts himself will be humbled and he that humbles himself will be exalted.”—Luke 14:7-11.
True Christians Avoid Ambition
The Bible indicates that haughty ambition is linked to human imperfection. (James 4:5, 6) The apostle John was at one time ambitious. So ardent was his desire for rank that, together with his brother, he boldly asked Jesus for a highly prominent place in the Kingdom. (Mark 10:37) Later John changed his attitude. In fact, in his third epistle, he had strong words of censure for Diotrephes, who, he said, “likes to have the first place.” (3 John 9, 10) Christians today take to heart Jesus’ words and humble themselves, while following the example of the aged apostle John, who learned to shun ambitious tendencies.
Realistically, though, it must be stated that an individual’s talents, abilities, good deeds, and hard work do not in themselves guarantee recognition. Sometimes they are rewarded by fellow humans, and sometimes they are not. (Proverbs 22:29; Ecclesiastes 10:7) At times, those less qualified may be put in positions of authority, while individuals who are more capable go unrecognized. In this imperfect world, those who attain rank and power may not necessarily be the most qualified.
For true Christians the subject of ambition does not present an ethical dilemma. Their Bible-trained consciences help them to shun ambition. They simply try hard to do their best in all situations, for God’s glory, and leave the outcome in his hands. (1 Corinthians 10:31) Christians strive to reach their potential by fearing God and keeping his commandments.
[Picture on page 12, 13]
Did God encourage Abraham to be ambitious?

