Curbing the Scourge of Inequality
The Creator will soon bring about the equality that humans crave. Until then, we can at least take steps to curb the scourge of inequality that affects us and our families. As Nelson Mandela, former president of South Africa, observed, “it is what we make out of what we have, not what we are given, that separates one person from another.”
HISTORY verifies his words. Many are the men and women who were given little at birth but who, by making use of what they had, achieved successes that set them apart from their possibly more gifted peers. Conversely, other individuals richly blessed with advantages from birth squandered what they had and failed to live up to their full potential.
Make the Most of What You Have!
Jehovah’s Witnesses are keenly interested in helping people gain a knowledge of God’s purposes through a study of the Bible. They realize, however, that to benefit fully from Bible information, people must be literate. For that reason, Jehovah’s Witnesses have taught tens of thousands of people to read and write, including 23,000 persons (as of the mid-1990’s) in one West African country alone. Referring to the outstanding social service that Jehovah’s Witnesses provide, the San Francisco Examiner noted: “You might regard them as model citizens. They pay taxes diligently, tend the sick, battle illiteracy.”
In addition, by means of a progressive course in public speaking, Jehovah’s Witnesses have trained hundreds of thousands of people to become qualified speakers, able to express themselves fluently in public. Among these thousands are some who once had serious speech problems. Take the man from South Africa who writes: “My stuttering was so bad that I had become an introvert, usually relying on others to speak for me. . . . When I joined the Theocratic Ministry School and had to give a Bible reading before a small audience . . . , I stuttered so badly that I was unable to complete the assignment in the allotted time. After the meeting the [counselor] kindly gave me practical advice. He suggested that I practice reading aloud to myself. This I did, spending time day after day, reading aloud from my Bible and the Watchtower magazine.” This man progressed so well that he now gives public discourses to audiences numbering into the hundreds, even thousands.
Enjoying Equality Among Brothers
As regards education, health care, and economic and social standing, circumstances among Jehovah’s Witnesses differ greatly. These differences merely mirror the imperfect worldly conditions in which they live. But in contrast with other religious groups, racial, social, and economic prejudices have been virtually eradicated from their ranks.
They have accomplished this by doing their best in practicing what they have learned from the Bible. They wholeheartedly embrace such Bible principles as: “Not the way man sees is the way God sees, because mere man sees what appears to the eyes; but as for Jehovah, he sees what the heart is.” (1 Samuel 16:7) “God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.” (Acts 10:34, 35) “Return evil for evil to no one. Provide fine things in the sight of all men. If possible, as far as it depends upon you, be peaceable with all men.”​—Romans 12:17, 18; see also 1 Timothy 6:17-19; James 2:5, 9.
Closely adhering to these Bible principles that promote unity, Jehovah’s Witnesses refuse to tolerate within their ranks any exercise of inequality based upon racial, social, or economic differences. These factors play no part, for example, in deciding who is to be extended privileges of service in the Christian congregation. Positions of responsibility, such as teaching and oversight, are granted solely on the basis of spiritual qualifications.​—1 Timothy 3:1-13; Titus 1:5-9.
For individuals who have suffered under the inequalities of a biased world, how refreshing it is to have others treat them as brothers and sisters with equal standing before their Creator! Martina can attest to this. After her father deserted the family, she was raised in a poor, one-parent home. She was often treated like a social outcast, had little self-confidence, and found it hard to get along with others. She developed a couldn’t-care-less attitude. Things changed, however, after she began studying the Bible and became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. She says: “I must still fight negative thinking, but now I am better able to cope with the problem. My self-respect has improved, and I speak with greater confidence. The truth has given me a sense of responsibility. Now I know that Jehovah loves me and that life is worth living.”
As an international group of Christians, Jehovah’s Witnesses in over 230 countries enjoy a degree of equality that is truly unique in today’s world. Can any other religious organization make a similar claim and back it up by facts?
Of course, Jehovah’s Witnesses are realistic. They readily admit that being products of an imperfect environment, they can no more blot out human inequality than could any of the others who over the centuries have tried to do so​—and failed. Nevertheless, they rejoice that within their own ranks, they have done much to curb this deadly scourge. And with strong faith in God’s promise, they look forward to a new world of righteousness where inequality will forever be a thing of the past.
Yes, all obedient humans will soon be restored to the equality “in dignity and rights” that their Creator purposed for them to enjoy in the first place. What a beautiful thought! And this time it will be a reality!
[Picture on page 7]
Jehovah’s Witnesses battle illiteracy by teaching tens of thousands of people to read and write
[Picture on page 8]
Bible truth helps eradicate racial, social, and economic prejudices

