Can Music Really Harm You?
IMAGINE this: An acquaintance at work invites you to dinner in his home. You accept. As the evening passes, you learn a number of shocking facts about your host. He has a sadistic nature, exhibits suicidal tendencies, uses vulgar language, and promotes Devil worship. Now, would you be inclined to spend another evening in his company? “No!” you reply.
Further, what if this acquaintance recorded his twisted beliefs and attitudes that night and gave you the tape? Would you expose yourself to repeated playings of it? Not likely.
However, the fact is that millions today expose themselves in this way. As a result, many who listen to this music adopt the thinking and behavior that it encourages.
What music are we referring to? Degrading influences can be found in virtually any style of music. Whether one prefers classical, jazz, or some other kind of music, there is a need for caution and selectivity.
There are, however, certain forms of music in which the most unwholesome of subjects are explicitly featured. This presents a special challenge. U.S.News & World Report describes the primary theme of heavy metal music as “teenage nihilism, complete with liberal doses of violent sex and occasional thoughts of suicide.” Dr. David Elkind speaks of some rock groups that are “so out of line with respect to obscene language and behavior that they reflect negatively on the whole rock music industry.” In some areas certain albums are even labeled with a warning of their explicit content.
Are people just overreacting to music that is not to their personal liking, or is there a real cause for concern? Let’s take a close look at some of the rock music that is now reaching large segments of the public through albums, music videos on television, and live concerts. Examine how people are affected by it. Then judge for yourself whether this entertainment is harmless fun or mental poison. Is it something you or your family should keep close company with or even be exposed to?

