From Our Readers
Christmas Giving  The article “Something Better Than Christmas Giving” (December 22, 1992) handled a controversial subject clearly, yet with great tact. Right from the very start, it was acceptable to every reader, whether religious or not. Furthermore, there was no wholesale condemnation of all the fuss associated with Christmas. This agreeable presentation was a pleasure both to read and to offer in our preaching activity.
T. T., Germany
The article really showed me what is better than Christmas gifts, namely, the love of my parents and the way they truly give from the heart. I also face the problem of explaining to my class why we as Jehovah’s Witnesses do not celebrate “St. Nicholas’ Day” and Christmas. With the help of this article, I will be able to give a good explanation.
S. H. S., Germany
Celts  Your article “The Celts​—Their Influence Still Felt” (September 8, 1992) was thoroughly enjoyable. It is so common today [for writers] to treat the subject of older cultures as if people had everything right back then and that if we all became primitives again, everything would be all right. It was refreshing to read an article that revealed a culture in such an interesting way without idealizing them or making them look ridiculous.
L. Z., United States
A Child’s Sex  Thank you for the box entitled “How Is a Child’s Sex Determined?” that appeared in the article “Women​—Respected at Home?” (July 8, 1992) You have taught me not to blame my older sister for giving birth to five girls within a period of ten years and failing to have a male child. According to your article, if anyone should be blamed, it should be the husband.
E. J. O., Nigeria
Although the sperm carries the determining factor as to whether a child is male or female, neither husband nor wife carries any blame. As the article stated, this is “simply the lottery of procreation” over which neither party has control.​—ED.
Crossword Puzzles  Thank you so much for the crossword puzzles! I recently read the chapter on depression in the book Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work. It suggested that you engage in “activities that bring you pleasure,” such as working a puzzle. This is a great tip because I found myself laughing, having fun, and finding new information. Please keep the puzzles coming!
M. R., United States
The book referred to is published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc., the publishers of this magazine.​—ED.
Wayward Parents  When I read the article “Young People Ask . . . What if My Parent Has Disgraced Us?” (October 22, 1992), tears burst forth like a flood. My father was disfellowshipped from the Christian congregation two years ago, and my mother and I have gone through a very trying time. I have done as the article suggests and confided in a mature Christian elder, and I received much encouragement and support.
A. O., Japan
My father, who was once one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, became an apostate. He has tried to turn others away from the truth and even gives talks at churches. They call him “reverend”! The shame I felt! This article surely helped me.
B. A., United States

