Modern Music​—Avoiding the Pitfalls
SOME argue the pros and cons of censoring rock music. Others debate its deleterious effects on teenagers. But if you are a Christian, these considerations are secondary to the central issue: How can music affect your relationship with God?
The Christian’s guide in life is God’s Word, the Bible. It contains principles regarding every aspect of life, including entertainment. The Bible’s directives protect obedient ones from what is unwholesome and harmful. Furthermore, God’s approval is dependent on obedience to his Word. Therefore, the principles in God’s Word guide a Christian’s selection of music. (Psalm 43:3; 119:105; 2 Timothy 3:16, 17) What, then, are the Scriptural guidelines that help us in our selection of music?
The Need for Balance
Ecclesiastes 7:16 cautions: “Do not become righteous overmuch, nor show yourself excessively wise. Why should you cause desolation to yourself?” Before writing off a piece of music as bad, ask yourself whether the issue is perhaps one of personal taste. Remember, you may dislike a piece of music, but that does not necessarily make it bad music.
The other side in this matter of balance is presented in Ecclesiastes 7:17, 18: “Do not be wicked overmuch, nor become foolish. Why should you die when it is not your time? It is better that you should take hold of the one, but from the other also do not withdraw your hand; for he that fears God will go forth with them all.”
What, then, if a Christian listens to music that encourages violence, racism, immorality, Devil worship, and suicide? Ephesians 5:3, 4 specifies: “Let fornication and uncleanness of every sort or greediness not even be mentioned among you, just as it befits holy people; neither shameful conduct nor foolish talking nor obscene jesting, things which are not becoming, but rather the giving of thanks.” Yes, those who desire friendship with Jehovah cannot make unwholesome matters their entertainment. They will not reason that as long as they do not do these bad things, it is all right to be amused by them.
It is not just the lyrical content of a song that makes it good or bad from a Scriptural standpoint. What spirit does it encourage? Please read Galatians 5:19 to 23 in your Bible. Which listing best describes the spirit of the music that you listen to? If the music resembles “the works of the flesh,” then Jehovah’s view of it is clear enough.
If a Christian attempts to combine his life of sacred service to God with degrading musical entertainment, he will learn that they are simply incompatible. It is like drinking a mixture of fruit juice and poison. The fruit juice won’t keep the poison from killing you. The words at 2 Corinthians 6:14-17 make it plain: “Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers. For what fellowship do righteousness and lawlessness have? Or what sharing does light have with darkness? Further, what harmony is there between Christ and Belial? Or what portion does a faithful person have with an unbeliever? . . . ‘Therefore get out from among them and separate yourselves,’ says Jehovah, ‘and quit touching the unclean thing.’”
These, then, are the Scriptural issues that face those who desire a close relationship with God. If you value Bible principles, take a close, hard look at the music you listen to. Carefully go through your collection of records and videos. Discard those that violate Bible principles. If in doubt, discard them anyway. Likewise with live concerts and reading material​—weed out anything that has no rightful fellowship with righteousness.
The Tendency to Make Excuses
If you are drawn to music that is borderline or that crosses Scriptural guidelines, it may be hard for you to face the issue objectively. Some make excuses in an effort to defend and justify their position of compromise. If you find this to be true in your case, stop and think. Is your reasoning sound, or does it simply reflect an emotional attachment to the music? Consider the following arguments offered by some and note that, under scrutiny, such arguments turn out to be only excuses.
It is safe for me to listen to this group because its members take a stand against drug abuse. But does the group take as firm a stand against other acts of badness, such as fornication, violence, and disrespect for authority? “A little leaven ferments the whole lump,” says Galatians 5:9.​—Compare James 2:10.
Life in this world is so unjust. Can we really blame these bands for expressing their anger at world conditions? The Bible encourages righteous indignation against the evils of this system but points to the Messianic Kingdom as the solution.​—Daniel 2:44; Matthew 6:9, 10.
The Christian’s bright hope is different from the dark pessimism of many musicians who advocate nihilism as the solution to mankind’s distress. Really, the world’s anger is destructive and animalistic, reflecting the wisdom of the system of things.​—Romans 12:9; James 3:15-18.
The musicians are skilled, even classically trained. But the skill with which a musician performs is irrelevant to the weighing of musical content against Bible principles, is it not? King Solomon was skilled in numerous fields, including the field of music. But when he apostatized from true worship, the Bible reports, “Jehovah came to be incensed at Solomon, because his heart had inclined away from Jehovah.” Likewise, Nimrod was a skilled builder and hunter, but he and his associates met with God’s disapproval. Why? Because Nimrod was “a mighty hunter in opposition to Jehovah.”​—1 Kings 11:9; Genesis 10:8, 9.
A few of the band’s songs are innocent, including some soft acoustic ballads. The danger here is that an innocent tune can lead one to purchase and listen to an entire album, most of which may be clearly unhealthful. Just as a cup of water cannot wash away a pile of mud, an occasional innocent song does not change the overall spirit of a degrading album or band.
The stars do not really worship Satan or live immorally. They’re just acting on stage. The fact remains that the music they use to entertain their audiences is sprinkled, if not saturated, with badness. Colossians 3:8 directs Christians, not to be entertained by such things as anger and abusive speech, but to “put them all away.” Paul told the Ephesians to “quit sharing with [the sons of disobedience] in the unfruitful works that belong to the darkness, but, rather, even be reproving them.” Is a person who is entertained by works of darkness in any position to reprove those who practice them?​—Ephesians 5:6, 11.
I don’t listen to the lyrics. I hear only the melody. But lyrics can register in the subconscious mind and create problems later on. Though we think information has left our minds, it may not be forgotten at all. How dangerous, then, to expose ourselves willingly to messages that are in direct opposition to the counsel at Philippians 4:8, that we keep our minds fixed on what is chaste, lovable, and praiseworthy.
Remember, too, that whoever “wants to be a friend of the world is constituting himself an enemy of God.” This is because the world of mankind alienated from God and the spirit of the world are the products of Jehovah’s chief Adversary, Satan the Devil. Now think about it. Would a man appreciate it if his wife displayed a photograph of a former lover even if she claimed that she had no special feelings for him but that the picture was simply for decoration? No, he would want it out of the house and out of her mind. What if we take into our homes and hearts music that serves the purpose of Jehovah’s Adversary? Does it really make a difference to Jehovah if we claim, “I’m only interested in the melody; I ignore the lyrics”?​—James 4:4; 1 Corinthians 10:21, 22.
Act Decisively
If you have been exposing yourself to music that highlights wrongdoing, what is your real reason? You may not agree with the evil ideas, but the music itself may be so appealing to you​—the beat so addictive, so gripping—​that you find it simply irresistible and do not want to give it up.
But doing the right thing is not always easy. We are especially tested when God’s standards direct us to let go of something to which we are emotionally attached. Will we rationalize that our case is exceptional and keep “limping upon two different opinions,” or will we act decisively against what Jehovah hates?​—1 Kings 18:21.
Regardless of the personal sacrifice involved, we will be happiest if we make the choice that pleases Jehovah. This means that we must quit touching the unclean thing. If we do, then Jehovah promises that he will take us in. Yes, he will count us among his favored people.​—2 Corinthians 6:17.
Jehovah has our best interests at heart. He formulated his commands to improve the quality of our lives. Respond to his sincere appeal as found at Isaiah 48:17, 18. “I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you to benefit yourself, the One causing you to tread in the way in which you should walk. O if only you would actually pay attention to my commandments. Then your peace would become just like a river, and your righteousness like the waves of the sea.”
[Box/​Picture on page 10]
A Responsibility of Parents
  If you are a parent, you have the Scriptural responsibility to teach your children to discern the difference between good and bad music. This means acquainting yourself with what they are listening to. It means your being firm as to what music you will and will not permit in the home.
  Reason with your children. Avoid arguments that weaken credibility. Statements such as, “I can’t understand why you listen to that garbage,” will likely move young ones to cling even more tightly to their personal choices. Pointing to the degraded personal life-style of a musician may likewise be unconvincing, especially if it is not reflected in the music. One young man exclaimed: “For someone to say that all rap music is bad, I just really think is ignorant!”
  So inform yourself. Learn what God’s viewpoint is on these matters. Jehovah’s Witnesses would be glad to assist by providing you with Bible-based publications that go into more detail. Know the facts. Make it clear that the issue is that of Bible standards and not of imposing your personal taste on your children.​—Ephesians 6:4.
[Picture on page 9]
If a Christian listens to debasing music, can he conscientiously advise others against it?
[Picture on page 11]
You will be happier if you throw away what Jehovah abhors

