Benefiting Fully From the “Zealous Kingdom Proclaimers” District Convention
1 An Invigorating Program: What a stimulating program we enjoyed at our recent district convention! We were gathered for a common purpose, to become better equipped to proclaim God’s Kingdom zealously. Do you remember how the first speaker defined the phrase “to proclaim”? Do you recall what research we were encouraged to do in the talk “Be Fearless in Knowing That Jehovah Is With Us”? Which true life accounts have you examined thus far?
2 The symposium “The Quality of Our Faith Tested by Various Trials” gave three main reasons why Jehovah allows persecution. Can you explain what they are? What is the Scriptural basis for our Christian neutrality? What were we encouraged to do to prepare ourselves for challenges to our neutral position? How does our faithfully enduring trials bring praise to Jehovah?
3 Which scenes in the drama “Stand Firm in Troublesome Times” especially strengthened you? How can we be like Jeremiah?
4 The public discourse, “The Scene of This World Is Changing,” described what significant changes that lie ahead and that lead up to God’s fear-inspiring day? While listening to the concluding talk, “Abound in Fine Works as Zealous Kingdom Proclaimers,” how did you relate the information to your personal ministry?
5 Main Points to Apply: As was explained in the talk “Show Yourselves Thankful,” how can we express the depth of our gratitude to Jehovah? In the keynote address, “Kingdom Proclaimers Fired With Zeal,” whose zeal were we encouraged to imitate? What self-examination were we asked to make?
6 The symposium “Micah’s Prophecy Strengthens Us to Walk in Jehovah’s Name” highlighted what three requirements that we must meet to receive Jehovah’s favor? Are these reachable? (Mic. 6:8) According to the talk “Maintain Chastity by Safeguarding Your Heart,” in what ways must we keep morally clean? In what areas did the talk “Guard Against Deception” warn us not to be deceived and not to deceive others?
7 Which practical points from the symposium “Kingdom Proclaimers Who Glorify Their Ministry” have you begun applying in your ministry? In the talk “Spiritual Conversation Builds Up,” Philippians 4:8 was analyzed. How does that scripture help us to make our conversations spiritual, and when should we do so?
8 The talk “Trust Jehovah Completely in Times of Distress” discussed how we can cope with tragic events, financial difficulties, poor health, family problems, and persistent weaknesses. How can we show trust in Jehovah when facing these situations?
9 New Spiritual Treasures: We were delighted to receive the new book Worship the Only True God. How did the announcement explaining its purpose affect you? Why will it be helpful in our disciple-making work as the second study book?
10 Next we received the beautiful book Draw Close to Jehovah. What are some of its special features? Which illustrations do you especially appreciate? Has your reading of it drawn you closer to Jehovah? Who else might be able to benefit from it?
11 The “Zealous Kingdom Proclaimers” District Convention provided us with the spiritual encouragement we need to face these challenging times. So as to benefit fully from this outstanding spiritual provision, may we do our utmost to remember what was said, appreciate what we received, and apply what we learned. (2 Pet. 3:14) Doing so will strengthen us to maintain our integrity and to be zealous Kingdom proclaimers in imitation of our Lord Jesus Christ, all to Jehovah’s glory.​—Phil. 1:9-11.

