How Congregation Book Study Overseers Show Personal Interest
1 The Congregation Book Study is designed to make it “possible for more personal attention to be given to the spiritual growth of each individual. . . . Here is a reflection of Jehovah’s loving-kindness and his tender care for his people.” (om p. 75; Isa. 40:11) The book study overseer plays a key role in providing such personal attention.
2 At the Book Study: Since book study groups are purposely kept small, the book study overseer is able to get to know the members of his group well. (Prov. 27:23) Usually there are opportunities to associate before or after the study each week. In the course of a month, he may be able to converse with nearly every person in the group. This helps the members of the book study to feel comfortable approaching him when they are facing trials or need encouragement.​—Isa. 32:2.
3 The book study overseer tries to encourage all in the group to participate during the study. One way he does this is by conducting the study in a kind, gentle manner. (1 Thess. 2:7, 8) He looks for ways to involve all in the discussion, including younger ones. If some are timid about commenting, he may offer private assistance by arranging in advance for them to read a scripture or to comment on a particular paragraph. Or he may show them how to comment in their own words.
4 If the book study overseer’s assistant is a ministerial servant, the overseer arranges for him to conduct the study once every two months. This allows the overseer to observe the assistant and offer helpful suggestions. What a fine arrangement to help brothers improve their art of teaching!​—Titus 1:9.
5 In the Field Ministry: One of the principal responsibilities of the book study overseer is to take the lead in evangelizing. (Num. 27:16, 17) He makes practical arrangements for group witnessing and strives to help all in the group find joy in their ministry. (Eph. 4:11, 12) To accomplish this, he makes it a goal to work in service with each member of the group. He also works with the service overseer to arrange for those who would like to improve some aspect of their ministry to receive assistance from a more experienced publisher.
6 As a Loving Shepherd: The book study overseer is interested in those who because of their circumstances are able to have only a small share in the preaching work. He makes sure that those who are very limited because of advanced age or because of being shut-ins and those who are temporarily limited because of serious illness or injury are aware of the provision that allows them to report field service time in 15-minute increments if they are not able to report a complete hour during one month. (The Congregation Service Committee determines who qualifies for this provision.) He also takes an interest in those assigned to the group who may be inactive, striving to help them resume their activity with the congregation.​—Luke 15:4-7.
7 How grateful we are for the loving interest shown by book study overseers! The personal attention they provide helps “all attain to the oneness in the faith . . . , to the measure of stature that belongs to the fullness of the Christ.”​—Eph. 4:13.

