Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting October 14
Song 103
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage everyone to read Numbers chapter 25 and Insight, Volume 2, page 419, paragraphs 3-5, and then watch the video Warning Examples for Our Day in preparation for the discussion at the Service Meeting the week of October 28. Using suggestions on page 8, have two demonstrations of how to present the October 15 Watchtower and the October 22 Awake! In each case, show a different way to handle the conversation stopper “I am already well acquainted with your work.”​—See Reasoning book, page 20.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “How Congregation Book Study Overseers Show Personal Interest.” Question-and-answer discussion to be handled by a Congregation Book Study overseer. In introductory comments, briefly explain how the book study arrangement got started. (jv 237, par. 4) Arrange in advance for two or three publishers to comment on how they have benefited from personal interest shown to them through the Congregation Book Study.
Song 65 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 21
Song 206
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
35 min: “Benefiting Fully From the ‘Zealous Kingdom Proclaimers’ District Convention.” To be handled by the Watchtower Study conductor. Following a one-minute introduction, conduct an audience discussion of the district convention program, using the questions provided in the article. Apportion your time carefully. Brief comments may be included to bring key points back to mind. When appropriate, ask the audience how they have been applying what they learned and what benefits they are receiving from doing so.
Song 194 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 28
Song 110
 8 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to review their notes from the last special assembly day program in preparation for the discussion at next week’s Service Meeting. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for October. Using the suggestions on page 8, have a sister demonstrate how to present the November 1 Watchtower and have a brother show how to present the November 8 Awake! After each demonstration, briefly highlight a positive aspect of the presentation.
12 min: Local experiences. Invite the congregation to relate experiences they have enjoyed while traveling to and from the district convention, while at the convention, or in witnessing informally at work, at school, when shopping, and so forth.
25 min: “A Warm Appeal to Heed Warning Examples for Our Day.” Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, then get right into an audience discussion of each question presented in the article. In December we will review the video No Blood​—Medicine Meets the Challenge.
Song 41 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 4
Song 66
10 min: Local announcements. Briefly review a few suggestions from the January 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry insert for presenting the Require brochure and the Knowledge book. Demonstrate one of the presentations.
13 min: Not Ashamed of the Good News. (Rom. 1:16) Youth approaches father with a problem. Young person is reluctant to be identified as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses because of fear of being ridiculed by peers. Father thanks youth for being honest about the matter. He relates how Peter once reacted because of peer pressure. (Matt. 26:69-74) Father offers the following advice: We should never be ashamed of who we are as Christians. (Mark 8:38) It is advantageous to identify yourself as a Witness at school. When informed, many teachers will respect your beliefs and not try to involve you in activities you find objectionable. Unprincipled youths are not as likely to try to pressure you into misconduct. Other classmates will more readily understand why you choose not to date, participate in extracurricular sports, or share in after-school activities. As time permits, the father and youth discuss points from the subheading “Publicly Declaring Your Friendship With God” in the Young People Ask book, pages 315-18. Teenager expresses appreciation for the good advice.
22 min: Subject Yourselves to God​—Oppose the Devil. (Jas. 4:7) Using the questions provided here, an elder conducts a lively audience discussion of the special assembly day program that was held during the past service year. Invite congregation to relate how they have been able to apply what they learned. (Portions can be assigned in advance.) Highlight the following program parts: (1) “Subjection to God in an Enslaved World.” Why must we be alert to avoid worldly snares? (2) “Manifesting Godly Subjection as Family Members.” Why is there an urgent need within Jehovah’s organization to strengthen family ties? How can we do so? (3) “Help New Disciples to Stand Firm on Jehovah’s Side.” How can we help new ones overcome obstacles that test their faith? (4) “What It Means to Oppose the Devil.” What is the key to standing successfully against the Devil? How can the spiritual armor described at Ephesians 6:11-18 protect us? (w92 5/15 21-3) (5) “Youths Who Successfully Resist the Wicked One” and “Youths Who Benefit From Godly Subjection.” What are some of Satan’s devices that young people must guard against? How are young ones blessed by subjecting themselves to Jehovah? (w90 8/1 13-14, pars. 15-17) (6) “Benefiting From Godly Subjection.” Explain how Christians demonstrate subjection to governmental authorities, to secular employers, in the family circle, and in the Christian congregation. What qualities will help us to do so?
Song 185 and concluding prayer.

