A Video That Will Enlighten and Inspire You!
It was April 1951. Thousands of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the former Soviet Union​—entire families—​were rounded up, loaded into boxcars, and exiled to Siberia. Why was the mighty Soviet government bent on stamping them out? How did our brothers survive and even prosper despite decades of unrelenting persecution? You will find the answers in the video Faithful Under Trials​—Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Soviet Union. Watch it, and let its enlightening message inspire you to maintain your faithfulness to Jehovah, no matter what!
Can you answer these questions? (1) When did Jehovah’s Witnesses first get official recognition in Russia? (2) Before and after World War II, how did the Soviet Union come to have thousands more Witness families? (3) How were their beliefs in direct conflict with Lenin’s philosophy? (4) What was Operation North, and what did Stalin hope to accomplish by means of it? (5) What did exile mean for the Witnesses, and what were they told to do in order to avoid being exiled? (6) On the long train trip to Siberia, how did our brothers and sisters encourage one another and surprise their captors? (7) What miseries did the Witnesses endure in Siberia? (8) What spiritual provision did Jehovah’s people highly value, and why? (9) Why were our brothers willing to risk their lives for the sake of their literature, and how did they prevail over the relentless efforts of the authorities to prevent their receiving it? (10) How did Khrushchev continue the attack on God’s people? (11) How did the authorities try to destroy the faith of Witness children? (12) What clear understanding did our brothers have of the reason why they were persecuted? (2002 Yearbook, pages 203-4) (13) How did the all-out attack on God’s organization backfire on the persecutors? (2002 Yearbook, pages 220-1) (14) What things were realized that were once only dreams for Witnesses in the former Soviet Union? (15) What was it that brought our brothers through their trials, and how does the last scene of the video depict the truthfulness of Jeremiah 1:19? (16) Relate one of the true-life experiences of faithfulness under trial that especially inspires you.

