Help at the Right Time
1 When the apostle Peter saw a need to strengthen fellow believers, concern moved him to give them loving reminders and encouragement. (2 Pet. 1:12, 13; 3:1) He urged ‘those who had obtained a faith’ to keep growing in spiritual qualities so as not to become “either inactive or unfruitful regarding the accurate knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.” (2 Pet. 1:1, 5-8) Peter’s purpose was to help them make the calling and choosing they had received from Jehovah sure, so that they might “be found finally by him spotless and unblemished and in peace.” (2 Pet. 1:10, 11; 3:14) For many, his encouragement proved to be help at the right time.
2 Today, Christian overseers have similar concern for God’s people. In these “critical times hard to deal with,” many servants of Jehovah must contend with trying circumstances. (2 Tim. 3:1) Because of ongoing financial, family, or personal problems, some may feel as did David: “Calamities encircled me until there was no numbering of them. More errors of mine overtook me than I was able to see; they became more numerous than the hairs of my head, and my own heart left me.” (Ps. 40:12) These pressures can become so great that such ones may neglect vital spiritual matters and stop having an active share in the Christian ministry. Yet, despite their difficulties, ‘they have not forgotten Jehovah’s own commandments.’ (Ps. 119:176) Now is the right time for elders to provide such ones with needed help.​—Isa. 32:1, 2.
3 To meet this need, the elders have been encouraged to make a special effort to assist those who are not currently having a share in the preaching work. A concerted effort to accomplish this is now in progress and will extend through the month of March. Book study overseers are being asked to visit inactive ones to offer spiritual assistance with a view to helping them renew their activity with the congregation. Where there is a need, a personal Bible study may be arranged. Others may be asked to assist. If you are invited to do so, your efforts could be very beneficial, especially if you give encouragement in a kind, understanding way.
4 There is reason for all to rejoice when someone resumes his activity with the congregation. (Luke 15:6) Our efforts to encourage inactive ones may truly result in “a word spoken at the right time for it.”​—Prov. 25:11.

