Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting February 10
Song 4
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage everyone to view the video Faithful Under Trials​—Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Soviet Union in preparation for the discussion at the Service Meeting the week of February 24. Using the suggestions on page 8, have two separate demonstrations of how to present the February 15 Watchtower and the February 22 Awake! In each case, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured.
35 min: “Preach and Give a Thorough Witness.”a To be handled by the service overseer. Encourage all who can to auxiliary pioneer in March and April. Invite comments from those who pioneered last Memorial season. How did they arrange to pioneer? What effort and adjustments did this require? What joys and blessings did they experience? Review the sample schedules in the box on page 4. Announce that applications for auxiliary pioneering will be available after the meeting.
Song 30 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 17
Song 48
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Review literature offer for March. Mention one or two suggestions for presenting the Knowledge book, using points from the January 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry insert. Emphasize the goal of starting home Bible studies.
15 min: “Can You Open Your Home?” Talk by a book study overseer. Include comments on the April 2001 and February 1990 Our Kingdom Ministry Question Boxes. Mention the number of book study groups in the congregation and the average attendance. Have one or two publishers relate how they and their families have benefited by having a book study in the home. Any who would like to make their home available should make this known to the presiding overseer.
20 min: “What Is Your Priority?”b Arrange in advance for one or two publishers to comment on how they have been able to adjust their circumstances to do more in the ministry.
Song 57 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 24
Song 74
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for February. Using the suggestions on page 8, have two separate demonstrations of how to present the March 1 Watchtower and the March 8 Awake! In each case, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured.
10 min: “Help at the Right Time.” Talk by an elder. Highlight that the special effort being made to assist those who are inactive reflects Jehovah’s loving concern for his people.
25 min: “A Video That Will Enlighten and Inspire You!” Get right into an audience discussion of the Faithful Under Trials video, using the questions that are provided. Carefully apportion the time so as to allow for several comments on the last question. Conclude by reading the box on page 192 of the 2002 Yearbook.
Song 56 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 3
Song 14
10 min: Local announcements. Briefly discuss “New Arrangement for Kingdom Hall Libraries.” Mention who will be serving as librarian for the Kingdom Hall library.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Be Sound in Mind as the End Draws Close.”c When discussing paragraphs 3-4, invite publishers to relate what spiritual goals they are currently pursuing. Include comments on page 176 of the Worship God book.
Song 127 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

