What Is Your Priority?
1 Many religious organizations place emphasis on doing charitable works, such as providing facilities for secular education or medical needs. Jehovah’s Witnesses, however, while not forgetting “the doing of good and the sharing of things with others,” give priority to helping people spiritually.​—Heb. 13:16.
2 The First-Century Pattern: Jesus did many good works during his earthly ministry, but his primary work was that of bearing witness to the truth. (Luke 4:43; John 18:37; Acts 10:38) He commanded his followers to “go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations, . . . teaching them.” (Matt. 28:19, 20) And he indicated that those exercising faith in him would carry out on a much larger scale the work that he had initiated. (John 14:12) Jesus gave priority to the preaching work because it helps people to learn the way of salvation.​—John 17:3.
3 The apostle Paul viewed his preaching activity as a “necessity,” a requirement that he could not ignore. (1 Cor. 9:16, 17) He was willing to make any sacrifice, endure any trial, or suffer any hardship necessary in order to accomplish his ministry. (Acts 20:22-24) The apostle Peter and his associates showed a like spirit. Even in the face of imprisonment and beatings, “they continued without letup teaching and declaring the good news about the Christ, Jesus.”​—Acts 5:40-42.
4 What about us? Do we give priority to the work of proclaiming the Kingdom good news and making disciples? Like Jesus, do we have real concern for those who are “skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd”? (Matt. 9:36) Current world events and Bible prophecy clearly establish that time is running out for this wicked system! Having in focus the importance of the preaching work will move us to continue preaching zealously.
5 Evaluate Your Circumstances: Since personal circumstances often change, it is good periodically to consider if we can make adjustments so as to have a fuller share in the preaching work. One sister had been a regular pioneer during the ’50’s, ’60’s, and ’70’s but found it necessary to stop because of poor health. In time, however, her health improved. She recently reevaluated her circumstances and determined that she could pioneer again. How happy she was to attend the Pioneer Service School at the age of 90! How about you? Are you nearing retirement or graduation? Might your changed circumstances allow you to pioneer?
6 When Jesus observed that Martha “was distracted with attending to many duties,” he kindly suggested that she would reap greater blessings if she kept things simple. (Luke 10:40-42) Can you simplify your life-style? Is it really necessary for both husband and wife to be secularly employed? If adjustments are made, can the family live on just one income? Many have benefited spiritually by making adjustments so as to have a greater share in the ministry.
7 May all of us follow the pattern set by Jesus and the apostles! We can be certain of Jehovah’s blessing on our genuine endeavors to have a full share in the vital work of preaching the good news of the Kingdom.​—Luke 9:57-62.

