You Can Weather the Storm
IN THESE critical times, many are enduring stormlike adversities. Yet, for Christians, love for God and loyalty to his principles help them to cope. How? The answer can be found in an illustration told by Jesus Christ. He compared his obedient disciples to “a discreet man, who built his house upon the rock-mass.” Jesus said: “The rain poured down and the floods came and the winds blew and lashed against that house, but it did not cave in, for it had been founded upon the rock-mass.”—Matthew 7:24, 25.
Note that even though the man in the illustration is discreet, he still faces adversity—represented by pouring rain, floods, and destructive winds. Jesus, therefore, did not indicate that his disciples would escape all difficulties and enjoy a life of unbroken peace and tranquillity. (Psalm 34:19; James 4:13-15) But he did say that faithful servants of God can prepare for and cope with such tempestuous adversities and crises.
Jesus began the illustration by saying: “Everyone that hears these sayings of mine and does them will be likened to a discreet man, who built his house upon the rock-mass.” Of course, Jesus was talking, not about constructing literal houses, but about building lives. Those who heed Christ’s words use discernment and show good judgment. They build their motivations and deeds on the solid rock-mass of Christ’s teachings by putting into practice what they have been taught. Interestingly, this figurative rock-mass is not found on the surface. The man in the illustration had to dig “down deep” to reach it. (Luke 6:48) Similarly, Jesus’ disciples keep working hard to cultivate enduring qualities that draw them closer to God.—Matthew 5:5-7; 6:33.
What happens when stormlike difficulties test the integrity of the Christian foundation of Jesus’ followers? Their willing obedience to Christ’s teachings and their Christian qualities prove to be sources of strength during such hardships and, ultimately, during the impending storm of Armageddon. (Matthew 5:10-12; Revelation 16:15, 16) Yes, by following Christ’s teachings, many are successfully weathering stormlike trials. You can do the same.—1 Peter 2:21-23.

