Earnestly Search for Bible Studies
1 There is increasing evidence that time is running out for this old world. (2 Tim. 3:1-5) What does this mean? It means that the lives of people are at stake. However, it is within our power to help some get saved. (Prov. 3:27) To this end we should earnestly endeavor to start and conduct Bible studies.
2 Much good has been accomplished by the distribution of our Bible-​based literature. But what people need most is personal assistance through a regularly conducted home Bible study. How can we help them see that?
3 We can raise questions that concern many people. Such questions could focus on why morals have drastically declined, why family life is so unstable, why violence and crime are such a threat, why a loving God permits present conditions, and so forth. Be alert to issues and events that are of particular interest to people in your territory. Point to the Bible’s clear answers to these questions. Show how the literature we distribute can help them to learn what the Bible has to say about these and other vital issues that affect all of us.
4 It is important to draw the householder into the conversation. Be alert to discern what concerns him. Develop your conversation around his interests or anxieties. Call attention to information in a book, brochure, magazine, or tract that explains the Bible’s solution to mankind’s problems. Before leaving, raise a question or two that you believe will build his anticipation for your next call. When you return, be sure to remind him of these questions, and then use the literature in helping him to find the Bible’s answers.
5 Our starting studies and regularly conducting them can change the lives of people. We need to show genuine interest in the concerns of those we meet in the field or in informal settings. It takes good preparation to stimulate their interest progressively. It takes patience to keep calling back until you get them into a regular pattern of spiritual feeding. It takes loving interest in the people themselves. We must sincerely want to help them to be saved from impending destruction. Our Bible study work should be made a matter of regular and earnest prayer.​—1 Thess. 5:17.
6 It is most encouraging to see that nearly a million people have become baptized disciples in the past three years. (Matt. 28:19, 20) We are now conducting about four and a half million Bible studies each month, and this shows our concern for the lives of others. What about you? Have you been putting forth earnest effort to share in the home Bible study work? Remember, our lives and those of others depend upon our faithfulness in this regard.​—Ezek. 3:17-19.

