Return to Help People Learn How They Can Live Forever
1 Since the Live Forever book was released, more than 65 million copies have been produced in 115 languages. Many who are now servants of Jehovah learned the basic truths of the Bible by means of this fine instrument. This month and next, we may have opportunity to place this Bible study aid, or we may meet people in the territory who already have it.
2 Calling Back on Those Who Have the Book: Some publishers have had good results from calling attention to the table of contents and asking the interested person which subject he finds of particular interest. When the householder has selected a subject, suggest that he read over the chapter in the book before the next visit.
3 When at all possible, we should make a definite appointment to call back. Before returning we want to prepare to discuss a few paragraphs of the chapter the householder selected. If he did not have a preference, we can start discussing chapter 1. After considering a few paragraphs, we should raise a question that will be covered in the next few paragraphs. That will serve as a stepping-​stone to another return visit, when we can continue the study of the Live Forever book.
4 Of course, if the householder has questions, it is best to take those into consideration first. Most likely his questions are answered in the book. By our being familiar with the contents of the book, we may be able to turn to the appropriate paragraphs and use that material to answer the questions raised.
5 Calling Back on Those With Whom We Left a Tract: Perhaps we left with the householder a copy of the Peaceful New World tract. When calling back, we can discuss the opening paragraphs of the tract.
If the householder shows real interest, when we come to the end of the first paragraph on page 3, where Psalm 37:29 is quoted, we might say:
▪ “Those words highlight what is discussed in this publication, You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. Notice the thought here in paragraph 3 of chapter 1 under the heading ‘Why We Can Believe.’” We can then read paragraph 3, ask the printed question on it, and continue with paragraphs 4 and 5 in the same manner. Then we could say: “Why are conditions so out of harmony with God’s purposes now? The next few paragraphs explain that, and I would like to return next week at this same time and answer that question for you.” If the householder has shown real interest, we might want to offer the book at this point. Or we may decide to do so at the end of our next discussion.
6 To offer the “Live Forever” book, we could say:
▪ “I’m sure you’d enjoy having your own copy of this publication. Then you’d be able to read ahead and thus get more out of our next discussion.” If the householder agrees to take the book, we may want to say: “This work is supported by voluntary donations. If you would like to contribute to the worldwide work of Jehovah’s Witnesses, you may do so.”
7 Returning to help people learn how they can live forever is a very important work. Jesus instructed his followers to teach others what they had been taught. We pray for Jehovah to send out more workers. So then, let us do our part in finding interested ones and teaching them to be fellow workers in the harvest.​—Matt. 9:37; 28:19, 20.

