Service Meetings for August
Week Starting August 2
Song 63
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Discuss talking points from the current magazines. Encourage all to share in field service this weekend.
20 min: “Strive to Get a Listening Ear.” Discuss with audience. Highlight importance of treating each householder as an individual, with objective of having a discussion with him. Have brief presentations based on suggestions in paragraphs 2 and 3. Emphasize regular use of magazines in field service.
15 min: “Telephone Witnessing​—A Way to Reach Many.” Question-​and- answer coverage of first 13 paragraphs of insert. Read selected paragraphs as time permits. Remind congregation to prepare for coverage of remaining seven paragraphs next week.
Song 193 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 9
Song 70
10 min: Local announcements, including accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Commend congregation for financial support of local congregation as well as Society’s worldwide work.
15 min: “Telephone Witnessing​—A Way to Reach Many.” Question-​and- answer coverage of paragraphs 14-20. Read selected paragraphs as time permits. Ask audience to comment on Reasoning book reference mentioned in paragraph 16. Highlight additional points from July 1990 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 4.
20 min: “Return to Help People Learn How They Can Live Forever.” Question-​and-​answer coverage. Have one demonstration of return visit based on presentation outlined in paragraphs 5 and 6.
Song 71 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 16
Song 20
15 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Discussion of article “New Special Assembly Day Program.” Encourage all to make advance plans for attending special assembly day program during 1994 service year. Announce date and place if known. Also encourage participation in weekend field activity.
10 min: Highlight value of Live Forever book. Figures can be cited to indicate increases during the years when this publication was used. Many have learned the truth by studying this book. Interview one or two publishers who studied this book when coming into the truth. Have them tell what they appreciated learning from it and how it can be used in the field. Encourage brothers to offer it enthusiastically where interest is noted.
20 min: “Requirements for Both the New and the Seasoned Minister.” Question-​and-​answer coverage by elder. Conclude with warm but brief summary of points applying to local congregation needs.
Song 6 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 23
Song 148
10 min: Local announcements.
20 min: “Earnestly Search for Bible Studies.” Question-​and-​answer coverage of article by service overseer. Read and apply all cited scriptures. Review progress of Bible study work in congregation over past five years, and develop concluding comments according to local needs.
15 min: The Importance of Dates in Our Study of the Bible. After brief talk on material under “Definition” on page 93 of Reasoning book, conduct audience discussion of rest of information under “Dates.” Consider “Why do Jehovah’s Witnesses say that God’s Kingdom was established in 1914?” Highlight how this information helps new ones to be prepared to defend the Kingdom message.
Song 43 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 30
Song 156
 5 min: Local announcements, including special field service arrangements for September 6.
15 min: “Be Whole-​Souled in Your Service.” Talk by elder. When discussing paragraph 2, make appropriate comments on Watchtower reference. Read and apply Malachi 3:10 in conclusion.
10 min: “Telephone Witnessing​—A Way to Reach Many.” (2 min.) Brief review of high points of article. Scene I (3 min.) Demonstrate preparation steps outlined in paragraphs 12 and 13. Scene II (3 min.) Using one of the sample presentations in paragraph 16, demonstrate an actual telephone witness. (2 min.) Give enthusiastic conclusion reviewing great possibilities that exist for using this method of witnessing.
15 min: Local needs. Can discuss encouragement given by circuit overseer during last visit. Remind brothers to check that all reports for 1993 service year have been turned in.
Song 31 and concluding prayer.

