Strive to Get a Listening Ear
1 Many people we meet in our house-​to-​house ministry do not have spiritual matters on their minds. They may be preoccupied with family members, economic difficulties, or personal problems. To start a conversation, it is often best to talk about matters of interest common to many in the neighborhood. Questions can be used to stimulate interest, since this involves the householder in the conversation. Viewpoint questions that do not embarrass people are most effective.
2 You might get a listening ear by using an approach something like this:
▪ “Good morning. My name is ․․․․․․․. I live in the neighborhood. Many I’ve talked to this morning are concerned about [mention a recent neighborhood news event or matter of local concern]. Do you think God intended the world to be like this?” Allow for a response. At this point the tract Life in a Peaceful New World may be featured. Briefly consider the illustration on page 1 and the information in paragraphs 1-3 as time permits. If interest is established, the Live Forever book may be introduced. You could draw attention to Psalm 37:9, 10 as quoted on page 157 and read it from the book. Using artwork on pages 156-7, explain the righteous conditions that will exist earth wide when wickedness is gone.
3 Always be prepared to offer The Watchtower and Awake! People everywhere are alarmed at the breakdown in morals. As you read the August 8 Awake!, pick out a few points you feel would arouse interest among people in your territory. Without dwelling at length on current bad conditions, call the householder’s attention to the article “The Perfect Moral Guide,” and speak positively about the benefits of adhering to the counsel of God’s Word. Later in the month, when introducing the August 22 Awake!, call attention to the article “When All Races Live Together in Peace.” Highlight the Bible’s counsel for attaining peaceful race relations. Current as well as older issues of The Watchtower and Awake! may be featured at any time in addition to special days set aside for offering magazines.
4 Remember that our objective is to arouse interest in the Kingdom message. In order to get a listening ear, we must first get the householder’s attention and stimulate his thinking. This will cause sheeplike people to want to “hear what the true God Jehovah will speak” regarding his purpose for mankind.​—Ps. 85:8.

