From Our Readers
Greenhouse Effect  The format and layout for the articles on the greenhouse effect (September 8, 1989) were done up so well that it made you want to keep on reading. The use of pictures and boxes gave you the feeling that you did have time to read it, in contrast with full pages of type. I found that I did not want to lay the magazine down until I finished it. As a result, I wanted to share its contents with others.
G. G., United States
The writing, art, and photography have improved​—most dramatically. We were particularly impressed with the “Greenhouse” Awake! We have read several poorly written articles on the same subject in magazines and newspapers that did not explain things in terms most people could understand. What a tool this issue will be for speaking to people here in hot southern California!
Mr. and Mrs. J. P. M., United States
Horrifying Organ Source  Awake! has unfortunately repeated a groundless rumor, which is quite understandable given the fact that it appears as if the European Parliament had given its imprimatur to these reports. These rumors have done damage to the humanitarian cause of adoption.
T. L., U.S. Information Agency, United States
The March 22, 1989, “Awake!” item entitled “Horrifying Organ Source” was based on a resolution published by the European Parliament, a credible organization. However, that organization now claims that it was the victim of misinformation. “Awake!” has since investigated matters and learned that while there were several well-​publicized arrests in Guatemala for child trafficking back in 1987, there is no proof that children were being sold for organ transplants. Instead, the original reports state that babies were being obtained and sold illegally for the purpose of adoption.​—ED.
Staying Friends  I am 11 years old and would like to thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Is It So Hard to Stay Friends?” (September 22, 1989) I had a best friend that just took me for granted. With the help from your publication, I decided to find a true friend.
B. S., Australia
Down’s Syndrome  Reading the experience about Suzy (August 8, 1989) so moved me emotionally that I wept throughout the whole story. I too appreciate that Jehovah has given us the grand hope of the resurrection, as I have lost my father in death. My heart and prayers go out to Suzy’s family.
B. E., United States
Recycled Paper  Your issue of September 8, 1989, page 29, contained an interesting item on the recycling of paper, through which the ever-​increasing pollution of our environment can be held in check. Yet, neither The Watchtower nor Awake! is printed on recycled paper. Whoever promotes certain standards but at the same time behaves in contradiction of them can only be designated a hypocrite.
F. S., Federal Republic of Germany
Recycled paper of either suitable quality or sufficient quantity to suit our large-​scale printing operation is presently unavailable. Since recycled paper is also up to 20 percent more expensive than paper made from virgin fiber, it will no doubt be some time before it is commonly used for production printing. Nevertheless, where possible, waste paper from our printeries is sold for recycling. And substantial quantities of recycled materials are also used in the production of covers for our hardbound publications.​—ED.

