Announcements
● Literature offer for February and March: Any of the 50-cent books in congregation stock except Choosing, Commentary on James, Family Life or Truth. For April: Watchtower subscription for one year for $2.50, with three booklets of which the congregation has a good supply, given free to new subscribers. The following booklets may be ordered from Brooklyn and used during the campaign: Is There a God Who Cares?, Divine Victory, God’s Way Is Love and “The Word.” May: Bible Stories book for contribution of $2.00.
● The 1975 Yearbook contains the history of the origin of the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The Society has a supply of this publication in English and Spanish. It may be that some who are newly interested would like to have this information on the development of the work from its early years to modern times. The price is 50 cents.
● The special talk may be given the following week if a circuit overseer’s visit or circuit assembly is scheduled for April 6.
● New Publications Available:
Choosing the Best Way of Life—German, Italian
Holy Spirit—The Force Behind the Coming New Order!—Croatian
Making Your Family Life Happy—Swahili, Swedish
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1977, 1978—Portuguese
● Available Again in U.S.A.:
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life—Amharic, Persian
● The April 1 and 15 issues of The Watchtower, and also the April 8 and 22 issues of Awake! will have articles specially suitable for placing with the public and for obtaining subscriptions. Be sure to place your order early for extra copies, including those that will be needed by auxiliary pioneers.
● Any congregations who do not have a Federal Identification Number for their bank accounts should obtain one from the Internal Revenue Service. See the Society’s letter of April 12, 1978.
● The Watchtower is now published in 106 languages. However, restrictions in a number of countries limit distribution of some editions to the local brothers only. Please order only those languages listed in The Watchtower, and for which you may have a need.
● On Saturday, April 12, the Bethel home and factory and Watchtower Farms buildings will be closed for spring cleaning, so there will be no arrangements for tours on that day.

