Do Good to Those Related to You in the Faith
1 Are you aware of the spiritual and physical needs of the brothers and sisters in your congregation? Have you considered how you might assist them? Are you in a position to do something to meet their needs? (Prov. 3:27) Or, do you usually leave such matters for others to care for?
2 What a fine thing for qualified brothers to be aware of the needs of others and try to assist them before a certain trend or inclination gets them into spiritual difficulty. To a wise person, often a kindly reminder from the Scriptures is sufficient.
WHAT WE CAN DO
3 Some brothers with spiritual qualifications have taken a fatherly interest in some of the younger persons at the Kingdom Hall, especially those who do not come from families united in the truth, thus helping them avoid some of the problems common to youth. This is much more satisfying than trying to help the person correct a problem after it has occurred.
4 At Galatians 6:2 Paul writes: “Go on carrying the burdens of one another, and thus fulfill the law of the Christ.” This reference to “the law of the Christ” has been linked to Jesus’ words at John 13:34 and 35 which show that his disciples would love one another. And how encouraging it is to help lighten the burden of others in the congregation when it is possible.
5 It would be good for each of us personally to take a few minutes to think of those we know in the congregation, perhaps in our book study group, that we might be able to help. Have we visited their homes, or invited them to visit us? One circuit overseer visited a sister who had not shared in the service for quite some time. He found that she wanted to do so but only needed assistance. Help was given and she was able to go in the service that week. You can imagine how pleased she was that someone was concerned about her and even arranged to share a meal with her later in the week.
EVEN A LITTLE HELPS
6 Whether we are able to do much or little is not important, but showing concern is what really counts. A card, a visit, an invitation, a phone call, perhaps sharing the day’s text over the phone, helping with some needs, physical or spiritual—all of these can help.
7 Some sisters find it convenient to baby-sit, at times, for others who would like to go in the service. Many go out of their way to bring someone along for meetings or service. Others find it possible to visit those who are sick or in the hospital. And when this is done, have something encouraging to leave with them—an experience or a Scriptural thought, such as Psalm 55:22 or Ps 41:3. Such thoughts can be very faith-strengthening. And all of us can pray for one another, especially if we are aware of a problem and do not personally see how we can assist.
8 The early Christians’ example of hospitality is something that is good to imitate. It builds up our faith and strengthens the bond of love. Paul emphasizes this fine quality when he says: “So let us not give up in doing what is fine, for in due season we shall reap if we do not tire out. Really, then, as long as we have time favorable for it, let us work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.”—Gal. 6:9, 10.

