Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 3
 8 min: Song 58 and Announcements.
37 min: Question-and-answer coverage of insert material on 1980 “Divine Love” District Convention.
15 min: Our Field Service. Audience discussion. Mention 50-cent books of which the congregation has a good supply. Discuss Topic for Conversation and how the scriptures might be used. Consider how to introduce the books and interesting points that can be referred to in them. Field service announcements. Song 32 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 10
10 min: Song 85 and local announcements, including accounts report.
15 min: “Maintaining the Spirit of Helping One Another.” Question-and-answer discussion. Ask for practical suggestions for application in local congregation. Comment on what has been done locally and plans for additional efforts.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News—By Showing Personal Interest in Others (Part II).” Question-and-answer discussion. In discussing paragraph four, ask audience what other questions could be used effectively in the local territory. In paragraph five, demonstrate by having publisher ask question and then ignore the response, just going on with what was prepared. Stop action and ask audience how it could have been handled better. In paragraph six demonstrate how householder expresses a viewpoint often held in your territory. Then publisher begins reply with “But, . . . ” and proceeds to show why householder is wrong. Stop action and ask how this approach could be improved.
17 min: “Do Good to Those Related to You in the Faith.” Question-and-answer coverage. Comments from audience on what they can do to help. Song 25 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 17
 8 min: Song 5 and local announcements, including field service arrangements for the congregation.
20 min: “The Women Telling the Good News.” Question-and-answer discussion. Include interview of sisters who have been faithful in Jehovah’s service for many years. Ask such questions as: What obstacles have you had to overcome and what do you do to keep spiritually strong? What qualities displayed by women in the Bible have you particularly admired or tried to imitate? What provisions in the congregation do you appreciate to assist you in telling the good news?
15 min: “Ruth and Naomi.” Interview with several children on platform from Story 51 in My Book of Bible Stories. Brother handling interview may ask such questions as: What country was Ruth from? How did Naomi, an Israelite, help her? Why did Ruth decide to go to Israel with Naomi? What did Ruth say that showed her faith in God? Was Ruth a good worker? How do you know that she was? Who was Boaz? What did Boaz say to Ruth to show he appreciated her and the work she did? Did Ruth and Boaz later get married? Whose great-grandfather was Boaz? Do you know why being the great-grandmother of David was such a blessing from Jehovah for Ruth?
12 min: “Benefiting from the Circuit Assembly Program.” Cover points in article and encourage everyone to attend all sessions of next circuit assembly.
 5 min: Song 26 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 24
19 min: Song 73 and local announcements. Invite a group of young publishers to platform to discuss chapter 8 in Youth book, “What Kind of Friends Do You Want?” They should have previously read material and be familiar with it. Elder handling should keep discussion lively. Highlight important points from each subheading, drawing these points out from youths. Get comments from youths on why it is important to select friends who live by Bible principles. Some suggestions may also be given on how friendships in the truth might be developed. What if there are few the same age in local congregation? How can youths make friends with older ones in congregation? (1 Sam. 18:1) Jonathan was about 30 years David’s senior.
18 min: “We Must Keep Separate from the World” as presented at “Living Hope” District Convention. Involve audience in reading some scriptures and commenting on the following points. Some scriptures may be assigned in advance for brief paraphrase or deleted to stay within time.
Keeping separate essential for friends of Jehovah. (Jas. 4:4) We need his friendship to strengthen and comfort us. (2 Cor. 1:3, 4) We need help from our Father, Jehovah, for forgiveness of sin.—1 John 2:1, 2.
Jesus set the example in separateness from the world. (John 17:14) He refused to accept political authority, advised against resorting to force or fighting. (John 18:36) Such separateness includes neutrality on political and social issues, not becoming meddlers in affairs of others.—1 Pet. 4:15.
Our separateness also means not following ways of world, but upholding purity in all our conduct. (1 Pet. 1:14, 15) A person who is envious or unloving, who engages in obscene talk or favors entertainment that features works of flesh may lose God’s friendship. (Eph. 5:3-5; 1 John 4:20) Just as Jesus did not center his life on material things, neither should those who are separate from this system. (1 Tim. 6:8) Separateness also shown by Christian subjection to those having authority, whether one is employee, wife or child, at home or in school.—1 Pet. 2:17, 18; 3:1.
Separateness from world brings rich blessings. It results in a clean conscience. (1 Pet. 2:19, 20) Jehovah’s friends are known as his witnesses and they enjoy prospect of everlasting life.—Acts 15:14; 2 Pet. 3:13.
 8 min: “Prepare Now for Memorial!” Cover material in article and outline Memorial arrangements.
15 min: Talk on article “Walking in the Steps of the Master” in the January 15, 1980, issue of The Watchtower. Also, article on page 7 of Our Kingdom Service, “Can You Be An Auxiliary Pioneer in April?” Encourage all to support the special arrangements for field service the first weekend in March. Song 65 and prayer.

