Part II—Presenting the Good News—By Showing Personal Interest in Others
1 A couple was reminiscing about the brother who studied the Bible with them. The brother was only schooled through the fifth grade and the man being studied with was highly educated. The couple said: “We were so impressed by his humble yet sincere and loving attitude, his interest in us, that we agreed to study with him.” Why was this brother, though having little education, able to help a highly educated person and his wife learn the truth? It was because he projected a sincere personal interest in them.
2 Some have said: “I am not experienced in speaking with people at the door and find it difficult.” You may feel that way, too. However, sincere interest in others may help you reach them.
3 When you meet objections or questions that you have difficulty in answering, what do you do? Because of your sincere interest in helping the people you have spoken to, you may do some reading on the subject later and make note of supporting scriptures or you may check the scriptures listed in Bible Topics for Discussion under that subject. Yes, there are many ways we can show personal interest in others.
4 By asking questions rather than doing all the talking, you show you are interested in what the householder thinks. There are questions that call for opinions (Do you believe God will become involved in man’s affairs?), leading questions (What do you think is the greatest problem facing families today?), and even hypothetical questions (If you had the power, what would you do to change conditions in the world?). All of these can be used effectively to better understand how one is thinking.
5 Asking questions would serve little purpose, however, if we did not stop and listen to the answers. Pay attention to what is said; put yourself in the other person’s place; try to understand his viewpoint. This shows that you have empathy, are interested in his welfare and want to help. Since the mind thinks much faster than a person can talk, as the person speaks there is time to analyze what is said, draw conclusions and determine how you will respond.
6 When the time comes for you to respond, look for opportunities to agree with the householder. Avoid using expressions that indicate that what he has just said is not of much value in your eyes. Rather, respond in a way that shows you appreciated getting the householder’s viewpoint. At the same time help him to see the value of the Kingdom message and the need to learn more about it.
7 Where interest is found, think about the person after leaving the door. Make proper notation on the house-to-house record of the person’s name and the subject that was discussed. Prepare and look ahead to making a return visit, thus showing that you care about the person and his eternal welfare. (Mark 6:34) It is good to follow through on these things, asking Jehovah for his blessing upon your efforts.—1 John 3:22.
8 Jehovah and Jesus show a personal interest in us by listening to our prayers, forgiving our sins, providing for our spiritual needs and examining our hearts. We, too, want to take interest in others as we present the good news.

