“The Women Telling the Good News”
1 The psalmist said: “The women telling the good news are a large army.” (Ps. 68:11) In the days of Israel women joyfully proclaimed the good news of theocratic victories by song and dance. Today, within Jehovah’s organization, we have a “large army” of women who are proclaiming the good news of the victorious kingdom by their preaching and their fine conduct as Christians.
2 What a joy to Jehovah’s heart these exemplary Christian women must be. Like locusts they share in covering the field of preaching in response to Jesus’ command. (Matt. 24:14) The sisters generally outnumber the brothers in many countries and have a major share in the preaching work. Because of their circumstances, more of them can share as regular, special and auxiliary pioneers. Of three pioneer sisters who worked with a congregation this past summer where assistance was needed, the body of elders wrote: “Their example and zeal reminded us of the scripture at Acts 5:42. In a short time our entire congregation seemed uplifted.”
3 The preaching work is only a part of the service performed by you devoted sisters. As acknowledged at Proverbs 31:15, there are many other responsibilities you must care for. There is cleaning, cooking, shopping, getting children ready for school, as well as a variety of other tasks. You also seem to find time to visit, comfort and assist those in the congregation who are elderly or infirm. Such loving acts are deeply appreciated.
4 Not all of you married sisters have believing husbands. Like Lois and Eunice, the grandmother and mother of Timothy, you have an obligation to provide for the spiritual training of your family. (2 Tim. 1:5) Some of you have lost your husbands and must carry the full financial load, looking after yourselves as well as your children. Even with all of this it is good that you do not neglect your own spiritual condition or that of your children.
5 At meetings it is much appreciated when our well-prepared sisters share in commenting or take part in demonstrations. Their parts in the Theocratic School often reflect their fine womanly qualities, being presented with warmth, compassion and tenderness.
6 After the meetings the wives of elders and ministerial servants are often seen sitting quietly or talking encouragingly to others while their husbands dutifully care for theocratic business. These sisters show themselves willing to set aside their personal preferences for the moment, knowing that their husbands are caring for necessary congregational matters. Husbands appreciate the patience and self-sacrificing attitude of such wives.
7 The strong faith shown by such women as Sarah, Esther, Naomi and Ruth is matched today by the women who are telling the good news. Some of you have gone through great persecution from immediate family members, relatives and others. Yet, you still continue loyally in the service of our God, Jehovah. We commend you for your faithfulness and pray that Jehovah will richly bless you as you continue to tell the good news.

