VOL. XXXI JANUARY 15 No. 2 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Where Are the Dead? 19 

What Say the Scriptures? 22 

Death, Not Torment, the Penalty 22 

God's Penalty a Just One 23 

What Say the Scriptures About Hell 25 

Erroneous Theories Exposed? 26 

Hell in English, Hebrew and Greek 26 

The Rich Man and Lazarus 35 

The Sheep and the Goats 37 

Everlasting Punishment 39 

The Lake of Fire and Brimstone 40 

Parabolic and Symbolic Figures 42 

Forgivable and Unpardonable Sins 46 

Future Retribution 46 

Let Honesty and Truth Prevail 48 



page 18 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



Send us the addresses of your Christian friends for free samples. 



THIS ISSUE IS A DOUBLE ONE-32 PAGES. 



NONE TOO POOR TO HAVE THIS JOURNAL 
REGULARLY 

If a developed child of God, you are interested in Bible study, and 
if so, you cannot afford to deprive yourself of the helping hand God 
has provided for all such through the semi-monthly visits of this journal. 
If obliged to ask for it on credit, do so; if never able to pay you need 
not fear offending us. We will cancel the debt at any time on request. 



If you have no prospect of being able to pay, then say so as above 
and have it free— paid for out of a fund provided by loving "brethren" 
who desire thus to assist and serve the Lord. Write at once, and be 
sure to renew each May. 

HOW TO WRITE US 

Write your name and full address very plainly at the head of your 
letter sheet if it is not printed there;— giving street and number. And 
do this on every letter. Write your order on a separate sheet from 
your letter— or on a separate page. 

Address business communications to our Society as above, and personal 
or doctrinal queries to the Editor at same address. 

VOLUNTEERS-SERVICE FOR JESUS 

Our Society's object is— The Promulgation of Christian Knowledge: 
to the intent that the Lord's people may be sanctified by the Truth— the 
only genuine and acceptable sanctification. Everyone willing is invited 
to share this service as a true soldier of the cross. Ammunition in 
the form of tracts will be supplied free to all who will promise to use 
the same faithfully and judiciously. Write for samples free. 

"FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS" 

A Pamphlet by this title by the Editor of this journal, but now 
out of print, is much more than replaced by the "Scripture Study" 
Series, mentioned following. These volumes are invaluable aids to 
Bible study. They are sold at cost, and loaned to those too poor to 
purchase, who will promise a careful reading and to return them. 

You really cannot afford to be without these books if you are a 
Christian and desirous of understanding your Bible. 



R4549 : page 19 

WHERE ARE THE DEAD? 



Our Friends, Our Neighbors; the Holy, 
the Unholy; the Civilized, the Vile? 



The proper answer to this question stands related to 
our own destiny, colors and influences our theology 
and the entire trend of our lives! The correct 
answer gives strength, confidence, courage 
and assists towards the spirit of a sound mind! 



"Men and brethren, let me freely speak to you of the patriarch 
David, that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulchre 



is with us unto this day. For David is not ascended 
into the heavens." (Acts. 2:29,34.) "And no man 
hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down 
from heaven, even the Son of man."— John 3:13. 



FOR a man to declare himself uninterested in 
this subject would be to proclaim himself 
idiotic— thoughtless. If the ordinary affairs 
of this present life, food, raiment, finance, politics, 
etc., which concern us but for a few years, are 
deemed worthy of thought, study, how much more 
concern should we have in respect to the eternal 
future of ourselves and neighbors and mankind in 
general? 

Of course, so important a question has had the 
most profound study, ever since the reign of Sin and 
Death began six thousand years ago. By this time the 
subject should be threadbare. The entire world should 
be so thoroughly informed respecting this question 
that there would be nothing new to say and nobody 
curious to hear. But the large audiences of intelligent, 
thoughtful people which come to hear, and which listen 
with breathless interest to what we have to say, imply 
that after all the study the subject has had, but few 
are thoroughly satisfied with their conclusions. 

THE AGNOSTIC ANSWERS THE QUESTION 

Before presenting what we claim is the Scriptural 
and only satisfactory answer to our query, we think it 
but proper respect to the intelligence and thought of 
our day and of past centuries to make general inquiries 
on the subject and have before our minds the 
most profound thoughts of the most astute thinkers 
of our race. We cannot, however, go into this matter 
elaborately and give lengthy quotations. We must content 
ourselves with brief, synoptical answers, which 
will be stated kindly and truthfully, and with a desire 
not to offend anybody, however much we may disagree 
with his conclusions. We recognize the right of every 
man to do his own thinking and to reach his own conclusions, 
whether these agree with our conceptions or 
not. 

We begin our examination by asking our agnostic 
friends, who boast of their untrammeled freedom of 
thought, What say you, "Free-thinkers," in reply to 
our query, Where are the dead? Their answer is, 
"We do not know. We would like to believe in a 
future life, but we have no proof of it. Lacking the 
evidences our conclusion is that man dies as does the 
brute beast. If our conclusion disappoints your expectations 
in respect to having joy for the saints, it 
certainly should be comforting to all as respects the 
vast majority of our race, who certainly would be 



R4550 : page 19 

much better off perished like the brute beast than to be 
preserved in torture, as the majority believe." 

We thank our agnostic friends for the courteous 
reply, but feel that the answer is not satisfactory, either 
to our heads or to our hearts; which cry out that there 
must, or should be, a future life; that the Creator 
made man with powers of mind and heart so superior 
to the brute that his pre-eminence in the Divine plan 
should be expected. Furthermore, the brevity of the 
present life, its tears, its sorrows, its experiences, its 
lessons, will nearly all be valueless, useless, unless 
there be a future life— an opportunity for making use 
of these lessons. We must look further for some more 
satisfactory answer to our question. 

THE HEATHEN ANSWER TO OUR QUERY 

Since three-fourths of the world are heathens, the 
weight of numbers implies that they next should be 
asked for their solution to the question— Where are 
the dead? Heathenism gives two general answers. 

(1) Prominent are those which hold to Transmigration. 
These reply to us, "Our view is that when 

a man dies, he does not die, but merely changes his 
form. His future estate will correspond to his present 
living and give him either a higher or a lower position. 
We believe that we lived on earth before, perhaps as 
cats, dogs, mice, elephants, or what not, and that if the 
present life has been wisely used, we may reappear as 
men of nobler talents, as philosophers, etc.; but if, as 
usual, life has been misspent, at death we will be remanded 

R4550 : page 20 

to some lower form of being— an elephant, a 

worm, or what not. It is because of this belief that we 

are so careful in respect to our treatment of the lower 

animals and refuse to eat meat of any kind. Were we 

to tramp ruthlessly on the worm, our punishment might 

be a form in which we ourselves would be treated ruthlessly 

after the change which we call death." 

(2) The other large class of heathen believe in a 
spirit world with happy hunting grounds for the good 
and a hell of different torments for the wicked. We 

are told that when people seem to die they really become 
more alive than ever and that the very minute 
they cross the river Styx they go to the realms of 
either the blessed or the ever doomed, and that there 
are steps or degrees of punishment and reward. We 
inquire, Where did you receive these views? The 
answer is, They have been with us for a long, long 
time. We know not where they came from. Our 
learned men have handed them down to us as truths, 



and we have accepted them as such. 

But heathenism's answer is not satisfactory to 
our heads and hearts. We must look further. We 
must not trust to speculation. We must look for Divine 
Revelation; the message from him with whom we have 
to do— our Creator. 

THE CATHOLIC ANSWER TO OUR QUESTION 

Turning from heathenism we address our question 
to that intelligent one-fourth of the world's population 
known as Christendom. We say, Christendom, 
What is your answer to the question? The reply is, 
"We are divided in our opinion, more than two-thirds 
of us holding the Catholic and nearly one-third the 
general Protestant view. Let us hear the Catholic 
view (Greek and Roman) first then, because age, as 
well as numbers, suggests such precedence. 

Catholic friends, Give us, please, the results of 
your labors and studies, the conclusions of your ablest 
thinkers and theologians, in respect to the Revelation 
which you claim to have from God on this subject, 
Where are the dead? We will hear you thoughtfully, 
patiently, unbiasedly. Our Catholic friends respond: 
"Our teachings are very explicit along the lines of 
your question. We have canvassed the subject from 
every standpoint in the light of Divine Revelation. 
Our conclusion and teaching are that when anyone 
dies, he goes to one of three places: first, the saintly, of 
whom we claim there are but a few, go immediately 
to the presence of God, to heaven. These are referred 
to by our Lord, saying, "Whosoever doth not bear his 
cross and come after me, cannot be my disciple." 
(Luke 14:27.) Those who faithfully bear the cross 
are the "little flock," the "elect." Respecting these 
Jesus says, "Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, 
that leadeth to life, and few there be that find it." 
(Matt. 7:14.) These saintly do not include our clergy, 
not even our bishops, cardinals and popes; for you will 
find that when any of these die, it is a custom of the 
Church that masses be said for the repose of their 
souls. We would not say masses for any we believe to 
be in heaven, because there surely is repose for every 
soul; neither would we say masses for them if we 
believed them to be in eternal hell, for masses could 
not avail them there. We might remark, however, that 
we do not teach that many go to the eternal hell. It 
is our teaching that only incorrigible heretics— persons 
who have had a full knowledge of Catholic doctrines 
and who have wilfully and deliberately opposed them 
—these alone meet the awful, hopeless fate. 

MILLIONS TO PURGATORY 

"The dead in general, according to our teaching, 
pass immediately to Purgatory, which is, as the name 



indicates, a place of purgation from sin, a place of penances, 

sorrows, woes, anguish indeed, but not hopeless. 

The period of confinement here may be centuries or 

thousands of years, according to the deserts of the individual 

and the alleviations granted. If you would 

know more particularly the Catholic teaching on this 

subject, we refer you to the writings of one of our 

great Catholics, the noted poet Dante, a loyal Catholic, 

at one time an Abbot, who died in a monastery with 

the full rights of the Church. Dante's poem, "Inferno," 

graphically describes the tortures of Purgatory, 

as we understand the matter. You can procure at almost 

any library an illustrated copy of this great Catholic 

poem. Dore, the artist, was also a prominent 

Catholic and he portrayed Dante's poem vividly and 

truthfully. The illustrations show the torments of 

Purgatory vividly— how the demons chase some until 

they leap over precipices into boiling water. They ply 

others with fiery darts. Others are burned with heads 

downward; others with feet downward in pits. Some 

are bitten by serpents. Still others are frozen, etc. We 

advise that you see Dante's work, "Inferno," because it 

gives our Catholic view of the proper answer to your 

question, Where are the dead? The vast majority are 

in Purgatory. The billions of the heathens are there; 

because ignorance does not save, does not qualify for 

the heavenly condition. All who enter heaven must 

previously have been fitted and prepared in a manner 

impossible to the heathen. Millions of Protestants are 

there. They could not enter heaven, except through 

the portals of the Catholic Church; neither would God 

deem them worthy of eternal hell, because their rejection 

of Catholicism was due to the confession of 

faith under which they were born and environed. 

Nearly all Catholics go to Purgatory also, because, 

notwithstanding the good offices of our Church, our 

holy water, confessions, masses, holy candles, consecrated 

burying ground, etc., nevertheless, not having 

attained to saintship of character, they would be excluded 

from heaven until the distressing experiences 

of Purgatory would prepare their hearts for heaven. 

We hold, however, that for the reason stated, Catholics 

will not need to remain as long in Purgatory as 

will the Protestants and heathen." 

We can thank our Catholic friends for so kind 
a statement of their case. We will not ask them where 
their Purgatory is, nor how they obtain the details of 
information respecting it, because such questions might 
offend them, and we have no desire to offend. We 
merely wish for their ripest, clearest, maturest thought 
respecting our question. We regret to say that the 
answer is not all that we might have hoped for in 
clearness and reasonableness and Scripturalness. Our 
hearts are heavy with the thought that our poor race, 
by reason of original sin, is already, as the Apostle 
says, a "groaning creation," and the present life of a 



few years is full of trouble. It is saddening, discouraging 
to all of us to think that when present trials and 
difficulties are past, of being obliged, even for centuries 
(not to mention eternity), to have such awful 
experiences as Dante portrays, even though those centuries 

R4550 : page 21 

of anguish would purge us and fit us for the 
Divine presence of heavenly glory. It may seem 
strange to some theologians, but it is nevertheless 
true, that the answer of Catholicism to our question 
is not much better than the answer of heathendom. 
Neither our heads nor our hearts are yet satisfied. 
It cannot be wrong to look further for something more 
satisfactory. 

THE PROTESTANT ANSWER TO OUR QUESTION 

I class myself as a Protestant without thereby 
meaning any disrespect to anybody else. I assume 
that the majority of my audience are Protestants. I 
remind you that many of us in times past have been 
inclined to boast a little of Protestant "breadth of 
mind," "intelligence," "education," etc. May we not 
reasonably expect from Protestants a clear, logical, 
satisfactory answer to our question? Having found 
all the other answers unsatisfactory, and having now 
come to the one-twelfth portion of our race which has 
had most advantage every way, we might reasonably 
expect to find in its answer the quintescence of wisdom 
and proof from every quarter and from every 
age. But what do we find, dear friends? With 
shame I say it, We find the very reverse! We find that 
the voice of Protestantism as a whole (barring numerically 
insignificant denominations) giving the most 
absurd answer to my question that could be conceived 
—an answer which is put to shame by the Catholics, 
the heathen and the agnostics. Is not this marvelous? 
Can this be? It is written, "Faithful are the wounds 

R4551 : page 21 

of a friend." Bear with me, therefore, while I expose 
to you the weaknesses of our position as Protestants; 
not with a view to our vexation and shame, but with 
the thought that our intelligent investigation of the 
subject can be turned to our advantage and enable us 
to know the Truth and to lift the true, Divine standards 
before the people, to the intent that we and all 
may come to clearer views of our Heavenly Father's 
character, purposes and future dealings with our race. 

Permit me as gently as possible to touch this sore 
spot. The removal of the bandages and the cleansing 
of the sore may cause us pain, but the investigation 
should be helpful, nevertheless. We got our name 



Protestants from the fact that our intelligent and well-meaning 

forefathers, who were Catholics, thought that 

they discovered inconsistencies and unscripturalness 

in Catholic doctrines in which they had been reared. 

They protested against these, and hence came the 

name Protestants. We cannot defend all that they 

did to their enemies nor all that their enemies did to 

them. 

One of their points of protest was that our forefathers 
could find nothing of Purgatory anywhere on 
earth, nor any declaration respecting it in the Bible. 
With a simplicity that is certainly marvelous to us, 
they concluded that they would merely pick up their 
views of Purgatory and throw them away forever. 
This left them heaven and hell, into one of which, 
they said, every member of the race must go at death 
and there spend his eternity. Quite evidently these 
well-meaning forefathers of ours were not as long-headed, 
far-sighted and logical as we might have expected 
them to be, when they did not perceive the 
difficulty into which they were walking. Rather we 
should say, perhaps, that they did see something of 
the difficulty, but viewed matters differently from what 
we do. The theory of Calvin and Knox prevailed at 
that time amongst Protestants and led each denomination 
to hope that it was God's "elect" and that it would 
constitute the "little flock" who would go to heaven, 
while all the remainder of mankind would be consigned 
to an eternity of hellish torture. 

No longer does either Catholic or Protestant pray, 
"God bless me and my wife, 
My son John and his wife, 
Us four and no more." 

Both Catholics and Protestants, looking back to 
that period which we often term the "dark ages," 
have reason to give thanks to God for the anointing 
of the eyes of our understanding, which enables us, we 
believe, to think more logically than our forefathers. 
Even those of us reared under the doctrine of predestination 
have lost the idea that the heathen were passed 
by because they were predestinated to damnation; instead 
those who accepted the Westminster confession 
of faith are to-day the most zealous in the preaching 
of the Gospel amongst the heathen by missionary effort. 
We are glad of this. It is a sign that our hearts 
are in truer and nobler condition, even though our 
heads have not yet gotten into proper adjustment 
with our hearts; and we still look at crooked doctrines 
and endeavor to imagine them altogether straight. 

Theoretically Protestant doctrines stand with the 
Bible and with Catholics and declare that heaven is a 
place of perfection; that there can be no change to 
any who enter there; hence that all trial, all refinement, 
all chiseling, all polishing of character must be accomplished 
in advance of an entrance into the abode of 
the saints. In a word, we agree that only the saints 



will ever enter there, the "pure in heart," the "over-comers," 

the "little flock," who now walk in the footsteps 

of Jesus. What about the remainder of mankind? 

Ah! there is the difficulty. Our larger hearts 

will not consent that all except the saints must spend 

an eternity of torture, though this is the logic of our 

creeds. Our hearts protest, saying that three-fourths 

of humanity to-day are heathen and that fully that 

proportion of humanity altogether have never heard 

of God and the terms of salvation. 

THE BEST OF PEOPLE PERPLEXED 

Our creeds perplex us; for, as our hearts will not 
permit us to think of these poor creatures going to an 
eternity of misery, neither will our heads permit us to 
say that they are fit for heaven. Indeed it would be 
at variance not only with the Scripture, but also with 
reason itself, to suppose heaven with three-fourths of 
its inhabitants unregenerate in every sense of the word. 
Our forefathers merely spoiled things for us when 
they threw away Purgatory and kept the remainder 
of the arrangement. If we must object to Purgatory 
as being unscriptural, must we not equally object to 
the eternal torment of all the families of the earth as 
being unscriptural, especially when the Bible declares 
that "all the families of the earth shall be blessed" 
through Christ— blessed with a knowledge of the Truth 
and opportunity to come into heart harmony with God 
and attain everlasting life through Christ. I believe 
that it is necessary to press this point of the unreasonableness 
of the eternal torment doctrine. Nevertheless, 
I will remind you of what our prominent Protestant 
theories are on the subject: 

(1) The Calvinistic thought is that Divine Wisdom 

R4551 : page 22 

and Power planned for mankind in advance- 
knew of the fall of man in advance, and prepared therefor 
by the creating of a great place called hell and the 
manning of it with fire-proof devils for the torment of 
the race— all except the "little flock," the "elect." Love 
and justice were left out of this calculation; (2) The 
other prominent Protestant theory, the "Arminian," 
held to-day probably by the majority, insists that both 
Love and Justice created the world and arranged the 
torment, and that wisdom and power were not consulted; 
hence that God has gotten into difficulty, while 
endeavoring to do justly and lovingly by his creatures; 
because lacking in power to render the needed aid. The 
entire difficulty, dear friends, is that, in our reasoning 
on the subject, we have merely asked the opinions of 
men and have not sought the Word of the Lord. 

I shall surprise you, I feel sure, when I bring to 
your attention now the clear, plain, reasonable, just, 



loving and wise program of our Heavenly Father. It 
has been so long overlooked, so long buried under the 
rubbish of human tradition of the "dark ages" that to-day 
"Truth is stranger than fiction." Well did our 
Lord through the prophet declare: 

"As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are 
my ways higher than your ways, and my plans higher 
than your plans."— Isa. 55:9. 

WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES? 

All of the foregoing theories, be it noticed, are 
based upon the assumption that death does not mean 
death— that to die is to become more alive than before 
death. In Eden it was God who declared to our first 
parents, "Ye shall surely die." It was Satan who declared, 
"Ye shall not surely die." Notice that the 
heathens, as well as the Christians, have accepted 
Satan's lie and correspondingly rejected God's Truth. 
Do they not all agree with the serpent's statement, "Ye 
shall not surely die"? Do they not all claim that the 
dead are alive— much more alive than before they died? 
This, dear friends, has been our common point of mistake. 
We have followed the wrong teacher; the one 
of whom our Lord said, "He abode not in the Truth," 
and that he is the father of lies.— John 8:44. 

These false doctrines have prevailed amongst the 
heathen for many, many centuries, but they gained an 
ascendancy in the Church of Christ during the "dark 
ages" and had much to do with producing the darkness 
thereof. If our forefathers had believed God's 
testimony, "Thou shalt surely die," there would have 
been no room for the introduction of prayers for the 
dead, masses for their sins, frightful thoughts respecting 
their torture. The Scriptures agree from first to 
last that "the dead know not anything" (Eccl. 9:5) and 
that "their sons come to honor and they know it not; 
they come to dishonor and they perceive it not of 
them." (Job 14:21.) It is the Scriptures that tell us 
where the dead are and their condition; that they are 
experiencing neither joy nor sorrow, pleasure nor suffering; 
that they will have no knowledge of anything 
done under the sun until their awakening in the Resurrection. 
I remind you of the wise man's words, "Do 
with thy might what thy hand findeth to do, for there 
is neither wisdom nor knowledge nor device in (sheol) 
the grave, whither thou goest." (Eccl. 9:10.) I remind 
you that both in the Old Testament and in the 
New Testament it is written of both the good and the 
bad that they fell asleep in death. I remind you that 
the Apostle speaks of those who "Sleep in Jesus," and 
of those who have "fallen asleep in Christ;" who, he 
declares, are perished, if there be no resurrection of the 
dead. Could they perish in heaven or in Purgatory or 
in a hell of torment? Assuredly no one so teaches. 
They are already in a perished condition in the tomb; 



and the perishing would be absolute, complete, unless 
a resurrection be provided for their deliverance from 
the power of death. Hence we read, "God so loved the 
world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth on him should not perish, but have 
eternal life." 

In a word, then, the Bible teaching is that man was 
made superior to all the brute creation— in the image 
and likeness of his Creator; that he possessed life in 
a perfect degree in Eden and might have retained it 
by full obedience. But in his trial, his testing, he failed 
and came under the death sentence. "In the day 
that thou eatest thereof, dying thou shalt die." (Gen. 2:17.) 
There the dying began, which, after nine hundred 
and thirty years, brought father Adam to the 
tomb and involved all of his children in his weaknesses 
and death sentence. He died in the very day, which 

R4552 : page 22 

the Apostle Peter explains was not a twenty-four day, 
but a thousand year day, saying, "One day is with the 
Lord as a thousand years." (2 Pet. 3:8.) During six 
of these great days the death sentence has brought 
man down in some respects to the level of the brute 
and left him without hope of future life, except 
as God might take compassion upon him and bring him 
some relief. This was hinted at in the statement that 
"The Seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's 
head." It was yet further elaborated to Abraham, saying, 
"In thee and in thy Seed shall all the families of 
the earth be blessed."-Gen. 28:14. 

But not until four of the great thousand-year days 
had passed did God send forth his Son to redeem the 
race, by paying father Adam's penalty, by dying, "The 
just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God." 
(I Pet. 3:18.) As a result of that redemptive work accomplished 
at Calvary there is to be "a resurrection of 
the dead, both of the just and of the unjust"— a recovery 
from the death sentence, from the prison-house, the 
tomb. 

DEATH, NOT TORMENT, THE PENALTY 

Note well the mistake made in assuming eternal 
torment the wages of original sin, when the Scriptures 
explicitly declare that "The wages of sin is death"— 
not eternal torment. (Rom. 6:23.) We search the 
Genesis account of man's fall and the sentence imposed, 
but find no suggestion of a future punishment, 
but merely of a death penalty. Repeating it the second 
time the Lord said, "Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt 
thou return." (Gen. 3:19.) But he said not a word 
respecting devils, fire and torment. How, then, did the 
Adversary deceive our fathers during the "dark ages" 
with his errors, which the Apostle styles "doctrines of 



devils"? Note the fact that none of the prophecies 
mention any other than a death penalty for sin. Note 
that the New Testament likewise declares the same. 
St. Paul, who wrote more than one-half of the New 
Testament, and who assures us that he did "not shun 
to declare the whole counsel of God" (Acts 20:27), 
says not a word about torment. On the contrary, discussing 
this very matter of sin and its penalty, he says, 
"Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, 

R4552 : page 23 

and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, 
for that all have sinned." (Rom. 5:12.) Note that it 
was not eternal torment that passed upon one man nor 
upon all men, but death. If some one suggests that 
death would not be a sufficient penalty for sin, all we 
would need to do would be to point him to the facts 
and thus prove his suggestions illogical. For the sin 
of disobedience Adam lost his paradisaic home— lost 
eternal life and Divine fellowship, and instead got 
sickness, pain, sorrow, death. Additionally all of his 
posterity, reasonably estimated at twenty thousand millions, 
disinherited so far as the blessings are concerned, 
have inherited weaknesses, mental, moral and physical, 
and are, as the Apostle declares, "A groaning creation." 
-Rom. 8:22. 

GOD'S PENALTY A JUST ONE 

Let no one think the death penalty unjust and too 
severe. God could have blotted out Adam, the sinner, 
thus fulfilling the sentence. He could have blotted out 
the race instantly. But would we have preferred that? 
Assuredly not. Life is sweet, even amidst pain and 
suffering. Besides it is the Divine purpose that present 
trials and experiences shall prove useful as disciplines; 
to prepare us for a wiser course than father 
Adam took, when we shall be privileged to have a 
further individual trial. Our race would have been 
without hope of future existence, just as agnosticism 
claims, had it not been for Divine compassion and the 
work of redemption. 

Notice again why our Lord died for our redemption 
and see in that another evidence of the penalty. 
If the penalty against us had been eternal torment, 
our redemption from it would have cost our Lord that 
price. He would have been obliged to suffer eternal 
torment, the just for the unjust. But eternal torment 
was not the penalty; hence Jesus did not pay that penalty 
for us. Death was the penalty and hence "Christ 
died for our sins." "By the grace of God he tasted 
death for every man." Whoever could pay Adam's 
penalty could settle with Divine Justice for the sins of 
the whole world, because Adam alone had been tried 
—Adam alone had been condemned. We, his children, 



were involved through him. Behold the wisdom and 
the economy of our Creator! The Scriptures assure 
us that he condemned the whole world for one man's 
disobedience, in order that he might have mercy upon 
all through the obedience of another— Christ. We were 
condemned to death without our consent or knowledge. 
We were redeemed from death without our consent 
or knowledge. 

Some one may inquire, "Are we, therefore, without 
responsibility? Will there be no individual penalty 
upon us for individual wrong doings"? We answer, 
"A just recompense of reward" will be meted 
out to all. But our eternal destiny can be settled only 
by ourselves, by our individual acceptance or rejection 
of the grace of God. The Scriptures clearly inform 
us that every sin, in proportion to its wilfulness, 
brings a measure of degradation which involves 
"stripes," chastisements, corrections to regain the lost 
standing. Thus the more mean and more wicked a 
man or woman may be, the greater will be his or her 
disadvantage in the resurrection time, and the more 
he will then have to overcome to get back to all that 
was lost in Adam and redeemed by Christ. 

"AND THE DEAD CAME FORTH" 

At his first advent our Lord's miracles foreshadowed 
the great work which he, with his glorified 
Church, will accomplish for the world during the Millennium 
—then all the sick, lame, blind and dead will 
be revived and, if obedient, will be brought ultimately 
to full perfection. The disobedient will be destroyed 
in the Second Death. The most notable miracle which 
our Lord performed was the awakening of Lazarus, 
his friend. Jesus was gone several days when Lazarus 
took sick and, of course, knew about the matter. 
Nevertheless Martha and Mary sent him a special message, 
saying, "Lord, behold he whom thou lovest is 
sick." (John 11:3.) They knew of Jesus' power to 
heal, even by the word of his mouth. They had faith 
that if he could help strangers, he would surely be glad 
to assist his friend. But Jesus remained where he was 
and allowed Lazarus to die and a rude shock to come 
to the dear sisters. Then he said to his disciples, "Our 
friend Lazarus sleepeth." (John 11:11.) Then, coming 
down to their comprehension, he added, "Lazarus 
is dead; and I am glad for your sakes that I was not 
there. "-John 11:14,15. 

He was glad to let his friend fall asleep in death, 
because it would provide a special opportunity for a 
special miracle. Then, with his disciples, he began 
the three-days' journey to Bethany. We cannot blame 
the sorrowing sisters that they felt hurt that the Messiah 
should apparently neglect their interests. They 
knew that He had the power to relieve them. Martha's 
gentle reproof was, "Lord, if thou hadst been here, 



my brother had not died. Jesus said unto her, thy 

brother shall rise again. Martha saith unto Him, I 

know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the 

last day." (John 21:23,24.) Notice that our Lord 

did not say, "Thy brother is not dead; thy brother is 

more alive than he ever was; he is in heaven or in 

purgatory." Nothing of the kind! Purgatory had not 

yet been invented, and he knew nothing of it. And 

as for heaven, our Lord's testimony is, in our text, 

"No man hath ascended into heaven, but he that came 

down from heaven." Martha was also well informed. 

The errors of the dark ages had not yet supplanted the 

truth. Her hope for her brother was the Scriptural 

one; that he would rise in the resurrection, in the last 

day, the Millennial Day, the seventh of the great thousand-year 

days from creation. 

Our Lord explained that the power of resurrection 
was vested in himself, that He was there with her, and 
could give relief to them without waiting. Martha 
told our Lord that it was too late; that putrefaction 
had set in by this time. But Jesus insisted on seeing 
the tomb and when he arrived at it, He said, "Lazarus, 
come forth." And we read, "He that was dead came 
forth." (John 1 1:43,44.) Mark well that it was not 
the living that came forth, but that Lazarus was really 
dead. Mark well that he was not called from heaven 
nor from purgatory. 

"ALL THAT ARE IN THEIR GRAVES" 

What Jesus did for Lazarus he intimated He 
would ultimately do for Adam and his entire race. 
Note His words: "The hour is coming, in the which 
all that are in the graves shall hear His voice, and 
shall come forth." (John 5:28,29.) Does this astonish 
us? If so, the reason is not far to seek. It 
is because we have gotten so far away from the teachings 
of the Bible— so fully immersed in the "doctrines 
of devils," so fully to believe in the serpent's lie, "Ye 
shall not surely die"— so blinded to the Lord's declaration, 

R4552 : page 24 

"Ye shall surely die," and "The wages of sin is 
death." 

The remainder of John 5:29 explains that there 
will be two general classes of the dead to come forth. 
The first, those who have had their trial and who have 
passed it successfully; the second, all the remainder of 
mankind who have thus far failed to have divine approval. 
The approved will come forth from the tomb 
unto a resurrection of life— perfection. The disapproved 
will come forth unto a resurrection of judgment 
(see Revised Version). The coming forth is one 
thing. The resurrection is another. The Apostle explains 
that they will come forth, "every man in his own 



order." (I Cor. 15:23.) On thus being awakened the 
privilege will be theirs of rising, up, up, up out of present 
degradation, mental, moral, physical, to the glorious 
perfection which father Adam enjoyed in the image 

R4553 : page 24 

and likeness of his Creator. The uplifting or resurrection 

work St. Peter refers to as the "Restitution 

of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of 

all his holy prophets since the world began."— 

Acts 3:21. 

NOT UNIVERSALISM EITHER 

Nor does this mean universal everlasting life, for 
the Scriptures declare that such as refuse to profit by 
the glorious opportunities of the Millennium; such as 
refuse to be uplifted to perfection, shall be destroyed 
from amongst the people in the Second Death— "They 
shall be as though they had not been." (Obad. 16.) I 
remind you again of our Lord's teaching on this subject. 
He entered the synagogue at Capernaum and, 
being asked to read the lesson, He chose Isaiah, the 
sixty-first chapter, and read respecting Himself and 
His work— that a part of it would be "to open the 
prison doors and set at liberty the captives." We are 
well aware that our Lord did not open any of the literal 
prisons, such as John the Baptist was confined in. 
He made no effort to succor him. The prison-house 
which Christ will open is the great prison-house, the 
tomb, which now holds approximately twenty thousand 
millions of our race. At his second advent our 
Lord will open this great prison-house and allow all the 
prisoners to come forth, just as truly as he did in the 
example— in the case of Lazarus. Nor will he call 
them from heaven, purgatory and hell, but, just as He 
declared, "Lazarus, come forth," "all that are in their 
graves shall hear His voice and come forth." 

WHERE ARE THE DEAD? 

My dear friends, you had before your minds the 
answers to our question from the highest to the lowest 
earthly authorities. None of them was satisfactory. 
Now you have heard the testimony of God's Word— 
the Divine declaration as to "Where are the dead?" 
Harkening to the voice from heaven we are assured 
that they are really dead and that all their hopes as 
respects the future are centered, first, upon the redemptive 
work of our Lord Jesus, accomplished at Calvary, 
and, secondly, upon the work of resurrection which, 
at His second advent, He is to accomplish for those 
whom He redeemed. If perchance you have a shade 
of disappointment as respects a saintly brother or sister, 
father or mother or child, who you hoped was already 



in heaven, then as a consolation look at the 

other side of the question— behold how many of your 

loved ones, kith and kin, friends and foes and neighbors, 

according to your theory and all the prevalent 

theories, have been suffering untellable woe since their 

death and would be suffering similarly for long centuries 

to come— consider the relief of mind and heart 

you get from the knowledge of the Truth; that they 

are not alive anywhere, but simply dead, or more poetically, 

they are "Asleep in Jesus," in the sense that He 

is their Redeemer, in whom all their hopes of a future 

awakening reside. 

PRESENT YOUR BODIES SACRIFICES 

Just a closing word! Our subject would lack a 
proper finish if we did not explain Scripturally why 
God has delayed the world's blessing, the resurrection, 
nearly two thousand years since the death of Jesus. 
The reason is such a glorious one! It must appeal to 
every true Christian heart and make it glad. It is this: 

God purposed the selection of the Church before 
the blessing of resurrection should go to the world. 
This Church is called sometimes "the Body of Christ, 
which is the Church," of which Jesus is the Head. 
Again it is styled "the Bride— the Lamb's Wife." Ever 
since Pentecost the Heavenly Father has been drawing 
believers to Jesus' side. After having been justified 
through faith in the precious blood, they have been invited 
to become Jesus' disciples, his followers, to walk 
in his steps, to lay down their lives in the Father's 
service, as Jesus did, and to develop in their hearts the 
fruits and graces of the holy Spirit to such a degree 
that they might be called "Copies of God's dear Son." 

The promise to these is not the resurrection of restitution 
promised to the world during the Millennium. 
On the contrary, these have a "heavenly calling." After 
their consecration they are begotten of the holy 
Spirit and then instructed in the school of Christ and 
submitted to trials and disciplines in various ways, for 
the purpose of chiseling and polishing their characters 
as New Creatures. These are a "little flock," gathered 
one here and one there; "saints" from all denominations 
and from outside of all denominations, for "the 
Lord knoweth them that are His." When the predestined 
number of the "elect" shall have been selected 
and polished the present age will end. Our Lord will 
come in second advent glory and power. His Elect 
Bride will constitute the First Resurrection class, from 
earthly to heavenly nature, "changed in a moment," 
for "flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of 
God."-ICor. 15:50. 

Then will come the holy, invisible Millennial 
Kingdom and the binding of Satan and the destruction 
of his unholy, invisible kingdom, and the setting 
loose of agencies for the enlightening and uplifting of 



the whole race. 

To those who are already the Lord's consecrated 
saints, I say, Lift up your heads and realize more 
fully than ever before the glorious fulness of the heavenly 
calling, of which you have been made partakers. 
To others who have the hearing ear and appreciate 
this high calling we say, permit the love of God, and 
of Christ to constrain you and become disciples indeed 
of Jesus, laying aside every weight and every besetting 
sin, and entering the race and pressing with vigor 
to its end and crown of glory! 



R4553 : page 25 
WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES CONCERNING HELL? 



"To the Law and to the Testimony; If they speak not according 
to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them."— Isa. 8:20. 

A CORRECT understanding of this subject has 
become almost a necessity to Christian steadfastness. 
For centuries it has been the teaching 
of "orthodoxy," of all shades, that God, before 
creating man, had created a great abyss of fire 
and terrors, capable of containing all the billions of the 
human family which he purposed to bring into being; 
that this abyss he had named "hell;" and that all of the 
promises and threatenings of the Bible were designed 
to deter as many as possible (a "little flock") from such 
wrong-doing as would make this awful place their 
perpetual home. 

As knowledge increases and superstitions fade, 
this monstrous view of the divine arrangement and 
character is losing its force; and thinking people cannot 
but disbelieve the legend, which used to be illustrated 
on the church walls in the highest degree of art 
and realism, samples of which are still to be seen in 
Europe. Some now claim that the place is literal, but 
the fire symbolic, etc., etc., while others repudiate the 
doctrine of "hell" in every sense and degree. While 
glad to see superstitions fall, and truer ideas of the 
great, and wise, and just, and loving Creator prevail, 
we are alarmed to notice that the tendency with all 
who abandon this long-revered doctrine is toward 
doubt, skepticism, infidelity. 

Why should this be the case, when the mind is 
merely being delivered from an error,— do you ask? 
Because Christian people have so long been taught 
that the foundation for this awful blasphemy against 
God's character and government is deep-laid, and 
firmly fixed, in the Word of God— the Bible— and, 
consequently, to whatever degree that belief in "hell" 



is shaken, to that extent their faith in the Bible, as the 
revelation of the true God, is shaken also;— so that 
those who have dropped their belief in a "hell," of some 
kind of endless torment, are often open infidels, and 
scoffers at God's Word. 

Guided by the Lord's providence to a realization 
that the Bible has been slandered, as well as its divine 
Author, and that, rightly understood, it teaches nothing 
on this subject derogatory to God's character nor 
to an intelligent reason, we will attempt to lay bare 
the Scripture teaching on this subject, that thereby 
faith in God and his Word may be re-established, in 
the hearts of his people, on a better, a reasonable 
foundation. Indeed, it is our opinion that whoever 
shall hereby find that his false view rested upon human 
misconceptions and misinterpretations, will, at the 
same time, learn to trust hereafter less to his own and 
other men's imaginings, and, by faith, to grasp more 
firmly the Word of God, which is able to make wise 
unto salvation. 

That the advocates of the doctrine of eternal torment 
have little or no faith in it is very manifest from 
the fact that it has no power over their course of action. 
While all the denominations of Christendom 
sustain the doctrine that eternal torment and endless, 
hopeless despair will constitute the punishment of the 
wicked, they are mostly quite at ease in allowing the 
wicked to take their course, while they pursue the 
even tenor of their way. Chiming bells and pealing 
organs, artistic choirs, and costly edifices, and upholstered 
pews, and polished oratory which more and 
more avoid any reference to this alarming theme, 
afford rest and entertainment to fashionable congregations 
that gather on the Lord's day and are known 
to the world as churches of Christ and representatives 
of his doctrines. But they seem little concerned about 
the eternal welfare of the multitudes, or even of themselves 
and their own families, though one would naturally 
presume that with such awful possibilities in view 
they would be almost frantic in their efforts to rescue 
the perishing. 

The plain inference is that they do not believe it. 
The only class of people that to any degree show their 
faith in it by their works is the Salvation Army; and 
these are the subjects of ridicule from almost all other 
Christians, because they are somewhat consistent with 
their belief. Yet their peculiar, and often absurd, 
methods, so strikingly in contrast with those of the 
Lord of whom it was written, "He shall not cry, nor lift 
up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street" (Isa. 42:2), 
are very mild compared with what might be 
expected if they were fully convinced of the doctrine. 
We cannot imagine how sincere believers of this terrible 
doctrine go from day to day about the ordinary 
affairs of life, or meet quietly in elegance every Sunday 
to hear an essay from the pulpit on the peculiar 



subjects often advertised. Could they do so while 
really believing all the time that fellow mortals are 
dying at the rate of one hundred a minute, and 
entering 

"That lone land of deep despair," where 
"No God regards their bitter prayer"? 

If they really believed this few saints could complacently 
sit there and think of those hurrying every 
moment into that awful state described by that good, 
well-meaning, but greatly deluded man, Isaac Watts 
(whose own heart was immeasurably warmer and 
larger than that he ascribed to the great Jehovah), 
when he wrote the hymn— 

"Tempests of angry fire shall roll 

To blast the rebel worm, 
And beat upon the naked soul 

In one eternal storm." 

People often become frantic with grief when 
friends have been caught in some terrible catastrophe, 
as a fire, or a wreck, though they know they will 
soon be relieved by death; yet they pretend to believe 
that God is less loving than themselves, and that he 
can look with indifference, if not with delight, at billions 
of his creatures enduring an eternity of torture 
far more terrible, which he prepares for them and prevents 
any escape from forever. Not only so, but they 
expect that they will get literally into Abraham's bosom, 
and will then look across the gulf and see and hear 
the agonies of the multitudes (some of whom they now 
love and weep over); and they imagine that they will 
be so changed, and become so like their present idea 
of God, so hardened against all pity, and so barren of 
love and sympathy, that they will delight in such a 
God and in such a plan. 

It is wonderful that otherwise sensible men and 
women, who love their fellows, and who establish hospitals, 
orphanages, asylums, and societies for the prevention 
of cruelty even to the brute creation, are so 
unbalanced mentally that they can believe and subscribe 

R4553 : page 26 

to such a doctrine, and yet be so indifferent about 
investigating its authority! 

Only one exception can we think of— those who 
hold the ultra-Calvinistic doctrine; who believe that 
God has decreed it thus, that all the efforts they 
could put forth could not alter the result with a single 
person; and that all the prayers they could offer would 
not change one iota of the awful plan they believe 
God has marked out for his and their eternal pleasure. 
These indeed could sit still, so far as effort for their 



fellows is concerned: but why sing the praises of such 
a scheme for the damnation of their neighbors whom 
God has told them to love as themselves? 

Why not rather begin to doubt this "doctrine of 
devils," this blasphemy against the great God, hatched 
in the "dark ages," when a crafty priesthood taught 
that it is right to do evil that good may result? 

The doctrine of eternal torment was undoubtedly 
introduced by Papacy to induce pagans to join her 
and support her system. It flourished at the same 
time that "bull fights" and gladiatorial contests were 
the public amusements most enjoyed; when the Crusades 
were called "holy wars," and when men and 
women were called "heretics" and were often slaughtered 
for thinking or speaking contrary to the teachings 
of the Papacy; at a time when the sun of gospel 
truth was obscure; when the Word of God had fallen 
into disuse and was prohibited to be read by any but 
the clergy, whose love of their neighbors was often 
shown in torturing "heretics" to induce them to recant 
and deny their faith and their Bibles— to save 
them, if possible, they explained, from the more awful 
future of "heretics,"— eternal torture. They did not 
borrow this doctrine from the heathen, for no heathen 
people in the world have a doctrine so cruel, so fiendish 
and so unjust. Find it, whoever can, and show 
it up in all its blackness, that, if possible, it may be 
shown that the essence of barbarism, malice, hate and 
ungodliness has not been exclusively appropriated by 
those whom God has most highly favored with light 
from every quarter, and to whom he has committed 
the only oracle— his Word. Oh! the shame and confusion 
that will cover the faces of many, even good 
men, who verily thought that they did God service 
while propagating this blasphemous doctrine, when 
they awake in the resurrection, to learn of the love 
and justice of God, and when they come to know that 
the Bible does not teach this God-dishonoring, love-extinguishing, 
truth-beclouding, saint-hindering, sinner-hardening, 
"damnable heresy" of eternal torment. 
-2 Pet. 2:1. 

But we repeat that, in the light and moral development 
of this day, sensible people do not believe this 
doctrine. However, since they think that the Bible 
teaches it, every step they progress in real intelligence 
and brotherly kindness, which hinders belief in eternal 
torment, is in most cases a step away from God's 
Word, which is falsely accused of being the authority 
for this teaching. Hence the second crop of evil 
fruit, which the devil's engraftment of this error is producing, 
is skepticism. The intelligent, honest thinkers 
are thus driven from the Bible into vain philosophies 
and sciences, falsely so-called, and into infidelity. Nor 
do the "worldly" really believe this doctrine, nor is it 
a restraint to crime, for convicts and the lower classes 
are the firmest believers in it. 



But, says one, Has not the error done some good? 
Have not many been brought into the churches by the 
preaching of this doctrine in the past? 

No error, we answer, ever did real good, but always 
harm. Those whom error brings into a church, 
and whom the truth would not move, are an injury 
to the church. The thousands terrorized, but not at 
heart converted, which this doctrine forced into Papacy, 
and which swelled her numbers and her wealth, 
diluted what little truth was held before, and mingled 
it with their unholy sentiments and errors so that, to 
meet the changed condition of things, the "clergy" 
found it needful to add error to error, and resorted to 
methods, forms, etc., not taught in the Scriptures and 
useless to the truly converted whom the truth controls. 
Among these were pictures, images, beads, vestments, 
candles, grand cathedrals, altars, etc., to help the unconverted 
heathen to a form of godliness more nearly 
corresponding to their former heathen worship, but 
lacking all the power of vital godliness. 

The heathen were not benefited, for they were still 
heathen in God's sight, but deluded into aping what 
they did not understand or do from the heart. They 
were added "tares" to choke the "wheat," without being 
profited themselves. The Lord tells who sowed 
the seed of this enormous crop. (Matt. 13:39). The 
same is true of those who assume the name "Christian" 
to-day, who are not really at heart converted 
by the truth, but merely frightened by the error, or 
allured by promised earthly advantages of a social or 
business kind. Such add nothing to the true Church; 
by their ideas and manners they become stumbling 
blocks to the truly consecrated, and by their inability 
to digest the truth, the real food of the saints, they 
lead even the few true pastors to defraud the true 
"sheep" in order to satisfy the demands of these 
"goats" for something pleasing to their unconverted 
tastes. No: in no way has this error accomplished 
good except in the sense that God is able to make 
even the wrath of man to praise him. So also he will 
overrule this evil thing eventually to serve his purposes. 
When by and by all men (during the Millennium) 
shall come to see through this great deception by 
which Satan has blinded the world to God's true character, 
it will perhaps awaken in them a warmer, 
stronger love for God. 

Seeing, then, the unreasonableness of man's view, 
let us lay aside human opinions and theories and come 
to the Word of God, the only authority on the subject, 
remembering that 

"God is His own interpreter, and He will make it plain." 

"HELL," AS AN ENGLISH WORD. 



In the first place bear in mind that the Old Testament 
Scriptures were written in the Hebrew language, 
and the New Testament in the Greek. The word 
"hell" is an English word sometimes selected by the 
translators of the English Bible to express the sense 
of the Hebrew word sheol and the Greek words hades, 
tartaroo and gehenna,— sometimes rendered "grave" 
and "pit." 

The word "hell" in old English usage, before 
Papal theologians picked it up and gave it a new and 
special significance to suit their own purposes, simply 
meant to conceal, to hide, to cover; hence the concealed, 

R4553 : page 27 

hidden or covered place. In old English literature 
records may be found of the helling of potatoes 
—putting potatoes into pits; and of the helling of a 
house— covering or thatching it. The word hell was 
therefore properly used synonymously with the words 
"grave" and "pit," to translate the words sheol and 
hades as signifying the secret or hidden condition 
of death. However, the same spirit which was willing 
to twist the word to terrorize the ignorant is willing 
still to perpetuate the error;— presumably saying— "Let 
us do evil that good may follow." 

If the translators of the Revised Version Bible 
had been thoroughly disentangled from the Papal 
error, and thoroughly honest, they would have done 
more to help the English student than merely to substitute 
the Hebrew word sheol and the Greek word 
hades as they have done. They should have translated 
the words. But they were evidently afraid to tell 
the truth, and ashamed to tell the lie; and so gave us 
sheol and hades untranslated, and permitted the inference 
that these words mean the same as the word 
"hell" has become perverted to mean. Their course, 
while it for a time shields themselves, dishonors God 
and the Bible, which the common people still suppose 
teaches a "hell" of torment in the words sheol 
and hades. Yet anyone can see that if it was proper 
to translate the word sheol thirty-one times "grave" 
and three times "pit," it could not have been improper 
to so translate it in every other instance. 

A peculiarity to be observed in comparing these 
cases, as we will do shortly, is that in those texts where 
the torment idea would be an absurdity the translators 
of the King James version have used the words 
"grave" or "pit"; while in all other cases they have 
used the word "hell;" and the reader, long schooled 
in the Papal idea of torment, reads the word "hell" 
and thinks of it as signifying a place of torment, instead 
of the grave, the hidden or covered place or condition. 
For example, compare Job 14:13 with Psa. 86:13. 
The former reads,— "Oh, that thou wouldst 



hide me in the grave [sheol] etc.," while the latter 
reads,— "Thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest 
hell [sheol]." The Hebrew word being the same in 
both cases, there is no reason why the same word 
"grave" should not be used in both. But how absurd 
it would have been for Job to pray to God to 
hide him in a hell of eternal torture! The English 
reader would have asked questions and the secret 
would have gotten out speedily. 

While the translators of the Reformation times 
are somewhat excusable for their mental bias in this 
matter, as they were just breaking away from the old 
Papal system, our modern translators, specially those 
of the recent Revised Version, are not entitled to any 
such consideration. Theological professors and pastors 
of congregations consider that they are justified 
in following the course of the revisers in not explaining 
the meaning of either the Hebrew or Greek words 
sheol or hades and by their use of the words they also 
give their confiding flocks to understand that a place 
of torture, a lake of fire, is meant. While attributing 
to the ignorant only the best of motives, it is manifestly 
only duplicity and cowardice which induces educated 
men, who know the truth on this subject, to prefer 
to continue to teach the error inferentially. 

But not all ministers know of the errors of the 
translators and deliberately cover and hide those errors 
from the people. Many, indeed, do not know of 
them, having merely accepted, without investigation, 
the theories of their seminary professors. It is the 
professors and learned ones who are most blameworthy. 
These have kept back the truth about "hell" 
for several reasons. First, there is evidently a sort 
of understanding or etiquette among them, that if they 
wish to maintain their standing in the "profession" they 
"must not tell tales out of school;" i.e., they must 
not divulge professional secrets to the "common people," 
the "laity." Second, they all fear that to let it 
be known that they have been teaching an unscriptural 
doctrine for years would break down the popular respect 
and reverence for the "clergy," the denominations 
and the theological schools, and unsettle confidence 
in their wisdom. And, oh, how much depends 
upon confidence and reverence for men, when God's 
Word is so generally ignored! Third, they know that 
many of the members of their sects are not constrained 
by "the love of Christ" (2 Cor. 5:14), but merely by 
the fear of hell, and they see clearly, therefore, that 
to let the truth be known now would soon cut loose 
the names and the dollars of many in their flocks; and 
this, to those who "desire to make a fair show in the 
flesh" (Gal. 6:12) would seem to be a great calamity. 

But what will be the judgment of God, whose 
character and plan are traduced by the blasphemous 
doctrine which these untranslated words help to support? 
Will he commend these unfaithful servants? 



Will he justify their course? Will the Chief Shepherd 
call these his beloved friends, and make known to them 
his further plans (John 15:15) that they may misrepresent 
them also to preserve their own dignity and 
reverence? Will he continue to send forth "things 
new and old," "meat in due season," to the household 
of faith, by the hand of the unfaithful servants? No, 
such shall not continue to be his mouthpieces or to 
shepherd his flock. (Ezek. 34:9,10.) He will choose 
instead, as at the first advent, from among the laity— 
"the common people"— mouthpieces, and will give 
them words which none of the chief priests shall be 
able to gainsay or resist. (Luke 21:15.) And, as foretold, 
"the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and 
the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." 
-Isa. 29:9-19. 

"HELL" IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 



The word "hell" occurs thirty-one times in the 
Old Testament, and in every instance it is sheol in the 
Hebrew. It does not mean a lake of fire and brimstone, 
nor anything at all resembling that thought: 
not in the slightest degree! Quite the reverse: instead 
of a place of blazing fire it is described in the context 
as a state of "darkness" (Job 10:21); instead of a place 
where shrieks and groans are heard, it is described in 
the context as a place of "silence" (Psa. 115:17); instead 
of representing in any sense pain and suffering, 
or remorse, the context describes it as a place or condition 
of forgetfulness. (Psa. 88:11,12.) "There is no 
work, nor device, nor knowledge, in the grave [sheol] 
whither thou goest."— Eccles. 9:10. 

The meaning of sheol is "the hidden state," as 
applied to man's condition in death, in and beyond 
which all is hidden, except to the eye of faith; hence, 

R4553 : page 28 

by proper and close association, the word was often 
used in the sense of grave— the tomb, the hidden 
place, or place beyond which only those who have the 
enlightened eye of the understanding can see resurrection, 
restitution of being. And be it particularly 
noted that this identical word sheol is translated 
"grave" thirty-one times and "pit" three times in our 
common version by the same translators— more times 
than it is translated "hell"; and twice, where it is translated 
"hell," it seemed so absurd, according to the present 
accepted meaning of the English word "hell," that 
scholars have felt it necessary to explain in the margin 
of modern Bibles, that it means grave. (Isa. 14:9 and 
Jonah 2:2.) In the latter case, the hidden state, or 
grave, was the belly of the fish in which Jonah was 



buried alive, and from which he cried to God. 

ALL TEXTS IN WHICH "SHEOL" IS TRANSLATED 
"HELL." 

(1) Amos 9:2.— "Though they dig into hell, thence 
shall mine hand take them." [A figurative expression; 
but certainly pits of the earth are the only hells men 
can dig into.] 

(2) Psa. 16:10.— "Thou will not leave my soul in 
hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see 
corruption." [This refers to our Lord's three days 
in the tomb. -Acts 2:31; 3:15.] 

(3, 4) Psa. 18:5 and 2 Sam. 22:6-margin.-"The 
cords of hell compassed me about." [A figure in 
which trouble is represented as hastening one to the 
tomb.] 

(5) Psa. 55:15.— "Let them go down quick into 
hell"— margin, "the grave." 

(6) Psa. 9:17.— "The wicked shall be turned into 
hell, and all the nations that forget God." This text 
will be treated later, under a separate heading. 

(7) Psa. 86:13.— "Thou hast delivered my soul 
from the lowest hell"— margin, "the grave." 

(8) Psa. 116:3.— "The sorrows of death compassed 
me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me." [Sickness 
and trouble are the figurative hands of the grave 

to grasp us.] 

(9) Psa. 139:8.— "If I make my bed in hell, behold, 
thou art there." [God's power is unlimited; even 
over those in the tomb he can and will exert it and 
bring forth all that are in the graves.— John 5:28.] 

(10) Deut. 32:22.— "For a fire is kindled in mine 
anger, and shall burn into the lowest hell." [A figurative 
representation of the destruction, the utter ruin, 

of Israel as a nation— "wrath to the uttermost," as 
the Apostle called it, God's anger burning that nation 
to the "lowest deep," as Leeser here translates the 
word sheol.— I Thes. 2:16.] 

(11) Job 11:8.— "It [God's wisdom] is as high as 
heaven; what canst thou do? deeper than hell [than 
any pit]; what canst thou know?" 

(12) Job 26:6. -"Hell [the tomb] is naked before 
him, and destruction hath no covering." 

(13) Prov. 5:5.— "Her feet go down to death; 

her steps take hold on hell [i.e., lead to the grave]." 

(14) Prov. 7:27.— "Her house is the way to hell 
[the grave], going down to the chambers of death." 

(15) Prov. 9:18. -"He knoweth not that the dead 

are there, and that her guests are in the depths of hell." 
[Here the harlot's guests are represented as dead, diseased 
or dying, and many of the victims of sensuality 
in premature graves from diseases which also hurry 
off their posterity to the tomb.] 

(16) Prov. 15:11.— "Hell and destruction are before 
the Lord." [Here the grave is associated with 



destruction and not with a life of torment] 

(17) Prov. 15:24.-"The path of life (leadeth) 

upward for the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath.' 
[This illustrates the hope of resurrection from 
the tomb.] 

(18) Prov. 23:14. --"Thou shalt beat him with the 
rod, and shall deliver his soul from hell" [i.e., wise 
correction will save a child from vicious ways which 
lead to premature death, and may also possibly prepare 
him to escape the "Second Death"]. 

(19) Prov. 27:20.— "Hell [the grave] and destruction 
are never full: so the eyes of man are never 
satisfied." 

(20) Isa. 5:14.— "Therefore hell hath enlarged 
herself and opened her mouth without measure." [Here 
the grave is a symbol of destruction.] 

(21, 22) Isa. 14:9, 15. -"Hell [margin, grave] 
from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy 
coming. "..."Thou shalt be brought down to hell" 
[the grave— so rendered in verse 11.] 

(23) Isa. 57:9.— "And didst debase thyself even 
unto hell." [Here figurative of deep degradation.] 

(24, 25) Ezek. 31:15-17. -"In the day when he 
went down to the grave,... I made the nations to 
shake at the sound of his fall, when I cast him down 
to hell with them that descend into the pit.... 
They also went down into hell with him, unto them 
that be slain with the sword." [Figurative and prophetic 
description of the fall of Babylon into destruction, 
silence, the grave.] 

(26) Ezek. 32:21.— "The strong among the mighty 
shall speak to him out of the midst of hell with them 
that help him." [A continuation of the same figure 
representing Egypt's overthrow as a nation to join 
Babylon in destruction— buried.] 

(27) Ezek. 32:27. -"And they shall not lie with 

the mighty that are fallen of the uncircumcised, which 
are gone down to hell with their weapons of war: and 
they have laid their swords under their heads; but 
their iniquities shall be upon their bones, though they 
were the terror of the mighty in the land of the living." 
[The grave is the only "hell" where fallen ones 
are buried and lie with their weapons of war under 
their heads.] 

(28) Hab. 2:5.— "Who enlargeth his desire as hell 
[the grave] and as death, and cannot be satisfied." 

(29) Jonah 2:1,2.— "Then Jonah prayed unto the 
Lord his God, out of the fish's belly, and said, I cried 
by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he 
heard me; out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou 
heardest my voice." [The belly of the fish was for 

a time his grave— see margin.] 

(30, 31) Isa. 28:15-18.— "Because ye have said, 
We have made a covenant with death, and with hell 
[the grave] are we at agreement; when the overflowing 
scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto 



us, for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood 
have we hid ourselves: Therefore, saith the Lord, 
...Your covenant with death shall be disannulled, 
and your agreement with hell [the grave] shall not 
stand." [God thus declares that the present prevalent 

R4553 : page 29 

idea, by which death and the grave are represented 
as friends, rather than enemies, shall cease; and men 
shall learn that death is the wages of sin, and that 
it is in Satan's power (Rom. 6:23; Heb. 2:14) and 
not an angel sent by God.] 

ALL OTHER TEXTS WHERE "SHEOL" OCCURS-- 
RENDERED "GRAVE" AND "PIT." 



Gen. 37:35.— "I will go down into the grave unto 
my son." 

Gen. 42:38.— "Then shall ye bring down my gray 
hairs with sorrow to the grave." [See also the same 
expression in 44:29,31. The translators did not like 
to send God's servant, Jacob, to hell simply because 
his sons were evil."] 

I Sam. 2:6.— "The Lord killeth, and maketh alive: 
he bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up." 

I Kings 2:6,9.— "Let not his hoar head go down 
to the grave with peace. ...His hoar head bring thou 
down to the grave with blood." 

Job 7:9.— "He that goeth down to the grave." 

Job 14:13.— "Oh, that thou wouldst hide me in 
the grave, that thou wouldst keep me secret until thy 
wrath be past, that thou wouldst appoint me a set 
time, and remember me [resurrect me]!" 

Job 17:13.— "If I wait, the grave is mine house: 
I have made my bed in the darkness." [Job waits for 
resurrection— "in the morning."] 

Job 17:16.— "They shall go down to the bars 
of the pit [grave], when our rest together is in the 
dust." 

Job 21:13.— "They spend their days in mirth, and 
in a moment go down to the grave." 

Job 24: 19,20.— "Drought and heat consume the 
snow waters: so doth the grave those which have 
sinned." [All have sinned, hence "Death passed upon 
all men," and all go down to the grave. But all have 
been redeemed by "the precious blood of Christ"; 
hence all shall be awakened and come forth again in 
God's due time— "in the morning," Rom. 5:12,18,19.] 

Psa. 6:5.— "In death there is no remembrance of 
thee; in the grave who shall give thee thanks?" 

Psa. 30:3.— "O Lord, thou hast brought up my 
soul from the grave: thou hast kept me alive, that I 
should not go down to the pit." [This passage expresses 



gratitude for recovery from danger of death.] 

Psa. 31:17.— "Let the wicked be ashamed; let 
them be silent in the grave." 

Psa. 49:14,15, margin.— "Like sheep they are laid 
in the grave: death shall feed on them; and the upright 
[the saints— Dan. 7:27] shall have dominion over 
them in the morning [the Millennial morning]; and 
their beauty shall consume, the grave being an habitation 
to every one of them. But God will redeem my 
soul from the power of the grave." 

Psa. 88:3.— "My life draweth nigh unto the grave." 

Psa. 89:48.— "Shall he deliver his soul from the 
hand of the grave?" 

Psa. 141:7.— "Our bones are scattered at the 
grave's mouth." 

Prov. 1:12.— "Let us swallow them up alive as 
the grave: and whole, as those that go down into the 
pit" [i.e., as of an earthquake, as in Num. 16:30-33]. 

Prov. 30:15,16.— "Four things say not, it is 
enough: the grave," etc. 

Eccl. 9:10.— "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, 
do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, 
nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither 
thou goest." 

Song of Solomon 8:6.— "Jealousy is cruel as the 
grave." 

Isa. 14:11.— "Thy pomp is brought down to the 
grave." 

Isa. 38:10.— "I shall go to the gates of the grave: 
I am deprived of the residue of my years." 

Isa. 38:18.— "The grave cannot praise thee, death 
cannot celebrate thee: they that go down into the pit 
cannot hope for thy truth." 

Num. 16:30-33.— "If.. .they go down quick 
into the pit, then shall ye understand. ...The ground 
clave asunder that was under them, and the earth 
opened her mouth and swallowed them up, and their 
houses, and all the men that appertained unto Korah, 
and all their goods. They and all that appertained to 
them went down alive into the pit, and the earth 
closed upon them: and they perished from among the 
congregation." 

Ezek. 31:15.— "In the day when he went down 
to the grave." 

Hosea 13:14.— "I will ransom them from the 
power of the grave; I will redeem them from death. 
O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be 
thy destruction. Repentance shall be hid from mine 
eyes." [The Lord did not ransom any from a place 
of fire and torment, for there is no such place; but he 
did ransom all mankind from the grave, from death, 
the penalty brought upon all by Adam's sin, as this 
verse declares.] 

The above list includes every instance of the use 
of the English word "hell" and the Hebrew word sheol 
in the Old Testament. From this examination it must 



be evident to all readers that God's revelations for 
four thousand years contain not a single hint of a 
"hell," such as the word is now understood to signify. 

"HELL" IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



In the New Testament, the Greek word hades 
corresponds exactly to the Hebrew word sheol. As 
proof see the quotations of the Apostles from the Old 
Testament, in which they render it hades. For instance, 
Acts 2:27, "Thou wilt not leave my soul in 
hades," is a quotation from Psa. 16:10, "Thou wilt 
not leave my soul in sheol." And in I Cor. 15:54,55, 
"Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where 
is thy sting? O grave [hades], where is thy victory?" 
is an allusion to Isa. 25:8, "He will swallow up death 
in victory," and to Hos. 13:14, "O death, I will be 
thy plagues; O sheol, I will be thy destruction." 

"HELL" FROM THE GREEK WORD "HADES." 



Matt. 11:23.— "And thou, Capernaum, which art 
exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell," 
Luke 10:15: "Shall be thrust down to hell." 
[In privileges of knowledge and opportunity the city 
was highly favored, or, figuratively, "exalted unto 
heaven;" but because of misuse of God's favors, 
it would be debased, or, figuratively, cast down to 
hades, overthrown, destroyed. It is now so thoroughly 
buried in oblivion, that even the site where 

R4553 : page 30 

it stood is a matter of dispute. Capernaum is certainly 
destroyed, thrust down to hades.] 

Luke 16:23.— "In hell he lifted up his eyes, being 
in torments." [A parabolic figure explained further 
along, under a separate heading.] 

Rev. 6:8.— "And behold a pale horse: and his 
name that sat on him was Death, and Hell followed 
with him." [Symbol of destruction or the grave.] 

Matt. 16: 18.— "Upon this rock I will build my 
church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against 
it." [Although bitter and relentless persecution, even 
unto death, should afflict the Church during the Gospel 
age, it should never prevail to her utter extermination; 
and eventually, by her resurrection, accomplished 
by her Lord, the Church will prevail over 
hades— the tomb.] 

CHRIST IN "HELL" (HADES) AND RESURRECTED 
FROM "HELL" (HADES).- 



ACTS 2:1,14,22-31. 



"And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, 
...Peter. ..lifted up his voice and said,. ..Ye 
men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of Nazareth, 
a man approved of God among you, ...being delivered 
by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge 
of God ['He was delivered for our offenses'], ye have 
taken and by wicked hands have crucified and slain: 
whom God hath raised up, having loosed the pains 
[or bands] of death, because it was not possible that 
he should be holden of it [for the Word of Jehovah 
had previously declared his resurrection]; for David 
speaketh concerning him [personating or speaking for 
him], 'I [Christ] foresaw the Lord [Jehovah] always 
before my face; for he is on my right hand, that I 
should not be moved. Therefore did my heart rejoice, 
and my tongue was glad; moreover also my flesh shall 
rest in hope, because thou wilt not leave my soul in hell 
[hades, the tomb, the state of death], neither wilt thou 
suffer thine Holy One to see corruption. Thou [Jehovah] 
hast made known to me [Christ] the ways of 
life.'" Here our Lord, as personified by the prophet 
David, expresses his faith in Jehovah's promise of 
a resurrection and in the full and glorious accomplishment 
of Jehovah's plan through him, and rejoices 
in the prospect. 

Peter then proceeds, saying— "Men and brethren, 
let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch David, 
that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulcher is 
with us unto this day [so that this prophecy could not 
have referred to himself personally; for David's soul 
was left in "hell"— [hades, the tomb, the state of death 
—and his flesh did see corruption]: Therefore being 
a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an 
oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins according to 
the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne; 
he, seeing this before [prophetically], spake of the resurrection 
of Christ [out of "hell"— hades, the tomb- 
to which he must go for our offenses], that his soul 
was not left in hell [hades— the death state], neither 
his flesh did see corruption." Thus Peter presents a 
strong, logical argument, based on the words of the 
prophet David— showing first, that Christ, who was 
delivered by God for our offenses, went to "hell," the 
grave, the condition of death, destruction (Psa. 16:10;) 
and, second, that according to promise he had been 
delivered from hell, the grave, death, destruction 
by a resurrection— a raising up to life; being created 
again, the same identical being, yet more glorious 
and exalted even to "the express image of the Father's 
person." (Heb. 1:3.) And now "this same Jesus" 
(Acts 2:36), in his subsequent revelation to the 
Church, declares— 



Rev. 1:18.— "I am he that liveth and was dead, 
and, behold, I am alive forevermore, Amen; and have 
the keys of hell [hades, the grave] and of death." 

Amen! Amen! our hearts respond; for in his resurrection 
we see the glorious outcome of the whole 
plan of Jehovah to be accomplished through the power 
of the Resurrected One who now holds the keys of 
the tomb and of death and in due time will release 
all the prisoners who are, therefore, called the "prisoners 
of hope." (Zech. 9:12; Luke 4:18.) No craft 
or cunning can by any possible device wrest these 
Scriptures entire and pervert them to the support of 
that monstrous and blasphemous Papal tradition of 
eternal torment. Had that been our penalty, Christ, 
to be our vicarious sacrifice, must still, and to all 
eternity, endure such torment, which no one will 
claim. But death was our penalty, and "Christ died 
for our sins," and "also for the sins of the whole 
world."-I Cor. 15:3; I John 2:2. 

Rev. 20:13,14— "And the sea gave up the dead 
which were in it; and death and hell [the grave] delivered 
up the dead which were in them: and they were 
judged, every man, according to their works. And 
death and hell [the grave] were cast into the lake of 
fire: this is the Second Death." [The lake of fire is the 
symbol of final and everlasting destruction. Death 
and hell [the grave] both go into it. There shall be 
no more death; "the last enemy that shall be destroyed 
is death."-I Cor. 15:26; Rev. 21:4.] 

OTHER OCCURRENCES OF THE WORD 
"HELL." 



Having examined the word sheol, the only word 
in the Old Testament rendered "hell," and the word 
hades, most frequently in the New Testament rendered 
"hell" we now notice every remaining instance 
in Scripture of the English word "hell." In the New 
Testament two other words are rendered "hell;" 
namely, gehenna and tartaroo, which we will consider 
in the order named. 

"GEHENNA" RENDERED "HELL." 



This word occurs in the following passages— in 
all twelve times:-Matt. 5:22,29,30; 10:28; 18:9; 23:15,33; 
Mark 9:43-47; Luke 12:5; Jas. 3:6. It is the 
Grecian mode of spelling the Hebrew words which 
are translated "Valley of Hinnom." This valley lay 
just outside the city of Jerusalem, and served the purpose 
of sewer and garbage burner to that city. The 
offal, garbage, etc., were emptied there, and fires were 



kept continually burning to consume utterly all things 
deposited therein, brimstone being added to assist 
combustion and insure complete destruction. But 
no living thing was ever permitted to be cast into 
Gehenna. The Jews were not allowed to torture any 
creature. 

When we consider that in the people of Israel 
God was giving us object lessons illustrating his dealings 
and plans, present and future, we should expect 

R4553 : page 31 

that this Valley of Hinnom, of Gehenna, would also 
play its part in illustrating things future. We know 
that Israel's priesthood and temple illustrated the Royal 
Priesthood, the Christian Church as it will be, the 
true temple of God; and we know that their chief city 
was a figure of the New Jerusalem, the seat of kingdom 
power and center of authority— the city (government) 
of the Great King, Immanuel. We remember, 
too, that Christ's government is represented in the 
book of Revelation (Rev. 21:10-27) under the figure 
of a city— the New Jerusalem. There, after describing 
the class permitted to enter the privileges and 
blessings of that Kingdom— the honorable and glorious, 
and all who have right to the trees of life— we find 
it also declared that there shall not enter into it anything 
that defileth, or that worketh abomination, or 
maketh a lie; but only such as the Lamb shall write 
as worthy of life. This city, which thus will represent 
the entire saved world in the end of the Millennium, 
was typified in the earthly city, Jerusalem; and the 
defiling, the abominable, etc., the class unworthy of 
life everlasting, who do not enter in, were represented 
by the refuse and the filthy, lifeless carcasses cast 
into Gehenna outside the city,— whose utter destruction 
was thus symbolized— the Second Death. Accordingly, 
we find it stated that those not found worthy 
of life are to be cast into the "lake of fire" (Rev. 20:15) 
—fire here, as everywhere, being used as a 
symbol of destruction, and the symbol, lake of fire, 
being drawn from this same Gehenna, or Valley of 
Hinnom. 

Therefore, while Gehenna served a useful purpose 
to the city of Jerusalem as a place for garbage burning, 
it, like the city itself, was typical, and illustrated 
the future dealings of God in refusing and committing 
to destruction all the impure elements, thus preventing 
them from defiling the holy city, the New Jerusalem, 
after the trial of the Millennial age of judgment 
shall have fully proved them and separated with unerring 
accuracy the "sheep" from the "goats." 

So, then, Gehenna was a type or illustration of 
the Second Death— final and complete destruction, 
from which there can be no recovery; for after that, 
"there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins," but only 



"fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries." 
-Heb. 10:26. 

Let us remember that Israel, for the purpose of 
being used as types of God's future dealing with the 
race, was typically treated as though the ransom had 
been given before they left Egypt, though only a typical 
lamb had been slain. When Jerusalem was built, 
and the Temple— representative of the true temple, the 
Church, and the true kingdom as it will be established 
by Christ in the Millennium— that people typified the 
world in the Millennial age. Their priests represented 
the glorified Royal Priesthood, and their Law and its 
demands of perfect obedience represented the law and 
conditions under the New Covenant, to be brought 
into operation for the blessing of all the obedient, and 
for the condemnation of all who, when granted fullest 
opportunity, will not heartily submit to the righteous 
ruling and laws of the Great King. 

Seeing then, that Israel's polity, condition, etc., 
prefigured those of the world in the coming age, how 
appropriate that we should find the Valley or abyss, 
Gehenna, a figure of the Second Death, the utter destruction 
in the coming age of all that is unworthy of 
preservation; and how aptly, too, is the symbol, "lake 
of fire burning with brimstone" (Rev. 19:20), drawn 
from this same Gehenna, or Valley of Hinnom, burning 
continually with brimstone. The expression, 
"burning with brimstone," adds force to the symbol, 
"fire," to express the utter and irrevocable destructiveness 
of the Second Death; for burning brimstone is 
the most deadly agent known. How reasonable, too, 
to expect that Israel would have courts and judges 
resembling or prefiguring the judgments of the next 
age; and that the sentence of those (figurative) courts 
of that (figurative) people under those (figurative) 
laws to that (figurative) abyss, outside that (figurative) 
city, would largely correspond to the (real) sentences 
of the (real) court and judges in the next age. 
If these points are kept in mind, they will greatly assist 
us in understanding the words of our Lord in reference 
to Gehenna; for though the literal valley just at 
hand was named and referred to, yet his words carry 
with them lessons concerning the future age and the 
antitypical Gehenna— the Second Death. 

SHALL BE IN DANGER OF GEHENNA. 
MATTHEW 5:21,22. 

"Ye have heard that it was said by them of old 
time, 'Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill 
shall be amenable to the judges:' but I say unto you, 
that whosoever is angry with his brother without a 
cause shall [future— under the regulations of the real 
Kingdom] be amenable to the judges; and whosoever 
shall say to his brother, 'Raca [villain] shall be in danger 
of the high council; but whosoever shall say, 



'Thou fool,' shall be in danger of hell [Gehenna] fire." 

To understand these references to council and 
judges and Gehenna, all should know something of 
Jewish regulations. The "Court of Judges" consisted 
of seven men (or twenty-three,— the number is in 
dispute), who had power to judge some classes of 
crimes. The High Council, or Sanhedrin, consisted of 
seventy-one men of recognized learning and ability. 
This constituted the highest court of the Jews, and its 
supervision was over the gravest offenses. The most 
serious sentence was death; but certain very obnoxious 
criminals were subjected to an indignity after 
death, being refused burial and cast with the carcasses 
of dogs, the city refuse, etc., into Gehenna, there to 
be consumed. The object of this burning in Gehenna 
was to make the crime and the criminal detestable in 
the eyes of the people, and signified that the culprit 
was a hopeless case. It must be remembered that 
Israel hoped for a resurrection from the tomb, and 
hence they were particular in caring for the corpses 
of their dead. Not realizing fully God's power, they 
apparently thought he needed their assistance to that 
extent. (Exod. 13:19; Heb. 11:22; Acts 7:15,16.) 
Hence the destruction of the body in Gehenna after 
death (figuratively) implied the loss of hope of future 
life by a resurrection. Thus to such Gehenna represented 
the Second Death in the same figurative way 
that they as a people represented or illustrated a future 
order of things under the New Covenant. 

Notice that our Lord, in the above words, 
pointed out to them that their construction of the 
Law, severe though it was, was far below the real import 

R4553 : page 32 

of that Law, as it shall be interpreted under the 
real Kingdom and Judges, which theirs only typified. 
He shows that the command of their Law, "Thou 
shalt not kill," reached much farther than they supposed; 
that malicious anger and vituperation "shall 
be" considered a violation of God's Law, under the 
New Covenant; and that such as, under the favorable 
conditions of that new age, will not reform so thoroughly 
as to fully observe God's Law will be counted 
worthy of that which the Gehenna near them typified 
—the Second Death. However, the strict severity 
of that Law will be enforced only in proportion as the 
discipline, advantages and assistance of that age, enabling 
each to comply with its laws, shall be 
disregarded. 
The same thought is continued in 

MATTHEW 5:22-30. 



"Ye have heard," etc., "but I say unto you. ..it 
is better for thee to lose one of thy members, than that 
thy whole body should be cast into Gehenna." 

Here again the operation of God's Law under 
the New Covenant is contrasted with its operation 
under the Old or Jewish Covenant, and the lesson of 
self-control is urged by the statement that it is far 
more profitable that men should refuse to gratify depraved 
desires (though they be dear to them as a right 
eye, and apparently indispensable as a right hand) 
than that they should gratify these, and lose, in the 
Second Death, the future life provided through the 
atonement for all who will return to perfection, holiness 
and God. 

These expressions of our Lord not only serve to 
show us the perfection (Rom. 7:12) of God's Law, 
and how fully it will be defined and enforced in the 
Millennium, but they served as a lesson to the Jews 
also, who previously saw through Moses' commands 
only the crude exterior of the Law of God. Since 
they found it difficult in their fallen state to keep inviolate 
even the surface significance of the Law, they 
must now see the impossibility of their keeping the 
finer meaning of the Law revealed by Christ. Had 
they understood and received his teaching fully, they 
would have cried out, Alas! if God judges us thus, 
by the very thoughts and intents of the heart, we are 
all unclean, all undone, and can hope for naught but 
condemnation to Gehenna (to utter destruction, as 
brute beasts). They would have cried, "Show us a 
greater priesthood than that of Aaron, a High Priest 
and Teacher able fully to appreciate the Law, and 
able fully to appreciate and sympathize with our fallen 
state and inherited weaknesses, and let him offer for 
us 'better sacrifices,' and apply to us the needed 
greater forgiveness of sin, and let him as a great physician 
heal us and restore us, so that we can obey the 
perfect Law of God from our hearts." Then they 
would have found Christ. 

But this lesson they did not learn, for the ears 
of their understanding were "dull of hearing;" hence 
they knew not that God had already prepared the 
very priest and sacrifice and teacher and physician 
they needed, who in due time redeemed those under 
the typical Law, as well as all not under it, and who 
also "in due time," shortly, will begin his restoring 
work— restoring sight to the blind eyes of their understanding, 
and hearing to their deaf ears. Then the 
"vail shall be taken away"— the vail of ignorance, 
pride and human wisdom which Satan now uses to 
blind the world to God's true law and true plan of 
salvation in Christ. 

And not only did our Lord's teaching here show 
the Law of the New Covenant, and teach the Jew a 
lesson, but it is of benefit to the Gospel Church also. 
In proportion as we learn the exactness of God's 



Law, and what would constitute perfection under its 

requirements, we see that our Redeemer was perfect, 

and that we, totally unable to commend ourselves to 

God as keepers of that Law, can find acceptance with 

the Father only in the merit of our Redeemer, while 

none can be of that "Body," covered by the robe of his 

righteousness, except the consecrated who endeavor 

to do only those things well pleasing to God, which 

includes the avoidance of sin to the extent of ability. 

Yet their acceptability with God rests not in their perfection, 

but upon the perfection of Christ, so long as 

they abide in him. These, nevertheless, are benefited 

by a clear insight into the perfect Law of God, even 

though they are not dependent on the perfect keeping 

of it. They delight to do God's will to the extent of 

their ability, and the better they know his perfect Law, 

the better they are able to rule themselves and to conform 

to it. So, then, to us also the Lord's words have 

a lesson of value. 

The point, however, to be specially noticed here 
is that Gehenna, which the Jews knew, and of which 
our Lord spoke to them, was not a lake of fire to be 
kept burning to all eternity, into which all would be 
cast who get "angry with a brother" and call him a 
"fool." No; the Jews gathered no such extreme idea 
from the Lord's words. The eternal torment theory 
was unknown to them. It had no place in their theology, 
as will be shown. It is a comparatively modern 
invention, coming down, as we have shown, from 
Papacy— the great apostasy. The point is that Gehenna 
symbolizes the Second Death— utter, complete 
and everlasting destruction. This is clearly shown 
by its being contrasted with life as its opposite. "It 
is better for thee to enter into life halt, or maimed, 
than otherwise to be cast into Gehenna." It is better 
that you should deny yourselves sinful gratifications 
than that you should lose all future life, and perish in 
the Second Death. 

ABLE TO DESTROY BOTH SOUL AND BODY IN 
GEHENNA. 
MATTHEW 10:28; LUKE 12:5. 



"Fear not them which kill the body, but are not 
able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able 
to destroy both soul and body in hell [Gehenna]." See 
also another account of the same discourse by 
Luke-12:4,5. 

Here our Lord pointed out to his followers the 
great cause they had for courage and bravery under 
the most trying circumstances. They were to expect 
persecution, and to have all manner of evil spoken 
against them falsely, for his sake, and for the sake of 
the "good tidings" of which he made them the ministers 



and heralds; yea, the time would come, that whosoever 

would kill them would think that he did God 

a service. Their consolation or reward for this was 

R4553 : page 33 

to be received, not in the present life, but in the life 
to come. They were assured, and they believed, that 
he had come to give his life a ransom for many, and 
that all in their graves must in consequence, in due 
time, hear the Deliverer's voice and come forth, either 
to reward (if their trial had been passed in this life 
successfully), future trial, or judgment, as must be the 
case with the great majority who do not, in this present 
life, come to the necessary knowledge and opportunity 
essential to a complete trial. 

Under present conditions men are able to kill our 
bodies, but nothing that they can do will affect our 
future being (soul),* which God has promised shall 
be revived or restored by his power in the resurrection 
day— the Millennial age. Our revived souls will have 
new bodies (spiritual or natural— "to each 'seed' his 
own [kind of] body"), and these none will have liberty 
to kill. God alone has power to destroy utterly— soul 
and body. He alone, therefore, should be feared, and 
the opposition of men even to the death is not to be 
feared, if thereby we gain divine approval. Our 
Lord's bidding then is, Fear not them which can 
terminate the present (dying) life in these poor, dying 
bodies. Care little for it, its food, its clothing, its 
pleasures, in comparison with that future existence or 
being which God has provided for you, and which, if 
secured, may be your portion forever. Fear not the 
threats, or looks, or acts of men, whose power can 
extend no farther than the present existence; who 
can harm and kill these bodies, but can do no more. 
Rather have respect and deference to God, with whom 
are the issues of life everlasting— fear him who is able 
to destroy in Gehenna, the Second Death, both the 
present dying existence and all hope of future 
existence. 

UNDYING WORMS AND QUENCHLESS FIRES. 
MATTHEW 18:8,9; MARK 9:43-48. 



Here it is conclusively shown that Gehenna as a 
figure represented the Second Death— the utter destruction 
which must ensue in the case of all who, 
after having fully received the opportunities of a future 
being or existence through our Lord's sacrifice, 
prove themselves unworthy of God's gift, and refuse to 
accept it, by refusing obedience to his just requirements. 
For it does not say that God will preserve soul or body 
in Gehenna, but that in it he can and will "destroy" 



both. Thus we are taught that any who are condemned 
to the Second Death are hopelessly and forever 
blotted out of existence. 

[Since these two passages refer to the same discourse, 
we quote from Mark— remarking that verses 44 and 46, 
and part of 45, are not found in the oldest 
Greek MSS., though verse 48, which reads the same, 
is in all manuscripts. We quote the text as found 
in these ancient and reliable MSS.] "If thy hand 
offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter 
into life maimed, than having two hands to go into 
Gehenna, into the fire that never shall be quenched. 
And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for 
thee to enter halt into life, than having two feet to be 
cast into Gehenna. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck 
it out: it is better for thee to enter into the Kingdom 
of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast 
into Gehenna, where the worm dies not and the fire 
is not quenched." 

After reading the above, all must agree with the 
prophet that our Lord opened his mouth in figures 
and obscure sayings. (Psa. 78:2; Matt. 13:35.) No 
one for a moment supposes that our Lord advised the 
people to mutilate their bodies by cutting off their 
limbs, or gouging out their eyes. Nor does he mean 
us to understand that the injuries and disfigurements 
of the present life will continue beyond the grave, 
when we shall "enter into life." The Jews, whom the 
Lord addressed, having no conception of a place of 
everlasting torment, and who knew the word Gehenna 
to refer to the valley outside their city, which was not 
a place of torment, nor a place where any living 
thing was cast, but a place for the utter destruction 
of whatever might be cast into it, recognizing the 
Lord's expression regarding limbs and eyes to be 
figurative, knew that Gehenna also was used in the 
same figurative sense, to symbolize utter destruction. 

The Lord meant simply this: The future life, 
which God has provided for redeemed man, is of inestimable 
value, and it will richly pay you to make any 
sacrifice to receive and enjoy that life. Should it 
even cost an eye, a hand or a foot, so that to all 
eternity you would be obliged to endure the loss of 
these, yet life would be cheap at even such a cost. 
That would be better far than to retain your members 
and lose all in Gehenna. Doubtless, too, the hearers 
drew the lesson as applicable to all the affairs of life, 
and understood the Master to mean that it would 
richly repay them to deny themselves many comforts, 
pleasures and tastes, dear to them as a right 
hand, precious as an eye, and serviceable as a foot, 
rather than by gratification to forfeit the life to come 
and be utterly destroyed in Gehenna— the Second 
Death. 

But what about the undying worms and the unquenchable 
fire? 



We answer, In the literal Gehenna, which is the 
basis of our Lord's illustration, the bodies of animals, 
etc., frequently fell upon ledges of rocks and not into 
the fire kept burning below. Thus exposed, these 
would breed worms and be destroyed by them, as 
completely and as surely as those which burned. No 
one was allowed to disturb the contents of this valley; 
hence the worm and the fire together completed the 
work of destruction— the fire was not quenched and 
the worms died not. This would not imply a never-ending 
fire, nor everlasting worms. The thought is 
that the worms did not die off and leave the carcasses 
there, but continued and completed the work of destruction. 
So with the fire: it was not quenched, it 
burned on until all was consumed. Just so if a house 
were ablaze and the fire could not be controlled or 
quenched, but burned until the building was destroyed, 
we might properly call such an "unquenchable 
fire." 

Our Lord wished to impress the thought of the 
completeness and finality of the Second Death, symbolized 
in Gehenna. All who go into the Second 
Death will be thoroughly and completely and forever 
destroyed; no ransom will ever again be given for any 
(Rom. 6:9); for none worthy of life will be cast into 
the Second Death, or lake of fire, but only those who 



*We will supply free on application a tract on "What is the Soul? 

R4553 : page 34 

love unrighteousness after coming to the knowledge 
of the truth. 

Not only in the above instances is the Second 
Death pointedly illustrated by Gehenna, but it is evident 
that the same Teacher used the same figure to 
represent the same thing in the symbols of Revelation, 
—though there it is not called Gehenna, but a "lake 
of fire." 

The same valley was once before used as a basis 
of a discourse by the Prophet Isaiah. (Isa. 66:24.) 
Though he gives it no name, he describes it; and all 
should notice that he speaks, not as some with false 
ideas might expect, of billions alive in flames and torture, 
but of the carcasses of those who transgressed 
against the Lord, who are thus represented as utterly 
destroyed in the Second Death. 

The two preceding verses show the time when 
this prophecy will be fulfilled, and it is in perfect 
harmony with the symbols of Revelation: it appertains 
to the new dispensation, the Millennium, the "new 
heavens and new earth" condition of things. Then 
all the righteous will see the justice as well as the wisdom 
of the utter destruction of the incorrigible, wilful 



enemies of righteousness, as it is written: "They shall 
be an abhorring unto all flesh." 

MATTHEW 23:15,33. 

The class here addressed was not the heathen who 
had no knowledge of the truth, nor the lowest and 
most ignorant of the Jewish nation, but the Scribes 
and Pharisees, outwardly the most religious, and the 
leaders and teachers of the people. To these our 
Lord said, "How can ye escape the judgment of Gehenna?" 
These men were hypocritical; they were 
not true to their convictions. Abundant testimony of 
the truth had been borne to them, but they refused to 
accept it, and endeavored to counteract its influence 
and to discourage the people from accepting it. And 
in thus resisting the holy spirit of light and truth, they 
were hardening their hearts against the very agency 
which God designed for their blessing. Hence they 
were wickedly resisting his grace, and such a course, 
if pursued, must eventually end in condemnation to 
the Second Death, Gehenna. Every step in the direction 
of wilful blindness and opposition to the truth 
makes return more difficult, and makes the wrongdoer 
more and more of the character which God abhors, 
and which the Second Death is intended to 
utterly destroy. The Scribes and Pharisees were 
progressing rapidly in that course: hence the warning 
inquiry of our Lord, "How can ye escape?" etc. The 
sense is this,— Although you boast of your piety, you 
will surely be destroyed in Gehenna, unless you change 
your course. 

SET ON FIRE OF GEHENNA. 
JAMES 3:6. 

"So [important] is the tongue among our members, 
that it defileth the whole body, and setteth on 
fire the course of nature, and [or when] it is set on 
fire of Gehenna." 

Here, in strong, symbolic language, the Apostle 
points out the great and bad influence of an evil tongue 
—a tongue set on fire (figuratively) by Gehenna (figuratively). 
For a tongue to be set on fire of Gehenna 
signifies that it is set going in evil by a perverse disposition, 
self-willed, selfish, hateful, malicious, the sort 
of disposition which, in spite of knowledge and opportunity, 
unless controlled and reformed, will be 
counted worthy to be destroyed— the class for whom 
the "Second Death," the real "lake of fire," the real 
Gehenna, is intended. One in that attitude may by 
his tongue kindle a great fire, a destructive disturbance, 
which, wherever it has contact, will work evil in 
the entire course of nature. A few malicious words 
often arouse all the evil passions of the speaker, engender 
the same in others and react upon the first. 



And continuance in such an evil course finally corrupts 
the entire man, and brings him under sentence 
as utterly unworthy of life. 

"TARTAROO" RENDERED "HELL." 



The Greek word tartaroo occurs but once in the 
Scriptures, and is translated hell. It is found in 2 Pet. 2:4, 
which reads thus: 

"God spared not the angels who sinned, but cast 
[them] down to hell [tartaroo], and delivered them 
into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto 
judgment." 

Having examined all other words rendered "hell," 
in the Bible, and all the texts in which they occur, we 
conclude the examination with this text, which is the 
only one in which the word tartaroo occurs. In the 
above quotation, all the words shown in Italic type 
are translated from the one Greek word tartaroo. 
Evidently the translators were at a loss to know how 
to translate the word, but concluded they knew where 
the evil angels ought to be, and so they made bold 
to put them into "hell," though it took six words to 
twist the idea into the shape they had pre-determined 
it must take. 

The word tartaroo, used by Peter, very closely 
resembles tartarus, a word used in Grecian mythology 
as the name for a dark abyss or prison. But tartaroo 
seems to refer more to an act than to a place. The 
fall of the angels who sinned was from honor and 
dignity, into dishonor and condemnation, and the 
thought seems to be— "God spared not the angels 
who sinned, but degraded them, and delivered them 
into chains of darkness." 

This certainly agrees with the facts known to 
us through other Scriptures; for these fallen spirits 
frequented the earth in the days of our Lord and the 
apostles. Hence they were not down in some place, 
but "down" in the sense of being degraded from former 
honor and liberty, and restrained under darkness, 
as by a chain. Whenever these fallen spirits, in 
spiritualistic seances, manifest their powers through 
mediums, pretending to be certain dead human beings, 
they must always do their work in the dark, because 
darkness is the chain by which they are bound until 
the great Millennial day of judgment. Whether this 
implies that in the immediate future they will be able 
to materialize in daylight is difficult to determine. If 
so, it would greatly increase Satan's power to blind 
and deceive for a short season— until the Sun of 
Righteousness has fully risen and Satan is fully 
bound. 

Thus we close our investigation of the Bible use 



R4553 : page 35 

of the word "hell." Thank God, we find no such place 
of everlasting torture as the creeds and hymn-books, 
and many pulpits erroneously teach. Yet we have 
found a "hell," sheol, hades, to which all our race were 
condemned on account of Adam's sin, and from which 
all are redeemed by our Lord's death; and that "hell" 
is the tomb— the death condition. And we find 
another "hell" (Gehenna— the Second Death— utter 
destruction) brought to our attention as the final 
penalty upon all who, after being redeemed and 
brought to the full knowledge of the truth, and to 
full ability to obey it, shall yet choose death by choosing 
a course of opposition to God and righteousness. 
And our hearts say, Amen! True and righteous are 
thy ways, thou King of nations! Who shall not venerate 
thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? For thou 
art entirely holy. And all nations shall come and 
worship before thee, because thy righteous dealings 
are made manifest— Rev. 15:3,4. 

PARABLE OF THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS. 
LUKE 16:19-31. 

The great difficulty with many in reading this 
Scripture is that, though they regard it as a parable, 
they reason on it and draw conclusions from it as 
though it were a literal statement. To regard it as a 
literal statement involves several absurdities; for instance, 
that the rich man went to "hell" because he had 
enjoyed many earthly blessings and gave nothing but 
crumbs to Lazarus. Not a word is said about his 
wickedness. Again, Lazarus was blessed, not because 
he was a sincere child of God, full of faith and trust, 
not because he was good, but simply because he was 
poor and sick. If this be interpreted literally, the 
only logical lesson to be drawn from it is, that unless 
we are poor beggars full of sores, we will never enter 
into future bliss; and that if now we wear any fine 
linen and purple, and have plenty to eat every day, 
we are sure of future torment. Again, the coveted 
place of favor is "Abraham's bosom;" and if the whole 
statement be literal, the bosom must also be literal, 
and it surely would not hold very many of earth's millions 
of sick and poor. 

But why consider absurdities? As a parable, it 
is easy of interpretation. In a parable the thing said 
is never the thing meant. We know this from our 
Lord's own explanations of his parables. When he 
said "wheat," he meant "children of the kingdom;" 
when he said "tares," he meant "the children of the 
devil;" when he said "reapers" his servants were to be 
understood, etc. (Matt. 13.) The same classes were 
represented by different symbols in different parables. 
Thus the "wheat" of one parable correspond 



to the "faithful servants," and the "wise virgins" of 
others. So, in this parable, the "rich man" represents 
a class, and "Lazarus" represents another class. 

In attempting to expound a parable such as this, 
an explanation of which the Lord does not furnish 
us, modesty in expressing our opinion regarding it 
is certainly appropriate. We therefore offer the following 
explanation without any attempt to force our 
views upon the reader, except so far as his own truth-enlightened 
judgment may commend them as in accord 
with God's Word and plan. To our understanding, 
Abraham represented God, and the "rich man" represented 
the Jewish nation. At the time of the utterance 
of the parable, and for a long time previous, the 
Jews had "fared sumptuously every day"— being the 
especial recipients of God's favors. As Paul says: 
"What advantage, then, hath the Jew? Much every 
way: chiefly, because to them were committed the 
oracles of God [Law and Prophecy]." The promises 
to Abraham and David and their organization as a 
typical Kingdom of God invested that people with 
royalty, as represented by the rich man's "purple." 
The typical sacrifices of the Law constituted them, in 
a typical sense, a holy (righteous) nation, represented 
by the rich man's "fine linen,"— symbolic of righteousness. 
-Rev. 19:8. 

Lazarus represented the outcasts from divine 
favor under the Law, who, sin-sick, hungered and 
thirsted after righteousness. "Publicans and sinners" 
of Israel, seeking a better life, and truth-hungry 
Gentiles who were "feeling after God" constituted 
the Lazarus class. These, at the time of the utterance 
of this parable, were entirely destitute of those 
special divine blessings which Israel enjoyed. They 
lay at the gate of the rich man. No rich promises of 
royalty were theirs; not even typically were they 
cleansed; but, in moral sickness, pollution and sin, 
they were companions of "dogs." Dogs were regarded 
as detestable creatures in those days, and the typically 
clean Jew called the outsiders "heathen" and "dogs," 
and would never eat with them, nor marry, nor have 
any dealings with them.— John 4:9. 

As to how these ate of the "crumbs" of divine 
favor which fell from Israel's table of bounties, the 
Lord's words to the Syro-Phenician woman give us 
a key. He said to this Gentile woman— "It is not 
meet [proper] to take the children's [Israelites'] bread 
and to cast it to dogs [Gentiles];" and she answered, 
"Truth, Lord, but the dogs eat of the crumbs that 
fall from their master's table." (Matt. 15:26,27.) 
Jesus healed her daughter, thus giving the desired 
crumb of favor. 

But there came a great dispensational change in 
Israel's history when as a nation they rejected and 
crucified the Son of God. Then their typical righteousness 
ceased— then the promise of royalty ceased 



to be theirs, and the kingdom was taken from them 
to be given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof 
—the Gospel Church, "a holy nation, a peculiar people." 
(Titus 2:14; I Pet. 2:7,9; Matt. 21:43.) Thus 
the "rich man" died to all these special advantages, 
and soon he (the Jewish nation) found himself in a 
cast-off condition,— in tribulation and affliction. In 
such condition that nation has suffered from that day 
to this. 

Lazarus also died: the condition of the humble 
Gentiles and the God-seeking "outcasts" of Israel 
underwent a great change, being carried by the angels 
(messengers— apostles, etc.) to Abraham's bosom. 
Abraham is represented as the father of the faithful, 
and receives all the children of faith, who are thus 
recognized as the heirs of all the promises made to 
Abraham; for the children of the flesh are not the 
children of God, "but the children of the promise are 
counted for the seed" (children of Abraham); "which 
seed is Christ;"— and "if ye be Christ's, then are ye 
[believers] Abraham's seed [children], and heirs according 
to the [Abrahamic] promise."— Gal. 3:29. 

Yes, the termination of the condition of things 

R4553 : page 36 

then existing was well illustrated by the figure, death 
—the dissolution of the Jewish polity and the withdrawal 
of the favors which Israel had so long enjoyed. 
There they were cast off and have since been 
shown "no favor," while the poor Gentiles, who before 
had been "aliens from the commonwealth [the 
polity] of Israel and strangers from the covenant of 
promise [up to this time given to Israel only] having 
no hope and without God in the world," were then 
"made nigh by the blood of Christ" and reconciled to 
God.-Eph. 2:12,13. 

To the symbolisms of death and burial used 
to illustrate the dissolution of Israel and their burial 
or hiding among the other nations, our Lord added 
a further figure— "In hell [hades, the grave] he lifted 
up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham 
afar off," etc. The dead cannot lift up their eyes, nor 
see either near or far, nor converse; for it is distinctly 
stated, "There is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, 
nor wisdom, in the grave;" and the dead are 
described as those who "go down into silence." 
(Eccl. 9:10; Psa. 115:17.) But the Lord wished to 
show that great sufferings or "torments" would be 
added to the Jews as a nation after their national dissolution 
and burial amongst the other peoples dead 
in trespasses and sins; and that they would plead in 
vain for release and comfort at the hand of the formerly 
despised Lazarus class. 

And history has borne out this parabolic prophecy. 
For eighteen hundred years the Jews have 



not only been in distress of mind over their casting 
out from the favor of God and the loss of their temple 
and other necessaries to the offering of their sacrifices, 
but they have been relentlessly persecuted by 
all classes, including professed Christians. It was 
from the latter that the Jews have expected mercy, 
as expressed in the parable— "Send Lazarus, that he 
may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my 
tongue;" but the great gulf fixed between them 
hinders that. Nevertheless, God still recognizes the 
relationship established in his covenant with them, 
and addresses them as children of the covenant. 
(Verse 25.) These "torments" have been the penalties 
attached to the violation of their covenant, and 
were as certain to be visited upon them as the blessings 
promised for obedience.— See Lev. 26. 

The "great gulf fixed" represents the wide difference 
between the Gospel Church and the Jew— the 
former enjoying free grace, joy, comfort and peace, 
as true sons of God, and the latter holding to the Law, 
which condemns and torments. Prejudice, pride and 
error, from the Jewish side, form the bulwarks of 
this gulf which hinder the Jew from coming into the 
condition of true sons of God by accepting Christ and 
the gospel of his grace. The bulwark of this gulf 
which hinders true sons of God from going to the 
Jew— under the bondage of the Law— is their knowledge 
that by the deeds of the Law none can be justified 
before God, and that if any man keep the Law 
(put himself under it to try to commend himself to 
God by reason of obedience to it), Christ shall profit 
him nothing. (Gal. 5:2-4.) So, then, we who are 
of the Lazarus class should not attempt to mix the 
Law and the Gospel, knowing that they cannot be 
mixed, and that we can do no good to those who still 
cling to the Law and reject the sacrifice for sins 
given by our Lord. And they, not seeing the change 
of dispensation which took place, argue that to deny 
the Law as the power to save would be to deny all 
the past history of their race, and to deny all of 
God's special dealings with the "fathers," (promises 
and dealings which through pride and selfishness they 
failed rightly to apprehend and use); hence they cannot 
come over to the bosom of Abraham, into the true 
rest and peace— the portion of all the true children 
of faith. -John 8:39; Rom. 4:16; Gal. 3:29. 

True, a few Jews probably came into the Christian 
faith all the way down the Gospel age, but so few 
as to be ignored in a parable which represented the 
Jewish people as a whole. As at the first, Dives represented 
the orthodox Jews, and not the "outcasts of 
Israel," so down to the close of the parable he continues 
to represent a similar class, and hence does not 
represent such Jews as have renounced the Law Covenant 
and embraced the New Covenant or such as have 
become infidels. 



The plea of the "rich man" for the sending of 
"Lazarus" to his five brethren we interpret as follows: 

The people of Judea, at the time of our Lord's 
utterance of this parable, were repeatedly referred to 
as "Israel," "the lost sheep of the house of Israel," 
"cities of Israel," etc., because all of the tribes were 
represented there; but actually the majority of the 
people were of the two tribes, Judah and Benjamin, 
but few of the ten tribes having returned from Babylon 
under Cyrus' general permission. If the nation 
of the Jews (chiefly two tribes) were represented in 
the one "rich man," it would be a harmony of numbers 
to understand the "five brethren" to represent the ten 
tribes chiefly scattered abroad. The request relative 
to them was doubtless introduced to show that all 
special favor of God ceased to all Israel (the ten 
tribes, as well as to the two more directly addressed). 
It seems to us evident that Israel only was meant, for 
no other nation than Israel had "Moses and the 
prophets" as instructors. (Verse 29.) The majority 
of the ten tribes had so far disregarded Moses and the 
prophets that they did not return to the land of promise, 
but preferred to dwell among idolaters; and hence 
it would be useless to attempt further communication 
with them, even by one from the dead— the figuratively 
dead, but now figuratively risen, Lazarus class, 
-Eph. 2:5. 

Though the parable mentions no bridging of this 
"great gulf," other portions of Scripture indicate that 
it was to be "fixed" only throughout the Gospel age, 
and that at its close the "rich man," having received 
the measurement of punishment for his sins,* will 
walk out of his fiery troubles over the bridge of God's 
promises yet unfulfilled to that nation. 

Though for centuries the Jews have been bitterly 
persecuted by pagans, Mohammedans and professed 
Christians, they are now gradually rising to political 
freedom and influence; and although much of "Jacob's 
trouble" is just at hand, yet as a people they will be 
very prominent among the nations in the beginning 
of the Millennium. The "vail" (2 Cor. 3:13-16) of 
prejudice still exists, but it will be gradually taken 
away as the light of the Millennial morning dawns; 



*See Isa. 40:1,2, margin; Rom. 11:27-31, and DAWN-STUDIES, 
Vol. II., page 227. 

R4553 : page 37 

nor should we be surprised to hear of great awakenings 
among the Jews, and many coming to acknowledge 
Christ. They will thus leave their hadean state 
(national death) and torment, and come, the first of 
the nations, to be blessed by the true seed of Abraham, 



which is Christ, Head and Body. Their bulwark of 
race prejudice and pride is falling in some places, and 
the humble, the poor in spirit, are beginning already 
to look upon him whom they have pierced, and to 
inquire, Is not this the Christ? And as they look 
the Lord pours upon them the spirit of favor and 
supplication. (Zech. 12:10.) Therefore, "Speak ye 
comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her 
appointed time is accomplished."— Isa. 40:1,2, margin. 

In a word, this parable seems to teach precisely 
what Paul explained in Rom. 11:19-32. Because of 
unbelief the natural branches were broken off, and 
the wild branches grafted into the Abrahamic root-promise. 
The parable leaves the Jews in their trouble, 
and does not refer to their final restoration to 
favor— doubtless because it was not pertinent to 
the feature of the subject treated; but Paul assures us 
that when the fulness of the Gentiles— the full number 
from among the Gentiles necessary to make up the 
Bride of Christ— is come in, "they [natural Israel] shall 
obtain mercy through your [the Church's] mercy." He 
assures us that this is God's covenant with fleshly 
Israel (who lost the higher, spiritual promises, but 
are still the possessors of certain earthly promises), 
to become the chief nation of earth, etc. In proof of 
this statement, he quotes from the prophets, saying: 
"The deliverer shall come out of Zion [the glorified 
Church], and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob 
[the fleshly seed]." "As concerning the Gospel [high 
calling], they are enemies [cast off] for your sakes; 
but as touching the election, they are beloved for the 
fathers' sakes." "For God hath concluded them all in 
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. O the 
depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge 
of God!"-Rom. 11:26-33. 



page 37 

PARABLE OF THE SHEEP AND THE GOATS. 



"These shall go away into everlasting punishment, 
but the righteous into life eternal."— Matt. 25:31-46. 

WHILE the Scriptures, as we have shown, do not 
teach the blasphemous doctrine of everlasting 
torment, they do most emphatically teach the everlasting 
punishment of the wicked, the class represented in 
the parable as "goats." Let us examine the parable, 
and then the sentence pronounced at its close. 
It has been truly said that "Order is Heaven's 
first law;" yet few, we think, have realized how emphatically 
this is true. In glancing back over the 



plan of the ages, there is nothing which gives such 
conclusive evidence of a Divine Director as the order 
observed in all its parts. 

God has had definite and stated times and seasons 
for every part of his work; and in the end of each of 
these seasons there has been a finishing up of its 
work and a clearing off of the rubbish, preparatory 
to the beginning of the new work of the dispensation 
to follow. Thus in the end of the Jewish age order 
is observed— a harvesting and complete separation of 
the "wheat" class from the "chaff," and an entire rejection 
of the latter class from God's favor. With the few 
judged worthy in the end of that age, a new age— the 
Gospel age— began. And now we find ourselves amidst 
the closing scenes, the "harvest," of this age: the 
"wheat" and the "tares," which have grown together 
during this age, are being separated. With the former 
class, of which our Lord Jesus is the Head, a new 
age is about to be inaugurated, and these "wheat" are 
to reign as kings and priests in that new dispensation, 
while the "tare" element is judged as utterly unworthy 
of that favor. 

While observing this order with reference to the 
Jewish age and the one just closing, our Lord informs 
us through the parable under consideration that the 
same order will be observed with reference to the age 
to follow this Gospel age. 

The harvest of the Jewish age was likened to the 
separation of wheat from chaff; the harvest of this age 
to the separation of wheat from tares; and the harvest 
of the Millennial age to the separation of sheep from 
goats. 

That the parable of the sheep and the goats 
refers to the Millennial age is clearly indicated in 
verses 31 and 32— "When the son of man shall come 
in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then 
shall he sit upon the throne of his glory, and before 
him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate 
them one from another, as a shepherd divideth 
his sheep from the goats." As in the present age 
every act of those on trial (the Church) goes to make 
a part of that character which, in due time, will determine 
the final decision of the Judge in our case, so 
will it be with the world (the "nations") in the age to 
come. As in the present age the trial of the majority 
of the individual members of the Church ends, and 
the decision of their case is reached, long before the 
end of the age (2 Tim. 4:7,8), so under the Millennial 
reign the decision of some individual cases will be 
reached long before the end of the age (Isa. 65:20); 
but in each age there is a "harvest" or general separating 
time in the end of the age. 

In the dawn of the Millennial age, after the "time 
of trouble," there will be a gathering of the living 
nations before Christ, and, in their appointed time and 
order, the dead of all nations shall be called to appear 



before the judgment seat of Christ— not to receive 

an immediate sentence, but to receive a fair and impartial, 

individual trial (Ezek. 18:2-4,19,20) under 

the most favorable circumstances, the result of which 

trial will be a final sentence, as worthy or unworthy 

of everlasting life.* 

The scene of this parable, therefore, is laid after 
the time of trouble, when the nations shall have been 
subdued, Satan bound (Rev. 20:1,2) and the authority 
of Christ's kingdom established. Ere this, the Bride 
of Christ (the overcoming Church) will have been 
seated with him in his throne of spiritual power and 
will have taken part in executing the judgments of the 



*See DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. I., Chapter VIII. 

page 38 

great day of wrath. Then the Son of man and his 
Bride, the glorified Church, will be revealed and be 
seen by men, with the eyes of their understanding and 
shall "shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their 
Father. "-Matt. 13:43. 

Here is the New Jerusalem as John saw it (Rev. 21), 
"that holy city [symbol of government]. ..coming 
down from God out of heaven." During the time 
of trouble it will be coming down, and before the end 
of it, it will have touched the earth. This is the stone 
cut out of the mountains without hands (but by the 
power of God), and it will then have become a great 
mountain (kingdom), filling the whole earth (Dan. 2:35), 
its coming having broken to pieces the evil kingdoms 
of the prince of darkness.— Dan. 2:34,35. 

Here is that glorious city (government), prepared 
as a bride adorned for her husband (Rev. 21:2), and 
early in the dawn of the Millennium the nations will 
begin to walk in the light of it. (Verse 24.) These 
may bring their glory and honor into it, but "there 
shall in no wise enter into it [or become a part of it] 
anything that defileth," etc. (Verse 27.) Here, from 
the midst of the throne, proceeds a pure river of water 
of life (truth unmixed with error), and the Spirit and 
the Bride say, Come, and take it freely. (Rev. 22:17.) 
Here begins the world's probation, the world's great 
judgment day— a thousand years.* 

But even in this favored time of blessing and 
healing of the nations, when Satan is bound, evil 
restrained, mankind in process of release from the 
grasp of death, and when the knowledge of the Lord 
fills the earth, two classes will be developed, which our 
Lord here likens to sheep and goats. These, he tells 
us, he will separate. The sheep class— those who are 
meek, teachable and willing to be led, shall, during 
the Millennial age, be gathered at the Judge's 



right hand— symbol of his approval and favor; but 
the goat class, self-willed and stubborn, always climbing 
on the rocks— seeking prominence and approval 
among men— and feeding on miserable refuse, while 
the sheep graze in the rich pastures of the truth furnished 
by the Good Shepherd— these are gathered to 
the Judge's left hand, the opposite of the position of 
favor— as subjects of his disfavor and condemnation. 

This work of separating sheep and goats will require 
all of the Millennial age for its accomplishment. 
During that age, each individual, as he comes gradually 
to a knowledge of God and his will, takes his place 
at the right hand of favor or the left hand of disfavor, 
according as he improves or misimproves the opportunities 
of that golden age. By the end of that age, 
all the world of mankind will have arranged themselves, 
as shown in the parable, into two classes. 

The end of that age will be the end of the world's 
trial or judgment, and then final disposition will be 
made of the two classes. The reward of this "sheep" 
class will be granted them because, during the age of 
trial and discipline, they cultivated and manifested the 
beautiful character of love, which Paul describes as 
the fulfilling of the Law of God. (Rom. 13:10.) They 
will have manifested it to each other in their times of 
sorest need; and what they will have done for one 
another the Lord will count as done unto him, counting 
them all as his brethren— children of God, though 
they will be of the human nature, while he is of the 
divine. 

The condemnation of the "goat" class is shown 
to be for the lack of this spirit of love. Under the 
same favorable circumstances as the "sheep," they 
wilfully resist the moulding influence of the Lord's 
discipline, and harden their hearts. The goodness 
of God does not lead them to true repentance, but, 
like Pharaoh, they take advantage of his goodness and 
do evil. The "goats," who will not have developed 
the element of love, the law of God's being and Kingdom, 
will be counted unworthy of everlasting life, and 
will be destroyed; while the "sheep," who will have 
developed God-likeness (love), and who will have exhibited 
it in their characters, are to be installed as the 
subordinate rulers of earth for future ages. 

In the end of the Millennial age, in the final adjustment 
of human affairs, Christ thus addresses his 
sheep: "Come, ye blessed,. ..inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you from the foundation of the world." 

It is manifest the "sheep" here addressed, at the 
close of the Millennium, are not the sheep of the Gospel 
age, the Gospel Church, but those "other sheep" 
to whom the Lord referred in John 10:16. And the 
kingdom prepared for them in the divine plan, from 
the foundation of the world, is not the kingdom prepared 
for the Gospel Church. The Church will receive 
her kingdom at the beginning of the Millennium; 



but this is the kingdom prepared for the "sheep" of the 

Millennial age. Their kingdom will be the dominion 

of earth which was originally given to Adam, but 

which was lost through sin, and which is again to be 

restored when man is brought to perfection, and so 

made fit to receive and enjoy it. That dominion will 

not be a dominion of some of the race over others, but 

a joint dominion, in which every man will be a king, 

and all will have equal rights and privileges in appropriating 

and enjoying every earthly good. It will be 

a sovereign people— a great and grand republic on a 

basis of perfect righteousness, wherein the rights of 

every man will be conserved; because the golden rule 

will be inscribed on every heart, and every man will 

love his neighbor as himself. The dominion of all 

will be over the whole earth, and all its rich and 

bountiful stores of blessing. (Gen. 1:28; Psa. 8:5-8.) 

The kingdom of the world, to be given to the perfected 

and worthy ones of the redeemed race at the close of 

the Millennium, is clearly distinguished from all others 

by being called the kingdom prepared for them "from 

the foundation of the world," the earth having been 

made to be the everlasting home and kingdom of perfect 

men. But the kingdom bestowed upon Christ, 

of which the Church, his "Bride," becomes joint-heir, 

is a spiritual kingdom, "far above angels, principalities 

and powers," and it also shall "have no end"— 

Christ's Millennial Kingdom, which will end, being 

merely a beginning of Christ's power and rule. (I Cor. 15:25-28.) 

This endless heavenly, spiritual kingdom 

was prepared long before the earth was founded— its 

inception being recognized in Christ, "the beginning 

of the creation of God." It was intended for Christ 

Jesus, the First Begotten; but even the Church, his 

Bride, and joint-heir, was chosen or designed also, in 

him, before the foundation of the world.— Eph. 1:4. 

The kingdom or rule of earth, is the kingdom 
that has been in preparation for mankind from the 
foundation of the world. It was expedient that man 
should suffer six thousand years under the dominion 
of evil, to learn its inevitable results of misery and 
death, in order by contrast to prove the justice, wisdom 
and goodness of God's law of love. Then it will 



*See DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. I., Chapter VIII. "The Day 
of Judgment." 

page 39 

require the seventh thousand-year, under the reign 
of Christ, to restore him from ruin and death, to the 
perfect condition, thereby fitting him to "inherit the 
kingdom prepared for him from the foundation of the 
world." 



That kingdom, in which all will be kings, will be 
one grand, universal republic, whose stability and 
blessed influence will be assured by the perfection of 
its every citizen, a result now much desired, but an 
impossibility because of sin. The kingdom of Christ 
during the Millennium will be, on the contrary, a theocracy, 
which will rule the world (during the period of 
its imperfection and restoration) without regard to its 
consent or approval. 

The brethren of the Gospel Church are not the 
only "brethren" of Christ. All who at that time will 
have been restored to perfection will be recognized as 
sons of God— sons in the same sense that Adam was a 
son of God (Luke 3:38— human sons. And all of 
God's sons, whether on the human, the angelic or the 
divine plane, are brethren. Our Lord's love for these, 
his human brethren, is here expressed. As the world 
now has the opportunity to minister to those who are 
shortly to be the divine sons of God, and brethren of 
Christ, so they will have abundant opportunity during 
the age to come to minister to (each other) the human 
brethren. 

The dead nations when again brought into existence 
will need food, raiment and shelter. However 
great may have been their possessions in this life, 
death will have brought all to a common level: the 
infant and the man of mature years, the millionaire 
and the pauper, the learned and the unlearned, the 
cultured and the ignorant and degraded: all will have 
an abundant opportunity for the exercise of benevolence, 
and thus they will be privileged to be co-workers 
with God. We are here reminded of the illustration 
given in the case of Lazarus: Jesus only awakened 
him from death, and then were the rejoicing friends 
permitted to loose him from his grave clothes and to 
clothe and feed him. 

Further, these are said to be "sick and in prison" 
(more properly, under ward or watch). The grave is 
the great prison where the millions of humanity have 
been held in unconscious captivity; but when released 
from the grave, the restoration to perfection is not to 
be an instantaneous work. Being not yet perfect, 
they may properly be termed sick, and under ward; 
not dead, neither are they yet perfected in life: and 
any condition between those two may be properly 
symbolized by sickness. And they will continue to be 
under watch or ward until made well— physically, 
mentally and morally perfect. During that time there 
will be abundant opportunity for mutual helpfulness, 
sympathy, instruction and encouragement and 
any failure to assist will mark a lack of the Lord's 
spirit of love. 

Since all mankind will not be raised at once, but 
gradually, during the thousand years, each new group 
will find an army of helpers in those who will have preceded 
it. The love and benevolence which men will 



then show to each other (the brethren of Christ) the 
King will count as shown to him. No great deeds 
are assigned as the ground for the honors and favors 
conferred upon the righteous: they will have simply 
come into harmony with God's law of love and proved 
it by their works. "Love is the fulfilling of the law" 
(Rom. 13:10), and "God is love." So, when man 
is restored again to the image of God— "very good"— 
man also will be a living expression of love. 

"Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world," does not signify a rule independent 
of the divine law and supremacy: for although 
God gave earth's dominion to man at first, and designs 
restoring it to him when he has prepared him for 
the great trust, we are not to suppose that God intends 
man to rule it, otherwise than as under, or in harmony 
with, his supreme law. "Thy will be done in earth as 
in heaven," must forever be the principle of government. 
Man thenceforth will rule his dominion in harmony 
with the law of heaven— delighting continually 
to do his will in whose favor is life, and at whose 
"right hand [condition of favor] there are pleasures 
forevermore." (Psa. 16:11.) Oh! who would not say, 
"Haste ye along, ages of glory!" and give glory and 
honor to him whose loving plans are blossoming 
into such fulness of blessing? 

Let us now examine the message to those on the 
left— "Depart from me, ye cursed" (condemned)— 
condemned as unfit vessels for the glory and honor of 
life, who would not yield to the moulding and shaping 
influences of divine love. When these, "brethren," 
were hungry and thirsty, or naked, sick, and in 
prison, ye ministered not to their necessities, thus 
continually proving yourselves out of harmony with 
the heavenly city (Kingdom); for "there shall in no 
case enter into it anything that defileth." The decision 
or sentence regarding this class is— "Depart 
from me into everlasting fire [symbol of destruction], 
prepared for the devil and his angels." Elsewhere 
(Heb. 2:14) we read without symbol that Christ "will 
destroy. ..him that had the power of death, that is, 
the devil." 

"And these [the "goats"] shall go away into everlasting 
[Greek, aionios— lasting] punishment, but the 
righteous into life eternal [Greek, aionios— lasting.]" 
The punishment will be as lasting as the reward. Both 
will be everlasting. 



page 39 

EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT. 



THE EVERLASTINGNESS of the punishment 
being thus established, only one point is left open 
for discussion; namely, the nature of the punishment. 
Take your Concordance and search out what saith the 
great Judge regarding the punishment of wilful sinners 
who despise and reject all his blessed provisions for 
them through Christ. What do you find? Does God 
there say— All sinners shall live in torture forever? 
No; we find not a single text where life in any condition 
is promised to that class. 

God's declarations assure us that ultimately he 
will have a clean universe, free from the blight of sin 
and sinners,— because "All the wicked will he destroy." 
-Psa. 145:20. 

But while we do not find one verse of the Bible 
saying that this class can have life in torment, or in 
any other condition, we do find numerous passages 
teaching the reverse. Of these we give a few merely 
as samples— "The wages of sin is death" (Rom. 6:23.) 
"The soul that sinneth, it shall die." (Ezek. 18:4,20.) 

page 40 

"The wicked shall perish." (Psa. 37:20.) "Yet a little 
while and the wicked shall not be." (Psa. 37:10.) 
Thus God has told us plainly the nature of the everlasting 
punishment of the wicked— that it will be 
death, destruction. 

The false ideas of God's plan of dealing with the 
incorrigible, taught ever since the great "falling away," 
which culminated in Papacy, and instilled into our 
minds from childhood, are alone responsible for the 
view generally held, that the everlasting punishment 
provided for wilful sinners is a life of torment. This 
view is held, notwithstanding the many clear statements 
of God's Word that their punishment is to be 
death. Here Paul states very explicitly what the punishment 
is to be. Speaking of the same Millennial Day, 
and of the same class, who, despite all the favorable 
opportunities and the fulness of knowledge then, will 
not come into harmony with Christ, and hence will 
"know not God," in the true sense and "obey not," 
he says— "Who shall be punished." Ah, yes! but how 
punished? He tells us how: They "shall be punished 
with everlasting destruction" [a destruction from which 
there shall be no recovery, no redemption or resurrection 
— Heb. 10:26-29] from the presence of the Lord 
and from the glory of his power." (2 Thes. 1:9.) This 
destruction is represented in the parable as the everlasting 
"fire" prepared for the devil and his angels: 
it is "the lake of fire and brimstone," which is the 
Second death (Rev. 20:14), into which the "goat" 
class of this parable are sent— Matt. 25:41. 

Thus the meaning and reasonableness of this 
statement concerning everlasting punishment are 
readily seen when looked at from the correct standpoint. 



The fire of the parable, by which the punishment 
(destruction) is to be accomplished, will not be 
literal fire, for the "fire" is as much a symbol as the 
"sheep" and "goats" are symbols. Fire here, as elsewhere, 
symbolizes destruction, and not in any sense 
preservation. 

We might well leave this subject here, and consider 
that we have fully shown that the everlasting 
punishment of the "goat" class will be destruction; but 
we direct attention to one other point which clinches 
the truth upon this subject. We refer to the Greek 
word kolasin, translated "punishment," in verse 46. 
This word has not in it the remotest idea of torment. 
Its primary signification is to cut off, or prune, or lop 
off, as in the pruning of trees; and a secondary meaning 
is to restrain. The wicked will be everlastingly 
restrained, cut off from life in the Second death. Illustrations 
of the use of kolasin can easily be had from 
Greek classical writings. The Greek word for "torment" 
is basinos, a word totally unrelated to the word 
kolasin. 

Kolasin, the word used in Matt. 25:46, occurs in 
but one other place in the Bible, viz., I John 4:18, 
where it is improperly rendered "torment" in the common 
version, whereas it should read, "Fear hath restraint." 
Those who possess a copy of Young's Analytical 
Concordance will see from it (page 995) that the 
definition of the word kolasin is "pruning, restraining, 
restraint." And the author of the Emphatic Diaglott, 
after translating kolasin in Matt. 25:46 by the words 
"cutting off," says in a foot note: 

"The common version and many modern ones 
render kolasin aionion 'everlasting punishment,' conveying 
the idea, as generally interpreted, of basinos, 
torment. Kolasin in its various forms occurs in only 
three other places in the New Testament: Acts 4:21; 
2 Pet. 2:9; I John 4:18. It is derived from kolazoo, 
which signifies, 1. To cut off; as lopping off branches 
of trees, to prune. 2. To restrain, to repress. The 
Greeks write— 'The charioteer restrains [kalazei] his 
fiery steeds.' 3. To chastize, to punish. To cut off 
an individual from life, or from society, or even to restrain, 
is esteemed as a punishment; hence has arisen 
this third or metaphorical use of the word. The 
primary signification has been adopted [in the Diaglott], 
because it agrees better with the second member 
of the sentence, thus preserving the force and 
beauty of the antithesis. The righteous go to life, the 
wicked to the cutting off from life, death.— 
2Thes. 1:9." 

Now consider carefully the text, and note the 
antithesis, the contrast, shown between the reward of 
the "sheep" and the reward of the "goats," which the 
correct idea of kolasin gives— the one class goes into 
everlasting life, while the other is everlastingly cut off 
from life— forever restrained in death. And this exactly 



agrees with what the Scriptures everywhere else declare 
concerning the wages or penalty of wilful sin. 

Consider for a moment the words of verse 41: 
"Depart from me, ye cursed [once redeemed by Christ 
from the Adamic curse or condemnation to death, but 
now condemned or cursed, as worthy of the Second 
death, by the One who redeemed them from the first 
curse], into everlasting fire [symbol of everlasting destruction, 
prepared for the devil and his messengers 
[servants]." 

Remember that this is the final sentence at the 
close of the final trial— at the close of the Millennium; 
and that none will then be servants of Satan ignorantly 
or unwillingly, as so many now are; for the great 
Deliverer, Christ, will remove outside temptations, and 
provide assistance toward self-improvement, which 
will enable all who will to overcome inherent weaknesses 
and to attain perfection. These "goats," who 
love evil and serve Satan, are the messengers ("angels") 
of Satan. For these and Satan, and for no 
others, God has prepared Second death— the everlasting 
destruction. Fire will come from God out of 
heaven and consume them. Consuming fire and devouring 
fire all can appreciate, unless their eyes are 
holden by false doctrine and prejudice. No one ever 
knew of a preserving fire; and as fire never preserves, 
but always consumes, God uses it as a symbol of 
utter destruction.— Rev. 20:9. 

"THE LAKE OF FIRE AND BRIMSTONE 
WHICH IS THE SECOND DEATH." 

-REV. 19:20; 20:10,14,15; 21:8.- 

"The lake of fire and brimstone" is several times 
mentioned in the book of Revelation, which all Christians 
admit to be a book of symbols. However, they 
generally think and speak of this particular symbol 
as a literal statement giving strong support to the torment 
doctrine, notwithstanding the fact that the symbol 
is clearly defined as meaning the Second death: 
"And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. 
This is the Second Death," etc. (Rev. 20:14.) It is 
sometimes spoken of as "a lake of fire burning with 
brimstone" (Rev. 19:20), the element brimstone being 

page 41 

mentioned to intensify the symbol of destruction, the 
Second death: burning brimstone being one of the 
most deadly elements known. It is destructive to all 
forms of life. 

The symbolism of this lake of fire is further shown 
by the fact that the symbolic "beast" and the symbolic 
"false prophet," and death and hell [hades], as well as 
the devil and his followers, are destroyed in it— Rev. 19:20; 



20:10,14,15; 21:8. 

This destruction or death is called the Second 
death in contradistinction to the First or Adamic 
death, and not to signify that everything which goes 
into it dies a second time. For instance, death (the 
first or Adamic death), and hades, the grave, are to be 
cast into it;— this work will require the entire Millennium 
to accomplish it; and in no sense will they ever 
have been destroyed before. So also "the devil," "the 
beast," and "the false prophet," will never have been 
destroyed before. 

From the first, or Adamic death, a resurrection 
has been provided. All that are in their graves shall 
therefore come forth. The Revelator prophetically 
declares: "The sea gave up the dead which were in 
it, and death and hell [hades, the grave] gave up the 
dead which were in them. ...And I saw the dead, 
small and great, stand before God, and the books were 
opened." (Rev. 20:13,12.) It was in view of God's 
plan for redeeming the race from Adamic death that in 
both the Old and New Testaments it is called a "sleep." 
In Israel's history of the good and the wicked it is repeatedly 
stated that they "slept with their fathers." 
The Apostles used the same symbol, and our Lord 
also. But no such symbol is used in reference to the 
Second death. On the contrary, the strongest figures 
of total and utter destruction are used to symbolize 
it; viz., "fire and brimstone;" because that will be a 
destruction from which there will be no recovery. 

Blessed thought! the Adamic death (which claimed 
the whole race for the sin of their progenitor) shall be 
forever swallowed up, and shall cease in this Second 
death into which it is to be cast by the great Redeemer 
who bought the whole world with the sacrifice of 
himself. Thus God tells us through the Prophet, "I 
will ransom them from the power of the grave [sheol]. 
I will redeem them from death.... O grave [sheol] 
I will be thy destruction." (Hos. 13:14.) The first 
or Adamic death shall no longer have liberty or power 
over men, as it has had for the past six thousand years; 
no longer shall any die for Adam's sin. (Rom. 5:12; 
Jer. 31:29,30; Ezek. 18:2.) Thenceforth the New 
Covenant, sealed with the precious blood, shall be in 
force, and only wilful transgressions will be counted 
as sin and punished with the wages of sin— death— 
the Second Death. Thus will the Adamic death be cast 
into and swallowed up by the Second Death. 

And hades and sheol— the dark, secret condition, 
the grave, which in the present time speaks to us of a 
hope of future life by God's resurrection power in 
Christ— shall be no more; for the Second Death will 
devour no being fit for life— none for whom there 
remains a shadow of hope, but such only as, by the 
unerring Judge, have been fully, impartially and individually 
found worthy of destruction. And Satan, 
that lying tempter who deceived and ruined the race 



and who, with persistent energy and cunning, has 
sought continually to thwart the purpose of God for 
our salvation through Christ, and with him all who 
are of his spirit, "his angels," shall be destroyed, and 
shall never awake from death to trouble the world 
again. Here he is said to be cast into "the lake of 
fire,"— the Second Death; and Paul in Heb. 2:14, referring 
to the same thing, calls it destruction— "that he 
might destroy death, and him that hath the power 
of death, that is the devil." And "the beast and the 
false prophet," the great false systems which have 
long oppressed and misled nominal Christendom, shall 
never escape from it. These systems are said to be 
cast "alive" (that is, while they are still organized and 
operative) into the lake of fire burning with brimstone. 
-Rev. 19:20. 

The great time of trouble, the Lord's judgment, 
which will utterly destroy these systems, will undoubtedly 
cause great social, financial and religious difficulty 
and pain to all those identified with these deceived 
and deceiving systems, before they are utterly destroyed. 
These systems will be cast in, destroyed, at 
the beginning of the Millennium, while Satan's destruction 
is reserved until its close, when all the 
"goats" shall have been separated from the "sheep," 
and they shall perish with Satan in the Second death, 
as "his angels," messengers or servants. None of 
those abominable characters among men, who, knowing 
the truth, yet love unrighteousness— none of "the 
fearful and unbelieving"— those who will not trust 
God after all the manifestations of his grace afforded 
during the Millennial reign of Christ; nor the 
abominable, who, at heart are murderers and whoremongers 
and sorcerers and idolaters and liars: none 
of these shall escape from the Second Death, to defile 
the earth again. All such, after a full and abundant 
opportunity for reformation, will be judged unworthy 
of life, and will be forever cut off in the Second death, 
symbolized by the lake of fire and brimstone. 

Several prophetic pen pictures of the Millennial 
age and its work, in chapters 20 and 2 1 of Revelation, 
clearly show the object and result of that age of trial, 
in harmony with the remainder of the Scriptures already 
noted. 

Chapter 20, verses 2,4,11, with verses 1,2,10,11 of chapter 21, 
show the beginning of that Age of 
Judgment, and the restraining of blinding errors and 
misleading systems. The "beast" and the "false 
prophet" are the chief symbols, and represent the organizations 
or systems of error which, together, constitute 
"Babylon." This judgment against the 
"thrones" of the present time, and against "the beast 
and the false prophet" systems follows speedily upon 
the introduction of this Millennial judgment reign. The 
thrones of the present dominion of earth will be "cast 
down," and the dominion transferred to the great 



Prophet, Priest, King and Judge, "whose right it is." 
(Compare Dan. 7:14,22; Ezek. 21:27.) Then the 
systems of error will be speedily judged worthy of 
destruction, "the lake of fire," "the Second Death."— 
Rev. 19:20. 

Thus the second destruction (or death) begins 
quite early in the new judgment: it begins with the 
false systems symbolized by the beast, false prophet, 
etc., but it will not reach the world of mankind, as 
individuals, until they have first had full trial, with full 
opportunity to choose life and live forever. Chapters 20:12,13, 
and 21:3-7, indicate the blessed, favorable 

page 42 

trial in which all, both dead and living (except 
the Church, who, with Jesus Christ, are kings, priests, 
joint-heirs and judges), will be brought to a full 
knowledge of the truth, relieved from sorrow and pain, 
and freed from every blinding error and prejudice, 
and tried "according to their works." 

The grand outcome of that trial will be a clean 
universe. As the Revelator expresses it, "Every creature 
which is in heaven and on the earth. ..heard I 
saying, Blessing and honor and glory and power be 
unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the 
Lamb forever." But this result will be accomplished 
in harmony with all God's dealings past and present, 
which have always recognized man's freedom of will 
to choose good or evil, life or death. 

We cannot doubt then that in the close of the 
Millennial age, God will again for a "little season" permit 
evil to triumph, in order thereby to test his creatures 
(who will by that time have become thoroughly 
acquainted with both good and evil, and the consequence 
of each, and will have had his justice and love 
fully demonstrated to them), that those who finally 
prefer and choose evil may be cut off— destroyed. 
Thus God will for all eternity remove all who do not 
love righteousness and hate iniquity. 

We read, regarding that testing, that Satan will 
endeavor to lead astray all mankind, whose numbers 
will then be as the sand of the sea for multitude; but 
that many of them will follow Satan's evil example and 
choose evil and disobedience, with past experience 
before them, and unhampered by present weaknesses 
and blinding influences, we need not suppose. However, 
when God does not tell us either the number or 
the proportion of those to be found worthy of life, and 
those to be judged worthy of death (the Second 
Death), we may not dogmatize. Of one thing we may 
be confident, God willeth not the death of the wicked, 
but would that all should turn to him and live; and no 
one will be destroyed in that "lake of fire and brimstone" 
(figurative of utter destruction,— Gehenna) who 
is worthy of life, whose living longer would be a blessing 



to himself or to others in harmony with 
righteousness. 

Utter and hopeless destruction is intended only 
for wilful evil doers, who, like Satan, in pride of 
heart and rebellion against God, will love and do evil 
notwithstanding the manifestations of God's disapproval, 
and notwithstanding their experience with its 
penalties. Seemingly the goodness and love of God 
in the provision of a ransom, a restitution, and another 
opportunity of life for man, instead of leading all to an 
abhorrence of sin, will lead some to suppose that God 
is too loving to cut them off in the Second Death, or 
that if he did so he would give them other, and 
yet other future opportunities. Building thus upon a 
supposed weakness in the divine character, these may 
be led to try to take advantage of the grace (favor) 
of God, as a license for wilful sin. But they 
shall go no further, for their folly shall be made manifest. 
Their utter destruction will prove to the righteous 
the harmony and perfect balance of Justice, 
Wisdom, Love and Power in the Divine Ruler. 

REVELATION 21:8. 

The true character of the goat class is portrayed. 
The fearful and unbelieving [who will not trust God], 
the abominable, murderers [brother-haters], whore-mongers, 
sorcerers, idolaters [such as misappropriate 
and misuse divine favors, who give to self or any other 
creature or thing that service and honor which belong 
to God], and all "liars"— "whosoever loveth and maketh 
a lie" [in a word, all who do not love the truth and 
seek it, and at any cost defend and hold it] "shall have 
their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone 
[Gehenna, symbol of utter destruction], which is 
the Second Death." Such company would be repulsive 
to any honest, upright being. It is hard to tolerate 
them now, when we can sympathize with them, 
knowing that such dispositions are now in great measure 
the result of inherited weakness of the flesh. We 
are moved to a measure of sympathy by the remembrance 
that in our own cases, often, when we would 
do good evil is present with us. But in the close of 
the Millennial judgment, when the Lord, the righteous 
Judge, shall have given every advantage and opportunity 
of knowledge and ability, this class will be an abhorrence 
and detestation to all who are in harmony 
with the King of Glory. And the righteous will be 
glad when, the trial being ended, the gift of life of 
which these shall have proved themselves unworthy, 
shall be taken from them, and when the corrupters of 
the earth, and all their work and influence, shall be 
destroyed. 

THE DEVIL, THE BEAST AND THE FALSE 
PROPHET TORMENTED. 



Rev. 20:9 tells of the destruction of those individuals 
who join with Satan in the last rebellion; and 
verse 15 tells of that same destruction in other words, 
using the symbol "lake of fire." They are devoured 
or consumed in fire. This being the case, the torment 
of verse 10 cannot refer to these human beings who 
are consumed, destroyed. Hence the question narrows 
down to this, Will Satan and a false prophet and 
a beast be tortured forever? and does this verse so 
teach? 

We answer in God's own words, "All the wicked 
will he destroy." Concerning Satan, the arch enemy 
of God and man, God expressly advises us that he will 
be destroyed, and not preserved in any sense or condition. 
-Heb. 2:14. 

The beast and false prophet systems, which during 
the Gospel age have deceived and led astray, will be 
cast into a great, consuming trouble in the close of this 
Gospel age. The torment of those systems will be 
aionion, i. e., lasting. It will continue as long as they 
last, until they are utterly consumed. So also the system 
of error, which will suddenly manifest itself at the 
end of the Millennial age and lead the "goats" to destruction, 
will be consumed. (Rev. 20:7-10.) That 
deceiving system (not specified as to kind, but merely 
called Satan, after its instigator) will be cast into the 
same sort of trouble and destruction, in the end of the 
Millennial age, as the beast and false prophet systems 
are now being cast into it, in the end of the Gospel age. 

Rev. 19:3, speaking of one of these systems, says: 
"Her smoke rose up forever and ever." That is to 
say, the remembrance ("smoke") of the destruction of 
these systems of deception and error will be lasting, 
the lesson will never be forgotten— as smoke, which 
continues to ascend after a destructive fire, is testimony 
that the fire has done its work.— See also Isa. 34:8-10. 

Of Rev. 14:9-1 1 we remark, incidentally, that all 
will at once concede that if a literal worshiping of a 

page 43 

beast and image were meant in verse 9, then few, if 
any, in civilized lands are liable to the penalty of verse 1 1 ; 
and if the beast and his image and worship and 
wine and cup are symbols, so also are the torments 
and smoke and fire and brimstone. 

The casting of death and the grave into utter destruction, 
the Second death, during the Millennial age, 
is a part of the utter destruction which will include 
every improper, injurious and useless thing. (Isa. 11:9; 
Psa. 101:5-8.) The Second death, the sentence 
of that individual trial, will be final: it will never be 
destroyed. And let all the lovers of righteousness say, 
Amen; for to destroy the Second Death, to remove the 
sentence of that just and impartial trial, would be to let 



loose again not only Satan, but all who love and practice 
wrong and deception, and who dishonor the Lord 
with their evil institutions— to oppose, offend and endeavor 
to overthrow those who love and desire to serve 
him and enjoy his favor. We rejoice that there is 
no danger of this, but that divine justice unites with 
divine wisdom, love and power, to bring in everlasting 
righteousness on a permanent basis. 

TURNED INTO HELL. 



"The wicked shall be turned into hell, and the nations 
that forget God. "-Psa. 9:17. 

This statement of the Lord recorded by the 
Psalmist we find without any qualification whatever, 
and we must accept it as a positive fact. If the claims 
of "Orthodoxy" respecting hell were true, this would 
be, indeed, a fearful message. 

But let us substitute the true meaning of the word 
sheol, and our text will read: "The wicked shall be 
turned into the condition of death, and all the nations 
that forget God." This we believe; but next, who are 
the wicked? In one sense all men are wicked, in that 
all are violators of God's law; but in the fullest sense 
the wicked are those who, with full knowledge of the 
exceeding sinfulness of sin, and the remedy provided 
for their recovery from its baneful effects, wilfully 
persist in sin. 

As yet few— only consecrated believers— have 
come to a true knowledge of God. The world knows 
him not, and the nations cannot forget God until they 
are first brought to a knowledge of him. The consecrated 
have been enlightened, led of the Spirit through 
faith to understand the deep and hidden things of God, 
which reveal the glory of God's character, but which, 
though expressed in his Word, appear only as foolishness 
to the world. 

As we have hitherto seen, this will not be so in the 
age to come, for then "The earth shall be full of the 
knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea." 
(Isa. 11:9.) Much that we now receive by faith will 
then be demonstrated to the world. When he who has 
ransomed man from the power of the grave (Hos. 13:14) 
begins to gather his purchased possessions back 
from the prison-house of death (Isa. 61:1), when the 
sleepers are awakened under the genial rays of the 
Sun of Righteousness, they will not be slow to realize 
the truth of the hitherto seemingly idle tale, that "Jesus 
Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every 
man." 

We have also seen that the gradual ascent of the 
King's Highway of Holiness in that age will be possible 
to all, and comparatively easy, because all the 
stones— stumbling-blocks, errors, etc.— will have been 



gathered out, and straight paths made for their feet. 
It is in that age that this text applies. Those who 
ignore the favoring circumstances of that age, and will 
not be obedient to the righteous Judge or Ruler- 
Christ— will truly be the wicked. And every loyal 
subject of the Kingdom of God will approve the 
righteous judgment which turns such an one again 
into sheol— the condition of death. Such an one 
would be unworthy of life; and, were he permitted to 
live, his life would be a curse to himself and to the 
rest of mankind, and a blemish on the work of God. 

This will be the Second Death, from which there 
will be no resurrection. Having been ransomed from 
the grave (sheol) by the sacrifice of Christ, if they die 
again on account of their own sin, "there remaineth 
no more sacrifice for sin." (Heb. 10:26.) "Christ 
dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over 
him." (Rom. 6:9.) The Second Death should be 
dreaded and shunned by all, since it is to be the end of 
existence to all those deemed unworthy of life. But 
in it there can be no suffering. Like Adamic death, it 
is the extinction of life. 

It is because through sin mankind had become 
subject to death (sheol, hades) that Christ Jesus came 
to deliver us and save us from death. (I John 3:8; 
Heb. 2:14.) Death is a cessation of existence, the absence 
of life. There is no difference between the conditions 
in the Adamic and Second deaths, but there is 
hope of a release from the first, while from the second 
there will be no release, no return to life. The first 
death sentence passed upon all on account of Adam's 
sin, while the Second Death can be incurred only by 
wilful, individual sin. 

That the application of our text belongs to the 
coming age is evident, for both saints and sinners go 
into sheol or hades now. This Scripture indicates that, 
in the time when it applies, only the wicked shall go 
there. And the nations that forget God must be nations 
that have known him, else they could not forget 
him; and never yet have the nations been brought to 
that knowledge, nor will they be until the coming 
time, when the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth, and none shall need to say unto his neighbor, 
Know thou the Lord, for all shall know him, from 
the least to the greatest of them.— Isa. 1 1:9; Jer. 31:34. 

The Hebrew word goi, rendered "nations" in this 
verse, is elsewhere used by the same writer and rendered 
"heathen," "Gentiles" and "people." The thought 
seems to be,— any who do not become God's covenant 
people, even though they be not openly wicked. The 
nations (Gentiles, all who under that full knowledge 
do not become Israelites indeed) who are forgetful 
or negligent of God's favors enjoyed, and of their 
duties and obligations to him, shall share the fate of 
the wilfully "wicked," and be cast into the Second 
Death. 



In further proof of this, we find that the Hebrew 
word shub, which in our text is translated "turned," 
signifies turned back, as to a previous place or condition. 
Those referred to in this text either have been 
in sheol or are liable to enter it, but being redeemed by 
the precious blood of Christ, will be brought out of 
sheol. If then they are wicked, they, and all who forget 
God, shall be turned back or returned to sheol. 

page 44 

DID THE JEWS BELIEVE IN EVERLASTING 
TORMENT? 



Noting that we teach that the doctrine of everlasting 
torment was engrafted upon the doctrines of the 
Christian Church during the period of the apostasy, 
the great falling away which culminated in Papacy, 
some have inquired whether it does not seem, according 
to the works of Josephus, that this doctrine was 
firmly held by the Jews; and, if so, they ask, does it not 
seem evident that the early Christians, being largely 
converts from Judaism, brought this doctrine with 
them, in the very outstart of Christianity? 

We answer, No; the doctrine of everlasting torment 
sprang naturally from the doctrine of human 
immortality, which as a philosophic question was first 
promulgated in anything like the present form by the 
Platonic school of Grecian philosophy. These first 
affirmed that each man contained a fragment of deity, 
and that this would prevent him from ever dying. This 
foundation laid, it was as easy to describe a place for 
evil-doers as for well-doers. But to the credit of those 
heathen philosophers be it recorded that they failed 
to develop, or at least to manifest, that depth of degradation 
from benevolence and reason and pity, necessary 
to paint, by word and pen and brush, such 
details of horrors and agonies as were soon incorporated 
into their doctrine, and a belief thereof declared 
"necessary to salvation" in the professed church of 
Christ. 

To appreciate the case, it is necessary to remember 
that, when the Christian Church was established, 
Greece stood at the head of intelligence and civilization. 
Alexander the Great had conquered the world, 
and had spread respect for Greece everywhere; and 
though, from a military point of view, Rome had taken 
her place, it was otherwise in literature. For centuries, 
Grecian philosophers and philosophies led the intellectual 
world, and impregnated and affected everything. 
It became customary for philosophers and 
teachers of other theories to claim that their systems 
and theories were nearly the same as those of the Grecians, 
and to endeavor to remove differences between 



their old theories and the popular Grecian views. And 
some sought to make capital by claiming that their 
system embraced all the good points of Platonism with 
others which Plato did not see. 

Of this class were the teachers in the Christian 
Church in the second, third and fourth centuries. Conceding 
the popularly accepted correctness of the philosophers, 
they claimed that the same good features 
of philosophy were found in Christ's teachings, and 
that he was one of the greatest philosophers, etc. Thus 
a blending of Platonism and Christianity took place. 
This became the more pronounced as kings and emperors 
began to scrutinize religious teachings, and to 
favor those most likely to awe the people and make 
them law-abiding. While heathen teachers were 
truckling to such imperial scrutiny, and teaching an 
everlasting punishment for those who violated the 
laws of the emperors (who ruled as divinely appointed), 
we cannot suppose otherwise than that the ambitious 
characters in the church at that time, who were seeking 
to displace heathenism and to become the dominant 
religious power instead, would make prominent 
such doctrines as would in the eyes of the emperors 
seem to have an equal hold upon the fears and prejudices 
of the people. And what could be more to 
the purpose than the doctrine of the endless torment 
of the refractory? 

The same motives evidently operated with Josephus 
when writing concerning the belief of the Jews. 
His works should be read as apologies for Judaism, 
and as efforts to exalt that nation in the eyes of Rome 
and the world. It should be remembered that the 
Jews had the reputation of being a very rebellious 
people, very unwilling to be ruled even by the Caesars. 
They were hoping, in harmony with God's promises, 
to become the chief nation. Many rebellious outbreaks 
had occurred among them, and their peculiar 
religion, different from all others, came in for its share 
of blame for favoring too much the spirit of liberty. 

Josephus had an object in writing his two principal 
works, "Antiquities" and "Wars of the Jews." 
He wrote them in the Greek language while living at 
Rome, where he was the friend and guest successively 
of the Roman emperors Vespasian, Titus and Domitian, 
and where he was in constant contact with the 
Grecian philosophers. These books were written for 
the purpose of showing off the Jewish people, their 
courage, laws, ethics, etc., to the best advantage before 
the Grecian philosophers and Roman dignitaries. This 
object is covertly admitted in his preface to his "Antiquities," 
in which he says: 

"I have undertaken the present work as thinking 
it will appear to all the Greeks worthy of their study. 
...Those that read my book may wonder that my discourse 
of laws and historical facts contains so much of 
philosophy. ...However, those that have a mind 



to know the reasons of everything may find here a 
very curious philosophical theory." 

In a word, as a shrewd man who himself had 
become imbued with the spirit of the Grecian philosophers 
then prevailing, Josephus drew from the Law 
and the Prophets, and from the traditions of the elders 
and the theories of the various sects of the Jews, all he 
could find that in the most remote degree would tend 
to show:— 

First, that the Jewish religion was not far behind 
popular Grecian philosophy; but that somewhat analogous 
theories had been drawn from Moses' Law, and 
held by some Jews, long before the Grecian philosophers 
broached them. 

Secondly, that it was not their religious ideas 
which made the Jews as a people hard to control or 
"rebellious," as all liberty-lovers were esteemed by the 
Caesars. Hence he attempts to prove, at a time when 
virtue was esteemed to consist mainly in submission, 
that Moses' Law "taught first of all that God is the 
Father and Lord of all things, and bestows a happy life 
upon those that follow him, but plunges such as do 
not walk in the paths of virtue into inevitable miseries." 
And it is in support of this idea, and for such 
purposes, evidently, that Josephus, after saying: 
"There are three philosophical sects among the Jews; 
first, the Pharisees; second, the Sadducees, and third, 
the Essenes," proceeds to give an account of their 
three theories; especially detailing any features which 
resembled Grecian philosophy. And because the 
last and least, the Essenes, most resembled the doctrines 
of the Stoics and leading Grecian theories, 
Josephus devotes nearly ten times as much space 
to their views as to the views of both Sadducees 

page 45 

and Pharisees combined. And yet the Essenes 
were so insignificant a sect that the New Testament 
does not even mention them, while Josephus 
himself admits they were few. Whatever views they 
held, therefore, on any subject, cannot be claimed as 
having Jewish sanction, when the vast majority of 
Jews held contrary opinions. The very fact that our 
Lord and the apostles did not refer to them is good 
evidence that the Essenes' philosophy by no means 
represented the Jewish ideas. This small sect probably 
grew up later and probably absorbed from 
Grecian philosophy its ideas concerning immortality 
and the everlasting torment of the non-virtuous. 
It should be remembered that Josephus 
was not born until three years after our Lord's 
crucifixion, and that he published his "Wars" A.D. 75 
and "Antiquities" A.D. 93— at a time when he and 
other Jews, like all the rest of the world, were eagerly 
swallowing Grecian philosophy and science falsely so 



called, against which Paul warned the church.— Col. 2:8; 
I Tim. 6:20. 

Josephus directed special attention to the Essenes 
because it suited his object to do so. He admits that the 
Sadducees, next to the largest body of Jewish people, 
did not believe in human immortality. And of the Pharisees' 
views he makes a blind statement, calculated to 
mislead, as follows: "They also believe that souls have 
an immortal vigor in them [This might be understood 
to mean that the Pharisees did not believe as the Sadducees 
that death ended all existence, but believed in 
a vigor or life beyond the grave— by a resurrection 
of the dead], and that under the earth there will be rewards 
and punishments, according as they have lived 
virtuously or viciously in this life; and that the latter 
are to be detained in an everlasting prison [death— not 
torture], but that the former [the virtuous] shall have 
power to revive and live again." 

Is it not apparent that Josephus has whittled and 
stretched the views of the Pharisees, as much as his 
elastic conscience would allow, to show a harmony 
between them and the philosophies of Greece? Paul, 
who had been a Pharisee, contradicts Josephus. While 
Josephus says they believed "that only the virtuous 
would revive and live again [Does not this imply 
a resurrection, and imply also that the others would 
not live again, but remain dead, in the great prison 
—the tomb?]" Paul, on the contrary, says: "I have 
hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, 
that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of 
the just and unjust."— Acts 24:15. 

We have no hesitancy about accepting the testimony 
of the inspired Apostle Paul, not only in regard 
to what the Jews believed, but also as to what he and the 
early Church believed; and we repeat, that the theory 
of the everlasting torment of the wicked, based upon 
the theory that the human soul cannot die, is contrary 
to both the Old and the New Testament teachings, 
and was introduced among Jews and Christians 
by Grecian Philosophers. Thank God for the purer 
philosophy of the Scriptures, which teaches that the 
death of the soul (being) is the penalty of sin (Ezek. 18:20); 
that all souls condemned through Adam's sin 
were redeemed by Christ's soul (Isa. 53:10); and that 
only for wilful, individual sin will any die the Second 
Death— an everlasting punishment, but not an everlasting 
torment. 

CHOOSE LIFE THAT YE MAY LIVE. 



"I have set before thee this day life and good, 
death and evil." "I have set before thee life and 
death, blessing and cursing; therefore choose life, that 
both thou and thy seed may live."— Deut. 30:15,19. 



We come now to the consideration of other Scripture 
statements in harmony with the conclusions set 
forth in the preceding articles. 

The words here quoted are from Moses to Israel. 
To appreciate them we must remember that Israel 
as a people, and all their covenants, sacrifices, etc., had 
a typical significance. 

God knew that they could not obtain life by keeping 
the Law, no matter how much they would choose 
to do so, because they, like all others of the fallen race, 
were weak, depraved through the effect of the "sour 
grape" of sin which Adam had eaten, and which his 
children had continued to eat. (Jer. 31:29.) Thus, 
as Paul declares, the Law given to Israel could not 
give them life because of the weaknesses or depravity 
of their fallen nature. -Rom. 8:3; Heb. 7:19; 10:1-10. 

Nevertheless, God foresaw a benefit to them from 
even an unsuccessful attempt to live perfectly; namely, 
that it would develop them, as well as show them the 
need of the better sacrifice (the ransom which our Lord 
Jesus gave) and a greater deliverer than Moses. And 
with all this their trial furnished a pattern or shadow 
of the individual trial insured to the whole world 
(which Israel typified) and secured by the better sacrifices 
for sin, which were there prefigured, to be accomplished 
by the great prophet of whom Moses was 
but a type. 

Thus seeing that the trial for life or death presented 
to Israel was but typical of the individual trial 
of the whole world, and its issues of life and death (of 
eternal life or the Second Death), may help some to see 
that the great thousand-year-day of trial, of which our 
Lord Jesus has been appointed the Judge, contains the 
two issues, life and death. All will then be called upon 
to decide, under that most favorable opportunity, for 
righteousness and life or sin and death, and a choice 
must be made. And, although there will be rewards 
and "stripes" according to the deeds of the present 
life, as well as according to their conduct under that 
trial (John 3:19; Matt. 10:42; Matt. 11:20-24), the 
verdict in the end will be in harmony with the choice 
expressed by the conduct of each during that age of 
trial. 

The second trial, its sentence and its result, are 
also shown in the words of Moses quoted by Peter 
(Acts 3:22,23): "A Prophet shall the Lord your God 
raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me. 
Him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall 
say unto you. And it shall come to pass that every 
soul [being] which will not hear [obey] that Prophet 
[and thus choose life] shall be destroyed from among 
the people." In few words this calls attention to the 
world's great trial, yet future. It shows the great 
Prophet or Teacher raised up by God to give a new 
judgment or trial to the condemned race which he has 
redeemed from the condemnation which came upon 



it through its progenitor, Adam. It shows, too, the 
conditions of eternal life to be righteous obedience, 
and that with the close of that trial some will be 

page 46 

judged worthy of that life, and some worthy of destruction 
—the Second Death. 

Our Lord Jesus, having redeemed all by his perfect 
and precious sacrifice, is the Head of this great 
Prophet; and during the Gospel age God has been selecting 
the members of his Body, who, with Christ 
Jesus, shall be God's agents in judging the world. 
Together they will be that Great Prophet or Teacher 
promised. "Do ye not know that the saints shall judge 
the world?"— I Cor. 6:2. 

The first trial was of mankind only, and hence 
its penalty or curse, the first death, was only upon 
man. But the second trial is to be much more comprehensive. 
It will not only be the trial of fallen and 
imperfect mankind, but it will include every other 
thing and principle and being out of harmony with 
Jehovah. "God will bring every work into judgment, 
with every secret thing." 

The "judgment to come" will include the judgment 
to condemnation of all false systems— civil, 
social and religious. These will be judged, condemned 
and banished early in the Millennial day, the light 
of truth causing them to come into disrepute and 
therefore to pass away. This judgment comes first, in 
order that the trial of man may proceed unhindered 
by error, prejudice, etc. It will also include the trial of 
"the angels which sinned"— those angels "which kept 
not their first estate" of purity and obedience to God. 
Thus it is written by the Apostle of the members of the 
Body of the great Prophet and High Priest, who is 
to be Judge of all— "Know ye not that the saints shall 
judge angels?"— I Cor. 6:3. 

This being the case, the condemnation of the 
Millennial trial (destruction, Second Death) will cover 
a wider range of offenders than the penalty or curse 
for the sin of Adam, which "passed upon all men." 
In a word, the destruction at the close of the trial will 
be the utter destruction of every being and every 
thing which will not glorify God and be of use and 
blessing to his general creation. 



page 46 

FORGIVABLE AND UNPARDONABLE SINS. 



IN THE preceding pages we briefly show the extreme penalty 



for wilful sin. Adam's penalty, which involved his 
entire race, was of this sort; and only as the result of 
Christ's death as our ransom from that penalty of that wilful 
sin, is any forgiveness of it or subsequent sins possible. 

Forgivable sins are those which result from weaknesses 
incurred through that one Adamic sin which Christ settled 
once for all. They are such as are not wilful, but are committed 
through ignorance or weaknesses of the flesh. God 
stands pledged to forgive all such sins upon our repentance, 
in the name and merit of Christ's sacrifice. 

Unpardonable sins, sins which cannot be forgiven, are 
such as are wilfully done. As the penalty of the first wilful 
sin was death— extinction of being— so death is the penalty of 
every wilful sin against full knowledge and ability to choose 
and to do the right. This is called Second Death, in distinction 
from the first or Adamic penalty, from which Christ's 
ransom sacrifice will release all mankind. 

The "sin unto [Second] Death," for the forgiveness of 
which the Apostle declares it is useless to pray (I John 5:16), 
is not only a wilful sin but a sin against clear knowledge; a 
sin for which no adequate excuse can be found. Because it 
is a sin against clear knowledge, or enlightenment in holiness; 
it is called the "sin against the Holy Spirit" (Matt. 12:31,32), 
for which there is no forgiveness. 

But there are other partly-wilful sins, which are, therefore, 
partially unpardonable. In such the temptations within 
and without (all of which are directly or indirectly results of 
the fall) have a share;— the will consenting under the pressure 
of the temptation or because of the weakness. The Lord 
alone knows how to properly estimate our responsibilities and 
guilt in such cases. But to the true child of God there is but 
one proper course to take;— repentance and an appeal for 
mercy in the name and merit of Christ, the great sacrifice for 
sin. The Lord will forgive such a penitent, in the sense of 
restoring him to his favor; but he will be made to suffer 
"stripes" (Luke 12:47,48) for the sin, in proportion as God 
sees it to have been wilfully committed. 

Not infrequently a conscientious person realizes that he 
has committed sin, and that it had some wilfulness in it. He 
properly feels condemned, guilty before God; realizing his 
own guilt, and forgetting the fountain for sin and uncleanness, 
opened by God for our weak, fallen race, he falls into 
a state of sadness, believing that he has committed the sin 
unto death. Such wander in deserts drear, until they find the 
cleansing fountain. Let such remember, however, that the very 
facts of their sorrow for sin and their desire to return to divine 
favor are proofs that they have not committed the sin 
unto death; for the Apostle declares that those who commit 
sin of this sort cannot be renewed unto repentance. (Heb. 6:6.) 
Penitents, then, may always feel confident that their 
sins were in part, at least, results of the fall, and hence not 
unto death, but requiring forgiveness and stripes. 

Such is the wonderful provision of God, through Christ, 
for the acceptance of every soul which, forsaking sin and the 
love of it, seeks righteousness and life through him who is 
the Way, as well as the Truth and the Life. Thus all, whether 



naturally stronger or weaker, have an equal opportunity to 

gain everlasting life as well as to gain the great prize of joint-heirship 

with Christ. 

FUTURE RETRIBUTION. 



While the Scriptures teach that the present Gospel age is 
the Church's Judgment-day or period of trial, and that the 
world's Judgment-day or time of trial will be the Millennial 
age, it is, nevertheless, a reasonable question to ask,— To what 
extent will those who are not of the consecrated Church be 
held responsible, in the Millennial age, for their misdeeds, of 
cruelty, dishonesty and immorality, of the present time? And 
to what extent will those of the same class then be rewarded 
for present efforts to live moral and benevolent lives? 

These are important questions, especially to the world; 
and well would it be for them if they could realize their importance 
and profit thereby. They are important also to the 
Church, because of our interest in the world, and because of 

page 47 

our desire to understand and teach correctly our Father's 
plans. 

We have learned that the sacrifice of Christ secures for 
all mankind, however vile, an awakening from death, and the 
privilege of thereafter coming to perfection, and, if they will, 
of living forever. "There shall be a resurrection of the dead, 
both of the just and the unjust." (Acts 24:15.) The object 
of their being again brought into existence will be to give 
them a favorable opportunity to secure everlasting life, on the 
conditions which God requires— obedience to his righteous 
will. We have no intimation whatever in the Scriptures that, 
when awakened, the moral condition of men will have changed, 
but we have much, in both reason and revelation, to show 
that as they went into death weak and depraved so they will 
come out of it. As there is "no work, nor device, nor knowledge, 
nor wisdom in the grave" (Eccl. 9:10), they will have 
learned nothing; and since they were sinners and unworthy of 
life and divine favor when they died, they will still be unworthy; 
and as they have received neither full rewards nor 
full punishments for the deeds of the present life, it is evident 
that just such a time of awakening as God has promised 
during the Millennium is necessary;— for rewarding, and punishing, 
and giving to all mankind the opportunity for eternal 
life secured by Christ's great ransom-sacrifice. 

While, strictly speaking, the world is not now on trial: 
that is, the present is not the time for its full and complete 
trial, yet men are not now, nor have they ever been, entirely 
without light and ability, for the use of which they are accountable. 
In the darkest days of the world's history, and in 
the deepest degradation of savage life, there has always been 
at least a measure of the light of conscience pointing more or 
less directly to righteousness and virtue. That the deeds of 



the present life have much to do with the future, Paul taught 
very clearly when, before Felix, he reasoned of justice and 
self-government, in view of the judgment to come, so that 
Felix trembled.— Acts 24:25, Diaglott translation. 

At the first advent of our Lord, an increased measure 
of light came to men, and to that extent increased their responsibility, 
as he said: "This is the condemnation, that light 
is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than 
light, because their deeds were evil." (John 3:19.) For those 
evil deeds committed against the light possessed, whether of 
conscience or of revelation, men will have to give an account, 
and will receive, in their day of judgment, a just recompense 
of reward. And, likewise, to the extent of their effort to live 
righteously: they will receive their reward in the day of trial. 
-Matt. 10:42. 

If men would consider what even reason discerns, that a 
time of reckoning, of judgment, is coming, that God will not 
forever permit evil to triumph, and that in some way he will 
punish evil-doers, it would undoubtedly save them many sorrows 
and chastisements in the age to come. Said the Prophet, 
"Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from 
the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say, 
Who seeth us? and who knoweth us?" (Isaiah 29:15.) Behold, 
"The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding 
the evil and the good" (Prov. 15:3); and "God shall bring 
every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether 
it be good, or whether it be evil." (Eccl. 12:14.) He "will 
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make 
manifest the counsels of the hearts."— I Cor. 4:5. 

The age of Christ's reign will be a time of just judgment; 
and though it will be an age of golden opportunities 
to all, it will be a time of severe discipline, trial and punishment 
to many. That the judgment will be fair and impartial, 
and with due consideration for the circumstances and 
the opportunities of each individual, is also assured— by the 
character of the Judge (the Christ— John 5:22; I Cor. 6:2), 
by his perfect knowledge, by his unwavering justice and 
goodness, by his divine power and by his great love as shown 
in his sacrifice to redeem men from death, that they might 
enjoy the privilege of this favorable, individual trial. 

The varied circumstances and opportunities of men, in 
this and past ages, indicate that a just judgment will recognize 
differences in the degree of individual responsibility, 
which will also necessitate differences in the Lord's future 
dealings with them. And this reasonable deduction we find 
clearly confirmed by the Scriptures. The Judge has been, 
and still is, taking minute cognizance of men's actions and 
words (Prov. 5:21), although they have been entirely unaware 
of it; and he declares that "Every idle ["pernicious," 
injurious or malicious] word that men shall speak, they shall 
give account thereof in the day of judgment" (Matt. 12:36); 
and that even a cup of cold water, given to one of his little 
ones, because he is Christ's, shall in nowise lose its reward. 
(Matt. 10:42.) The context shows that the "pernicious" 
words to which Jesus referred were words of wilful 
and malicious opposition spoken against manifest light. 



(Matt. 12:24,31,32.) He also affirmed that it would be more 
tolerable for Tyre, Sidon and Sodom in the day of judgment 
than for Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum, which 
had misimproved greater advantages of light and 
opportunity. --Matt. 11:20-24. 

In the very nature of things, we can see that the punishments 
of that age will be in proportion to past guilt. Every 
sin indulged, and every evil propensity cultivated, hardens 
the heart and makes the way back to purity and virtue more 
difficult. Consequently, sins wilfully indulged now, will require 
punishment and discipline in the age to come; and 
the more deeply the soul is dyed in willing sin, the more 
severe will be the measures required to correct it. As a 
wise parent would punish a wayward child, so Christ will 
punish the wicked for their good. 

His punishments will always be administered injustice, 
tempered with mercy, and relieved by his approval and reward 
to those who are rightly exercised thereby. And it 
will only be when punishments, instructions and encouragements 
fail; in short, when love and mercy have done all that 
wisdom can approve (which is all that could be asked), that 
any will meet the final punishment which his case demands— 
the Second Death. 

None of the world will meet that penalty until they have 
first had all the blessed opportunities of the age to come. 
And while this is true of the world, the same principle applies 
now to the consecrated children of God in this our judgment 
(trial) day. We now receive God's favors (through faith), 
while the world will receive them in the next age, viz., instruction, 
assistance, encouragement, discipline and punishment. 
"For what son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? 
But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, 
then are ye bastards and not sons." Therefore, when we receive 
grievous chastisement, we should accept it as from a 
loving Father for our correction, not forgetting "the exhortation 
which speaketh unto us as unto children, My son, 
despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when 
thou art rebuked of him; for whom the Lord loveth he 
chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth."— 
Heb. 12:4-13. 

How just and equal are God's ways! Read carefully the 
rules of the coming age.— Jer. 31:29-34 and Ezek. 18:20-32. 

page 48 

They prove to us, beyond the possibility of a doubt, the sincerity 

and reality of all his professions of love to men: "As 

I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death 

of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and 

live: Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye 

die?"-Ezek. 33:11. 

All who in this life repent of sin, and, as the term repentance 
implies, begin and continue the work of reformation 
to the best of their ability, will form character which will 
be a benefit to them in the age to come; when awakened in 
the resurrection age, they will be to that extent advanced 



towards perfection, and their progress will be more rapid and 
easy; while with others it will be more slow, tedious and difficult. 
This is implied in the words of our Lord (John 5:29,30 
— Diaglott): "The hour is coming in the which all that 
are in their graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; 
they that have done good unto the resurrection of life [those 
whose trial is past, and who were judged worthy of life, will 
be raised perfect— the faithful of past ages to perfect human 
life, the overcomers of the gospel age to perfect life as divine 
beings], and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection 
of judgment."— These are awakened to judgment— to receive 
a course of discipline and correction— as the necessary means 
for their perfecting, or, otherwise, their condemnation to the 
Second Death. 

The man who, in this life, by fraud and injustice, accumulated 
and hoarded great wealth, which was scattered 
to the winds when he was laid in the dust, will doubtless 
awake to lament his loss, and bewail his poverty and his 
utter inability under the new order of things to repeat unlawful 
measures to accumulate a fortune. With many it will 
be a severe chastisement and a bitter experience to overcome 
the propensities to avarice, selfishness, pride, ambition and 
idleness, fostered and pampered for years in the present life. 
Occasionally we see an illustration of this form of punishment 
now, when a man of great wealth suddenly loses all, 
and the haughty spirit of himself and family must fall. 

We are told (Dan. 12:2) that some shall awake to shame 
and age-lasting contempt. And who can doubt that, when 
every secret thing is brought into judgment (Eccl. 12: 14), 
and the dark side of many a character that now stands measurably 
approved among men is then made known, many a 
face will blush and hide itself in confusion? When the man 
who steals is required to refund the stolen property to its 
rightful owner, with the addition of twenty per cent, interest, 
and the man who deceives, falsely accuses or otherwise 
wrongs his neighbor, is required to acknowledge his crimes 
and so far as possible to repair damages, on peril of an eternal 
loss of life, will not this be retributive justice? Note the 
clear statement of this in God's typical dealings with Israel, 
whom he made to represent the world.— I Cor. 10:11; Lev. 6:1-7. 
See also "Tabernacle Shadows," page 99. 

As we are thus permitted to look into the perfect plan of 
God, how forcibly we are reminded of his word through the 
prophet Isaiah, "Judgment also will I lay to the line, and 
righteousness to the plummet." (Isa. 28:17.) We also see the 
wholesome influence of such discipline. Parents, in disciplining 
their children, realize the imperative necessity of making 
their punishments proportionate to the character of the 
offences; and so in God's government: great punishments 
following great offences are not greater than is necessary 
to establish justice and to effect great moral reforms. 

Seeing that the Lord will thus equitably adjust human 
affairs in his own due time, we can afford to endure hardness 
for the present, and resist evil with good, even at the cost of 
present disadvantages. Therefore, "Recompense to no man 
evil for evil." "Let this mind be in you, which was also in 



Christ Jesus our Lord."-Rom. 12:17-19; Phil. 2:5. 

The present order of things will not always continue: a 
time of reckoning is coming. The just Judge of all the earth 
says, "Vengeance is mine, I will repay"; and the Apostle 
Peter adds, "The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly 
out of temptation and to reserve the unjust unto the day of 
judgment to be punished." (2 Pet. 2:9.) And, as we have 
seen, those punishments will be adapted to the nature of the 
offences, and the benevolent object in view— man's permanent 
establishment in righteousness. 

Other Scriptures corroborative of this view of future 
rewards and punishments are as follows: 2 Sam. 3:39; Matt. 16:27; 
I Pet. 3:12; Psa. 19:11; 91:8; Prov. 1 1:18; Isa. 40:10; 
49:4; Matt. 5:12; 10:41,42; Luke 6:35; Rev. 22:12; 
Rom. 14:11,12. 

LET HONESTY AND TRUTH PREVAIL 



Having demonstrated that neither the Bible nor reason 
offers the slightest support to the doctrine that eternal torment 
is the penalty for sin, we note the fact that the various 
church creeds, and confessions, and hymn-books, and theological 
treatises, are its only supports; and that under the 
increasing light of our day, and the consequent emancipation 
of reason, belief in this horrible, fiendish doctrine of the 
dark ages is fast dying out. But alas! this is not because 
Christian people generally are zealous for the truth of God's 
Word and for his character, and willing to destroy their grim 
creed-idols. Ah no! they still bow before their admitted 
falsities; they still pledge themselves to their defense, and 
spend time and money for their support, though at heart 
ashamed of them, and privately denying them. 

The general influence of all this is, to cause the honest-hearted 
of the world to despise Christianity and the Bible; 
and to make hypocrites and semi-infidels of nominal Christians. 
Because the nominal church clings to this old blasphemy, 
and falsely presents its own error as the teaching of 
the Bible, the Word of God, though still nominally reverenced, 
is being practically repudiated. Thus the Bible, the 
great anchor of truth and liberty, is being cut loose from, 
by the very ones who, if not deceived regarding its teachings, 
would be held and blessed by it. 

The general effect, not far distant, will be, first open infidelity, 
then anarchy. For much, very much of this, lukewarm 
Christians, both in pulpits and pews, who know or 
ought to know better, are responsible. Many such are willing 
to compromise the truth, to slander God's character, and 
to stultify and deceive themselves, for the sake of peace, or 
ease, or present earthly advantage. And any minister, who, 
by uttering a word for an unpopular truth, will risk the loss 
of his stipend and his reputation for being "established" in 
the bog of error, is considered a bold man, even though he 
ignominiously withhold his name from his published protests. 

If professed Christians would be honest with themselves 



and true to God, they would soon learn that "their fear 

toward God is taught by the precepts of men." (Isa. 29:13.) 

If all would decide to let God be true, though it should prove 

every man a liar (Rom. 3:4), and show all human creeds to 

be imperfect and misleading, there would be a great creed-smashing 

work done very shortly. Then the Bible would be 

studied and appreciated as never before; and its testimony 

that the wages of sin is death (extinction), would be recognized 

as a "just recompense of reward." 



We have given foregoing but a mere suggestion of the light 
now shining in "due season" for the "household of faith." We 
invite correspondence from all who "hunger and thirst after right." 
We have free tracts, and books to loan to the poor in spirit 
who are poor also in purse. See page 2. 



page 49 



SEMI-MONTHLY 