Draw Close to God
A Lover of Justice
Hebrews 10:26-31
HAVE you ever been a victim of unjust or cruel treatment, perhaps by someone who appeared to get away with it and showed no remorse? Few things can be harder to cope with than such gross inequity, especially if the pain was inflicted by someone whom you expected to love you and care for you. You may wonder, ‘Why does God allow such things to happen?’a The truth is that Jehovah God hates all injustice. His Word, the Bible, assures us that hard-hearted practicers of sin will not escape divine retribution. Let us consider the apostle Paul’s words recorded at Hebrews 10:26-31.
Paul writes: “If we practice sin willfully after having received the accurate knowledge of the truth, there is no longer any sacrifice for sins left.” (Verse 26) Willful sinners are most reprehensible. Why? First, they do not commit an isolated sin in a moment of weakness—the kind of mistake we all make at times because we are imperfect. They make a practice of sin. Second, their sins are intentional. As The Bible in Basic English puts it, they “do evil on purpose.” Deeply ingrained badness fills their heart. Third, their sins are not the result of ignorance. They have an “accurate knowledge of the truth” about God’s will and ways.
How does God view unrepentant, malicious sinners? “There is no longer any sacrifice for sins left,” says Paul. The sacrifice of Christ—God’s gift to humankind—covers the sins we commit because of our imperfection. (1 John 2:1, 2) But those who practice sin without repentance show that they have no regard for this precious gift. In God’s eyes, they have “trampled upon the Son of God and . . . esteemed as of ordinary value the blood of” Jesus. (Verse 29) By their course, they show contempt for Jesus and treat his blood “as a cheap thing,” as having no more value than that of any imperfect human. (Today’s English Version) Such ingrates are in no position to benefit from Christ’s sacrifice.
What can the wicked expect? The God of justice has promised: “Vengeance is mine; I will recompense.” (Verse 30) Let all who are bent on practicing sin at the expense of others beware. No one can flout God’s righteous laws with impunity. Often, their wicked ways catch up with them. (Galatians 6:7) At the latest, they will stand before God in the near future when he comes to rid this earth of all injustice. (Proverbs 2:21, 22) Paul warns: “It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.”—Verse 31.
Learning that Jehovah God does not condone willful sin is both comforting and reassuring, especially for those who have been hurt by a hardened wrongdoer. We can confidently leave the avenging of wrong squarely in the hands of God, who hates all injustice.
[Footnote]
For a discussion of why God has allowed suffering, see pages 106-114 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

