Our Readers Ask
Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe That They Are the Only Ones Who Will Be Saved?
Jehovah’s Witnesses think that they have found the true religion. If they did not think so, they would change their beliefs. Like adherents of many religious faiths, Jehovah’s Witnesses hope to be saved. However, they also believe that it is not their job to judge who will be saved. Ultimately, God is the Judge. He decides.—Isaiah 33:22.
God’s Word reveals that those who would be saved must not only want salvation but also cooperate with the Savior. To illustrate: Suppose that a hiker becomes lost in a wilderness. He desperately wants to find his way out. Will he perish, or will he survive? The outcome depends on the way he responds to help. Out of pride, he may refuse the help of a rescuer, or savior. On the other hand, he could humbly accept help and reach safety.
In a similar way, salvation belongs to those who cooperate with mankind’s Rescuer, Jehovah God. Salvation is a gift from God, yet not all people will attain it. God’s Son, Jesus, said: “Not everyone saying to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter into the kingdom of the heavens, but the one doing the will of my Father who is in the heavens will.”—Matthew 7:21.
Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that God saves only those who exercise faith in the ransom sacrifice of Jesus and closely follow Jesus’ teachings. (Acts 4:10-12) Consider three important requirements for salvation that are revealed in God’s Word.
(1) “By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves,” Jesus told his companions. (John 13:35) Jesus’ own example of giving his life in behalf of others stressed the importance of love. Those who love others are demonstrating a quality vital for salvation.
(2) “I have made your name known to them,” said Jesus in prayer to his Father. (John 17:26) Jesus knew how important God’s personal name, Jehovah, was to his Father. Jesus prayed for his Father’s name to “be sanctified.” (Matthew 6:9) Sanctifying God’s name includes knowing that name and treating it as important and holy. Like Jesus, those seeking salvation need to use God’s name. They also need to teach others about God’s name and qualities. (Matthew 28:19, 20) In fact, only those calling on God’s name will be saved.—Romans 10:13.
(3) “My kingdom is no part of this world,” Jesus said to Pontius Pilate. (John 18:36) Few today demonstrate faith in God’s Kingdom, or government, of which Jesus is King. Instead, they place their trust in human institutions. By contrast, those who will be saved loyally support God’s Kingdom and teach others about how it will liberate all faithful mankind.—Matthew 4:17.
After learning some of the requirements for salvation, Jesus’ disciples said: “Who possibly can be saved?” Jesus answered: “The things impossible with men are possible with God.” (Luke 18:18-30) Jehovah’s Witnesses diligently try to meet these requirements for salvation. They also work hard to help others to be saved.

