What We Learn From Jesus
About God’s Kingdom
What is God’s Kingdom?
God’s Kingdom is a government that will rule the whole earth. Jesus said: “You must pray, then, this way: . . . ‘Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.’”—Matthew 6:9, 10; Daniel 2:44.
Who will be the rulers of God’s Kingdom?
Jesus was born to be the Ruler of God’s Kingdom. An angel told Jesus’ mother: “Jehovah God will give him the throne of David his father, and he will rule as king.” (Luke 1:30-33) Additionally, Jesus chose some of his followers to rule with him. He said to his apostles: “You are the ones that have stuck with me in my trials; and I make a covenant with you, just as my Father has made a covenant with me, for a kingdom.” (Luke 22:28, 29; Daniel 7:27) A total of 144,000 of Jesus’ followers will rule along with him.—Revelation 5:9, 10; 14:1.
Where will the government be located?
God’s Kingdom will rule from heaven. Jesus said to his disciples: “If I go my way and prepare a place for you [in heaven], I am coming again and will receive you home to myself, that where I am you also may be. . . . I am going my way to the Father.”—John 14:2, 3, 12; Daniel 7:13, 14.
What will God’s Kingdom do about evil?
Jesus will cleanse the earth of wicked people. Jesus said: “When the Son of man [Jesus] arrives in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit down on his glorious throne. And all the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate people one from another . . . And these [wicked ones] will depart into everlasting cutting-off, but the righteous ones into everlasting life.”—Matthew 25:31-34, 46.
Who will live on earth as subjects of the Kingdom?
Jesus said: “Happy are the mild-tempered ones, since they will inherit the earth.” (Matthew 5:5; Psalm 37:29; 72:8) The earth will be filled with people who are even now learning to love one another. Jesus said to his followers: “I am giving you a new commandment, that you love one another; just as I have loved you, that you also love one another. By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.”—John 13:34, 35.
What will God’s Kingdom do for mankind on earth?
Jesus will cure mankind of disease. While on earth, Jesus spoke to the crowds “about the kingdom of God, and he healed those needing a cure.” (Luke 9:11) After seeing the resurrected Jesus in a vision, the apostle John said: “I saw a new heaven and a new earth . . . I heard a loud voice from the throne say: ‘Look! The tent of God is with mankind . . . And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more.’”—Revelation 21:1-4.
God’s Kingdom will restore Paradise to the earth. An evildoer who was executed with Jesus said: “Jesus, remember me when you get into your kingdom.” And Jesus said to him: “Truly I tell you today, You will be with me in Paradise.”—Luke 23:42, 43; Isaiah 11:4-9.
For more information, see chapter 8 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach?a
[Footnote]
Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

