Our Readers Ask
Are Natural Disasters Punishment From God?
God does not use natural disasters to punish innocent people. He never has, and he never will. Why? Because “God is love,” says the Bible at 1 John 4:8.
Love is the wellspring of God’s actions. Love does not call down hurt on the innocent, for the Bible states that “love does not work evil to one’s neighbor.” (Romans 13:10) At Job 34:12, the Bible states: “For a fact, God himself does not act wickedly.”
True, the Bible foretold disasters for our day, such as “great earthquakes.” (Luke 21:11) But Jehovah is no more responsible for the destruction caused by them than a weatherman is responsible for the damage done by a typhoon that he forecasts. Well, if God is not behind the human suffering wrought by natural disasters, what is the cause?
“The whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one,” Satan the Devil, reveals the Bible. (1 John 5:19) He has been a manslayer from his rebellion at mankind’s beginning down to our day. (John 8:44) Satan sees human life as cheap and disposable. He is governed by self-serving ambition, so it is no wonder that he has created a global system that thrives on selfishness. Today’s world system condones human exploitation even to the point that many defenseless people live in harm’s way, in places where natural or man-made disasters are very likely to strike. (Ephesians 2:2; 1 John 2:16) Thus, greedy humans must bear the blame for some of the calamity that victims experience. (Ecclesiastes 8:9) How so?
A surprising number of disasters are at least partially man-made. Consider, for example, the woes that afflicted residents of the hurricane-flooded city of New Orleans, U.S.A., or the houses flattened by mud slides off the coastal mountains of Venezuela. In those instances and others, natural phenomena, such as wind and rain, turned catastrophic largely because of human environmental ignorance, shoddy engineering, flawed planning, unheeded warnings, and bureaucratic bungling.
Consider a disaster in Bible times. In Jesus’ day, the sudden collapse of a tower claimed 18 lives. (Luke 13:4) This disaster may have been the result of human error, “time and unforeseen occurrence,” or both—but assuredly not a result of God’s judgment.—Ecclesiastes 9:11.
Have any disasters ever been caused by the hand of God? Yes, but unlike natural or man-made disasters, they were selective, they had a purpose, and they were extremely rare. The global Flood in the days of the patriarch Noah and the destruction of the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah during the days of Lot are two examples. (Genesis 6:7-9, 13; 18:20-32; 19:24) Those divine judgments swept away incorrigibly wicked populations but preserved alive people who were righteous in the eyes of God.
As a matter of fact, Jehovah God has the means, the desire, and the power to end all suffering and to bring relief from the effects of natural disasters. Regarding God’s appointed King, Jesus Christ, Psalm 72:12 foretold: “He will deliver the poor one crying for help, also the afflicted one and whoever has no helper.”

