From Our Readers
Friendship  I am 16 years old, and I want to thank you for the article about Auntie Louie, entitled “My Dear Friend.” (February 22, 1996) I was attracted by the photo and read the article immediately. I was a bit down because most of my friends had turned out to be no friends at all. The article truly encouraged me to seek friendships with people who are older than I am.
L. N., Italy
School Sports  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Team Sports—Are They Good for Me?” (February 22, 1996) It seemed as though it was written just for me. It made me realize that maybe up until now I’ve been worshiping athletes. The article also helped me to appreciate that “bodily training is beneficial for a little.”—1 Timothy 4:8.
Y. T., Japan
Cobras  I used to think that cobras were very wicked reptiles that had to be exterminated. But after reading the article “Would You Like to Meet a Cobra?” (March 22, 1996), I now have a different view of them. Thanks for liberating people like me from misconceptions about these interesting creatures.
P. E., Nigeria
Although I was raised in a rural area where there are many snakes, I really did not know much about them. Reading about the cobra’s cautiousness in avoiding confrontations helped me have a better understanding of Jesus’ words at Matthew 10:16: “Prove yourselves cautious as serpents.”
J. F. S., Brazil
Counterfeiting  Thank you for the series “Counterfeiting—A Global Scourge.” (March 22, 1996) I work in a banking institution and recently completed a seminar on fraud prevention. The information you gave was the very latest. Thank you for all your reliable and informative articles.
B. P., United States
Since I work as a cashier at a bank, I appreciated the articles. In contrast with some journals that publish false information to create a sensation, you published a very balanced view. My bank gives the following advice to shopkeepers: ‘Keep a mint copy of each bill. If in doubt, compare the suspect bill (paper, print, and watermark) against the genuine one.’
L. G., France
Balance  Thank you for the article “God’s Gift of Balance.” (March 22, 1996) Three years ago I suffered vertigo for eight weeks. At first I thought I was the only one who had ever had this malady, since I had never heard of it before. Your article comforted me, showing that others have experienced this problem and have overcome it.
D. P., Jamaica
Flies  Thank you for the most interesting article “Those Obnoxious Flies—More Useful Than You Think?” (March 22, 1996) Last summer I spent some time doing research on flies, but I did not find any satisfying information. I think they are bothersome and unhygienic, just as the article says. But now I know that they do something useful—otherwise our Creator would not have made them. I greatly appreciate the articles you publish.
T. G., Italy
I just finished reading the article on flies, and I had to write. Many times I have told people in jest that I would like to know what Jehovah had in mind when he created this troublesome creature. Now I know that the fly was not put on earth just to bother us!
P. P., United States

