The Road to Recovery
IN THE wake of a heart attack, it is normal for a person to experience fear and concern. Will I have another attack? Will I be disabled or limited by pain and loss of strength and vitality?
John, mentioned in our second article, hoped that as time passed, the daily discomfort and chest pain would subside. But after a few months, he said: “So far they have not. That, along with tiring quickly and the fluttering of my heart, makes me constantly ask myself, ‘Am I on the verge of another attack?’”
Jane, from the United States, a young widow at the time of her heart attack, admitted: “I thought that I was not going to live or that I’d have another attack and die. Panic set in, as I had three children to care for.”
Hiroshi, of Japan, related: “It came as a shock to be told that my heart could no longer function as it had before; my pumping rate had dropped 50 percent. I was almost sure that I would have to curtail some of my activities as a minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses, for I could do less than half of what I had been doing.”
When one is faced with limited strength, bouts of depression and feelings of uselessness may set in. Marie, an 83-year-old Australian who devoted herself full-time to the preaching work of Jehovah’s Witnesses, lamented: “My inability to be as active as before saddened me. Instead of helping others, now I needed help.” In South Africa, Harold commented: “I was unable to work for three months. The most I could do then was just walk around the garden. That was frustrating!”
Bypass surgery was necessary after Thomas, of Australia, had his second heart attack. He said: “I do not tolerate pain well, and to have major surgery was almost too much to contemplate.” Jorge, of Brazil, commented on the aftermath of heart surgery: “Because of my poor financial situation, I feared that I would leave my wife alone and without assistance. I felt that I would not last much longer.”
Recovery
What has helped many to recover and to get their emotions back on an even keel? Jane observed: “When I felt panicky, I would always go to Jehovah in prayer and throw my burdens upon him and leave them there.” (Psalm 55:22) Prayer helps a person to gain the strength and the peace of mind that are essential when he is faced with anxieties.—Philippians 4:6, 7.
John and Hiroshi took part in rehabilitation programs. Good diet and exercise strengthened their hearts, so that both resumed working. And they attributed their mental and emotional recovery to the sustaining power of God’s spirit.
Through support from his Christian brothers, Thomas found the courage to face his surgery. He stated: “Before the operation, an overseer came to visit me and he prayed with me. In a very passionate plea, he asked Jehovah to strengthen me. That night I concentrated on his prayer and felt very blessed to have elders like him whose empathy during emotional periods is in itself part of the healing process.”
Anna, from Italy, coped with depression in this way: “When I’m discouraged, I think of all the blessings I have already received as one of God’s servants and of the blessings to come under God’s Kingdom. This helps me regain serenity.”
Marie is grateful for Jehovah’s help. Her family has been by her side, and she says: “My spiritual brothers and sisters, each with his own load to carry, made the time to visit me, call me on the telephone, or send cards. How could I stay sad with all this love being shown?”
No Lonely Hearts
It has been said that the healing heart should not be a lonely heart. The support of family and friends plays a large, positive role in the recovery of those whose hearts must literally and figuratively mend.
Michael, of South Africa, commented: “It’s hard to explain to others what it is like to be despondent. But when I walk into the Kingdom Hall, the concern that the brothers show is very heartwarming and uplifting to me.” Henry, of Australia, was also strengthened by the deep love and understanding that his congregation expressed. He said: “I really needed those tender words of encouragement.”
Jorge appreciated the depth of concern others showed by assisting his family financially until he was able to work. Olga, of Sweden, likewise appreciated the practical help given to her and her family by many spiritual brothers and sisters. Some did her shopping, while others cleaned her house.
Often, heart patients have to limit their participation in activities that they have held dear. Sven, of Sweden, related: “Sometimes I have to abstain from taking part in the ministry when the weather is too windy or cold, as it induces vascular spasm. I appreciate the understanding that many of my fellow Witnesses show in this matter.” And when confined to bed, Sven is able to listen to the meetings because the brothers lovingly record them on tape. “They keep me informed about what is going on in the congregation, and it makes me feel like a participant.”
Marie, confined to bed, feels blessed to have those with whom she is studying the Bible come to her. In this way she can continue to discuss the marvelous future that she looks forward to. Thomas is grateful for the concern he is shown: “The elders have been very considerate and have reduced the number of assignments they give me.”
Families Need Support
The road may be as difficult for family members as it is for the victim. They are subject to much stress and fear. Concerning his wife’s anxiety, Alfred, of South Africa, observed: “When I came home from the hospital, my wife used to wake me up many times during the night to see if I was still all right, and she would insist that I visit the doctor every three months for a checkup.”
Proverbs 12:25 states that ‘anxious care in the heart will cause it to bow down.’ Carlo, of Italy, notes that since his heart attack, his loving and supportive wife “has fallen into depression.” Lawrence, from Australia, said: “One of the things to watch out for is that your partner is being cared for. The strain on the partner can be very great.” Thus, we should keep in mind the needs of all in the family, including the children. The situation can take an emotional and physical toll on them.
James, mentioned in our second article, withdrew into a shell after his father’s heart attack. He said: “I felt that I couldn’t have fun anymore because I thought that the minute I did, something bad would happen.” Expressing his fear to his father and working at establishing good communication with others helped to relieve his worry. During that time James did something else that had a great effect on his life. He said: “I increased my personal study of the Bible and preparation for our Christian meetings.” Three months later he dedicated his life to Jehovah and symbolized it by water baptism. “Since then,” he says, “I have developed a very close relationship with Jehovah. I really have much to thank him for.”
In the aftermath of a heart attack, one has time to reexamine life. For example, John’s perspective changed. He said: “You see the vanity of worldly pursuits and realize how important love of family and friends is and how much we mean to Jehovah. My relationship with Jehovah, my family, and my spiritual brothers and sisters has an even higher priority now.” Reflecting on the trauma of his experience, he added: “I can’t imagine coping with this without our hope of a time when these things will be corrected. When things get me down, I think about the future, and what’s happening right now seems less significant.”
As they travel the ups and downs of the road to recovery, these heart-attack survivors have their hope firmly anchored in the Kingdom for which Jesus Christ taught us to pray. (Matthew 6:9, 10) The Kingdom of God will bring to humans everlasting life in perfection on a paradise earth. Then heart disease and all other disabilities will be eliminated forever. The new world is just ahead. Truly, the best of life is yet to come!—Job 33:25; Isaiah 35:5, 6; Revelation 21:3-5.
[Picture on page 13]
The support of family and friends plays a positive role in recovery

