Jehovah’s Name a Strong Tower
AS REGARDS the name “Jehovah,” all mankind may be said to fall into one of three classes. By far the great majority of mankind do not know that Jehovah is the name of the God of the Bible, the Creator of heaven and earth. Then again, of those that do have this knowledge there are only comparatively few who appreciate the importance of that name and that it is a place of safety: “The name of Jehovah is a strong tower; the righteous runneth into it, and is safe.” Do you ask, How can a name be a strong tower?—Prov. 18:10, AS.
Because of what Jehovah purposes to do in regard to his name. And what is that? Vindicate his name in the eyes of all creation by wiping out those opposing and defaming it. However, to those who now honor and proclaim that name it will be a strong tower, for Jehovah will protect them from the wrath of their enemies as well as shield them from the expression of his own anger against his enemies.
This is made clear by the record of Jehovah’s dealings with Pharaoh and the nation of Israel. When Moses told Pharaoh to let the Israelites go into the wilderness for a festival to Jehovah, that proud monarch contemptuously sneered: “Who is Jehovah, so that I should obey his voice?” Of course, Jehovah could have at once wiped out Pharaoh and his nation, but he did not choose to do so. Why? Because, as he had Moses tell Pharaoh: “For this cause I have kept you in existence, for the sake of showing you my power and in order to have my name declared in all the earth.” Ten plagues were not sufficient to convince Pharaoh who Jehovah was and so it was necessary for Jehovah to destroy Pharaoh and his army in the Red Sea. That Jehovah’s purpose was thus served can be seen from the fact that years later the people of Jericho and of Gibeon and, even centuries later in the days of Judge Samuel, the Philistines knew of Jehovah’s mighty acts against the Egyptians.—Ex. 5:2; 9:16, NW.
That name, which meant destruction to Pharaoh and his army, spelled salvation for the Israelites. As we read: “He saved them for his name’s sake, that he might make his mighty power to be known.” So it was to them, first of all, that Jehovah said: “I have declared, and I have saved, and I have showed; and there was no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith Jehovah, and I am God.”—Ps. 106:8; Isa. 43:12, AS.
Nor was the name of Jehovah a strong tower for the Israelites only when they came out of Egypt, but time and again thereafter, as the Scriptures so clearly show. It was for the sake of his name that Jehovah did not wipe out the Israelites for their idolatry and rebellion while in the wilderness, why he granted them victory over their enemies in Canaanland, why he gave David the victory over Goliath, why he delivered Hezekiah and his people from Sennacherib’s army. The psalmist repeatedly asks for forgiveness or deliverance or expresses confidence on the basis of Jehovah’s name. And that is why Jehovah delivered his people from Babylonian captivity.
Jehovah deals in the same way with the followers of Christ, the spiritual Israelites and their companions today. Likewise, the way Jehovah dealt with his enemies back there foreshadows how he will deal with his enemies in modern times, and that in the very near future. And also in each instance because of his name.
Yes, the fact that Christians are to be witnesses of Jehovah is generally overlooked; yet about this the Scriptures could not be plainer. Did not Jesus put his Father’s name first in his model prayer: “Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified”? Yes, he did. And did he not make his Father’s name known to his followers? Yes, he also did that, for on the night of his betrayal he prayed: “I have glorified you on the earth, having finished the work you have given me to do. I have made your name manifest to the men you gave me out of the world. . . . I have made your name known to them and will make it known.”—Matt. 6:9; John 17:4, 6, 26, NW.
Being Christ’s followers, Christians have a like obligation resting upon them to make Jehovah’s name known. In fact, that is the very purpose of their being Christians, as James, the disciple and half brother of Jesus, showed: “Symeon has related thoroughly how God for the first time turned his attention to the nations to take out of them a people for his name.” Since that is so, to them also apply the words of the prophet: “Ye are my witnesses, saith Jehovah, and I am God.”—Acts 15:14, NW; Isa. 43:12, AS.
Today the rulers of the world, both religious and political, are showing themselves to be like Pharaoh of old. They refuse to recognize Jehovah as the rightful universal Sovereign and to acknowledge Jesus Christ as the rightful King of the world and his kingdom as mankind’s only hope. They set up their own schemes in defiance of Jehovah and oppress Jehovah’s name people. So again, for the sake of his name, Jehovah will cause his enemies to lick the dust.—Psalm 2; Rev. 16:14, 16.
Again Jehovah has his witnesses making known his name and purposes. Thereby the enemy is being served notice to repent or face destruction. At the same time his witnesses call to all lovers of righteousness: “Seek ye Jehovah, all ye meek of the earth, that have kept his ordinances; seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye will be hid in the day of Jehovah’s anger.” That means studying God’s Word with the aids provided by him for understanding it; and it means acting upon the knowledge one gains by exercising faith, dedicating oneself to do Jehovah’s will and then progressing to maturity in knowledge and Christian activity.—Zeph. 2:3, AS.
All those who accept Jehovah’s name, who honor it and make it known to others and who live up to it by right conduct, will find protection and salvation. Truly “the name of Jehovah is a strong tower; the righteous runneth into it, and is safe.”—Prov. 18:10, AS.

