Life in a Paradise New World
NEW World life will be different from what we know today. For this we are grateful to the new world’s Creator, who declares: “Here I am creating new heavens and a new earth; and the former things will not be called to mind, neither will they come up into the heart.” What are these “former things” that “will not be called to mind,” their having so completely passed away?—Isa. 65:17.
Threat of a ruined earth will be gone. Gone with it the grim mention of nuclear devastation, fallout shelters and new and more deadly weapons! Why? God’s prophetic Word of truth shows that he will shortly “bring to ruin those ruining the earth.”—Rev. 11:18.
No matter how much radioactivity is released by nuclear-armed nations now or during their Armageddon destruction, it will not thwart God’s purpose for a paradise earth. Almighty God can miraculously cleanse the earth and its atmosphere of harmful radioactivity. Reversed will be the present trend, that of ruining the earth. After Armageddon, progress will be made every day toward the goal of a paradise earth under the kingdom of heaven.
How, then, can there be wars, or danger of injury from any other source? There will be none. Even with reference to the wild beasts we are assured: “They will not do any harm or cause any ruin in all my holy mountain; because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.” (Isa. 11:9) “For them I shall certainly conclude a covenant in that day in connection with the wild beast of the field and with the flying creature of the heavens and the creeping thing of the ground, and the bow and the sword and war I shall break out of the land, and I will make them lie down in security.”—Hos. 2:18.
Security will be man’s permanent lot in the paradise new world. The new world’s Ruler, Jesus Christ, will ensure freedom from oppression and from violence, just as it is written prophetically of him: “He will deliver the poor one crying for help, also the afflicted one and whoever has no helper. He will feel sorry for the lowly one and the poor one, and the souls of the poor ones he will save. From oppression and from violence he will redeem their soul, and their blood will be precious in his eyes.”—Ps. 72:12-14.
So precious will be the blood of all the new world’s faithful inhabitants that its Creator will bring to an end death-dealing and crippling diseases, along with the pain they have caused. How do we know? Because God’s sure Word of prophecy declares regarding the new world: “God himself will be with them. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be any more. The former things have passed away.” Yes, even death, the death inherited by descent from Adam, will pass away.—Rev. 21:3, 4.
In the new world, by means of God’s kingdom, Jesus Christ will do healing work on a far grander scale than he did when he was on the earth. The historian Luke tells us that Jesus received the crowds “kindly and began to speak to them about the kingdom of God, and he healed those needing a cure.” (Luke 9:11) He performed cures on the blind, the deaf, the crippled, the sick and leprous; but he also preached to them about God’s kingdom, the means God uses to make possible life in a paradise new world. “Those needing a cure” will be healed. All subjects of God’s kingdom will attain perfect health.
When on earth the Lord Jesus not only restored many persons to health but he raised from the dead the twelve-year-old daughter of Jairus, in Galilee; a young man, the son of a widow, at Nain, and his beloved friend, Lazarus, at Bethany. Since the new world’s King is “the resurrection and the life,” he will eventually raise from the dead those countless numbers of people who are in the memory of God. Assuring us of this, the Lord Jesus said: “Do not marvel at this, because the hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice and come out, those who did good things to a resurrection of life, those who practiced vile things to a resurrection of judgment.”—Mark 5:22-43; Luke 7:11-15; John 11:1-44; 5:28, 29.
These persons will be raised from the dead, and all will have the opportunity to enjoy the paradise earth everlastingly. This is true even of those receiving “a resurrection of judgment.” One who will receive such a resurrection is the believing evildoer who died alongside Jesus at Golgotha. Expressing faith in Jesus, the evildoer had asked: “Jesus, remember me when you get into your kingdom.” What did Jesus say in answer? “He said to him: ‘Truly I tell you today, You will be with me in Paradise.’” (Luke 23:42, 43) By their future course of conduct in the New World Paradise, men such as that evildoer will have opportunity to prove worthy of the gift of everlasting life.
No monotonous existence, life in the paradise new world will be filled with engrossing interests, enjoyable work and the endless pleasure of learning new things.
Nothing will be in vain, for life in the paradise new world will daily bring glory to its Creator, the One who promises: “They will certainly build houses and have occupancy; and they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. They will not build and someone else have occupancy; they will not plant and someone else do the eating. For like the days of a tree will the days of my people be; and the work of their own hands my chosen ones will use to the full. They will not toil for nothing.”—Isa. 65:21-23.
Would you like to live in God’s paradise new world? Then now is the time to “get a firm hold on the everlasting life.” Live for the new world now.—1 Tim. 6:12.

