Youthful Ministers Bear Fruit
NO CHILD old enough to talk is too young to be a witness for Jehovah God. And not only can they witness but they can bear fruit, as the following experiences taken from the 1962 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses clearly show:
● A Witness housewife in Belgium repeatedly tried to interest her neighbor in Jehovah’s kingdom but without success. Then one day this neighbor called and requested a Bible and a Bible study in her home. What had brought about the change? The Witness’s children had been witnessing to their playmates and these, in turn, told their mother what they had heard, awakening her interest.
● A young Chilean Witness of twelve years discussed the Bible with his playmates, resulting in an invitation to the home of one of them to talk to a Catholic lady who was visiting the family. Preparing in advance, he was able to give an effective sermon and also to place the Bible-study aid From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained. The lady was so impressed with his sincerity and ability that she not only requested to have a regular Bible study but insisted that the lad, instead of his parents, be the one to teach her.
● It is often true that adults pay more attention to a youthful minister than to one of their own age. Thus in one Haitian city where public lectures on the Bible were rather poorly attended, one Sunday the Kingdom Hall was filled to capacity. How so? Nearly every one of the newcomers had responded to the direct invitation of an eight-year-old who had visited all her neighbors to tell them about the Bible talks.
● In Greece a fourteen-year-old Witness who entered a clinic for an operation took with her the Bible-study aid From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained. Making skillful use of her opportunities, she aroused the interest of the surgeon director of the clinic to such an extent that he took time every evening for eight days to study the book with her. Upon her leaving he readily subscribed for both The Watchtower and Awake! and arranged for a Bible study in his office, to be held twice a week. The study is continuing and he is now attending the meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses.

