Announcements
MAKING WISE USE OF THE TIME THAT REMAINS
Living in these last days of the old system of things, more than ever the apostle’s counsel is seen to be of greatest value: “Keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons, buying out the opportune time for yourselves, because the days are wicked.” (Eph. 5:15, 16, NW) Buying out time from other activities in order to have opportunity for serving God is the wise course. It is needful that dedicated witnesses spend time doing their assigned work of witnessing, leaving with people Bibles and Bible literature that will aid them in understanding these times of increased wickedness. During November they will call on all persons with whom Bible studies have been conducted during the year in order to offer them one or more volumes of the New World Translation of the Scriptures on a contribution of $1.50 each. From door to door Jehovah’s witnesses will offer a volume of the New World Translation together with a book on a contribution of $2.
QUALIFIED TO BE MINISTERS
Adequately qualified ministers are needed today more than at any other time in man’s history. That means ministers ordained by God. Further, it means they must have the light from God through Christ shine upon them and they must make public confession of the true faith. As proof that Jehovah’s dedicated witnesses today meet these qualifications, ‘food at the proper time’ is being served to hundreds of thousands who are conscious of their spiritual need. These in turn, adequately fed, grow to maturity, dedicate their lives to do God’s will and prepare themselves for the ministry. Are you one of such? Then you will read with lasting benefit the new 384-page book Qualified to Be Ministers. Not only is it a provision to train and qualify new ministers, but also it is an aid to maturity and advancement for those already engaged in preaching activity. It covers preparation and delivery of speeches, composition, private study, the ministry, congregation activities, worship—clean and unclean—modern history of Jehovah’s witnesses, and theocratic society. Send for a copy for 50c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
November 20: The Triumphant Message of “The Kingdom,” ¶1-23. Page 621.
November 27: The Triumphant Message of “The Kingdom,” ¶24-41; also, An Expression of His Triumph. Page 629.

