Missionary Comforts Japanese Mother
THAT there is much preaching work to be done in all parts of the earth cannot be gainsaid. However, it also is true that the Watch Tower missionaries who graduate from Gilead are sent to where the need is the greatest. That there are blessings commensurate with what it costs to be a missionary is apparent from the following report from one in Tokyo, Japan:
“In going from house to house with the good news of God’s kingdom I met a woman who told me that she was so glad I called, as about a year ago she had lost her little girl about four years old, and since then she felt that her world had ended. The fact that her husband was a very kind man, and that she also had a son, did not seem to compensate for the loss of the little daughter she had so grown to love.
“She had been brought up in the very old Japanese ‘Kitsune’ religion, and recently, because she was often feeling so sad, she thought of attending some church in the hopes that this might change her frame of mind. She was looking for someone to tell her about the true God, one who could help her and give her some hope. I told her briefly of Jehovah’s precious promises and of the powerful hope of the resurrection. She listened intently and subscribed for The Watchtower, and then asked, ‘When can you come back and talk to my husband and me?’ A time was set and two days later I called back. They both came to the door to welcome me, the husband saying: ‘My wife has been talking about your visit ever since you called two days ago, and has been waiting impatiently since for your visit tonight.’
“After the first study she was quick to understand God’s purpose and concluded by saying, ‘Oh I’m so glad that I didn’t go to some church, because if I had I would not have wanted to listen to you when you came to my door.’ Two days later I received a letter from her thanking me very much for my visit and telling me that she sets aside two hours each day for personal study, and, please, how soon could I come again, because the day we study together is the best day of the week?
“After each study she insists on walking to the station with me because she says that way we can continue our conversation about Jehovah as we walk along. The other day as I was passing by I dropped in unexpectedly and asked her, ‘Are you busy right now?’ She replied, ‘Just come and look.’ I followed her into the room and there on the table was the Bible and the booklet Basis for Belief in a New World, being carefully studied and underlined, on the table.
“After just three studies she came to hear a Bible lecture at the Kingdom Hall and as I walked home with her she said, ‘I think it’s just wonderful the way you missionaries leave your homes, come here to Japan and learn our difficult language, and all for the purpose of leading us on to the right road.’ Regarding the meeting she said, ‘I’m overjoyed, for I met the finest of people.’
“The next day when I passed her house she was looking for me and asked, ‘Have you a songbook with you? Ever since I sang that song, “Blessed Bible,” I keep trying to remember the words and the melody, so please come in and teach me the song.’ After about ten minutes the ‘singing lesson’ ended, for she had learned the tune, and as I left I could hear her singing it as she went about her work in the kitchen.
“Upon leaving her yesterday after the fourth study she said: ‘Now I have entered Jehovah’s organization; the next thing is baptism and then preaching.’”
Truly those young men and women who leave their own homes and native lands to go to faraway countries and strange peoples to preach the good news of God’s kingdom and to comfort all that mourn do have heartwarming experiences.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of tender mercies and the God of all comfort, who comforts us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort those in any kind of tribulation through the comfort with which we ourselves are being comforted by God.—2 Cor. 1:3, 4, NW.

