Aiding New and Inexperienced Ones to Use the Bible
1 How thrilling it is to see thousands of new publishers joining us in the vital work of Kingdom-preaching. All of these, though, need instruction to become effective proclaimers of the “good news.” Jesus Christ set the example for us in providing guidelines for the disciples. When sending out the seventy evangelizers, he said: “Wherever you enter into a house say first, ‘May this house have peace.’ Also, wherever you enter into a city and they receive you, . . . go on telling them, ‘The kingdom of God has come near to you.’”​—Luke 10:5, 8, 9.
2 Today many of those sharing in the preaching work are accomplishing much in distributing magazines. Others, besides utilizing magazines, are getting excellent results by ‘reasoning with people from the Scriptures.’ (Compare Acts 17:2-4.) How fine it would be if more publishers could be aided to use the Bible in this way!
3 Those conducting Bible studies have opportunities to assist their students right from the start to become effective in handling the Word of God. The student could be encouraged to use what he is learning. For example, if the third chapter of the Truth book (“Who Is God?”) is being considered, the conductor could ask, ‘How might you explain to a friend that there is no Trinity? What scriptures would you read to him?’ After the study, the conductor might have the student use the Bible to explain to him who God is. If the student is progressively aided to use what he is learning, he will know to some extent how to use the Bible when he actually starts sharing in the field service. He will know how to explain his beliefs and to develop his argumentation. Then, as he works with experienced publishers, he will continue to progress, benefiting from their example and suggestions even after he is baptized.
4 Parents are usually in the best position to help their children. Part of the family study period could be devoted to training children to use the Bible. When discussing problems that come up at school, parents might ask children to show from the Bible the reason for their stand. The youngsters could also be assigned to work up a presentation on specific objections encountered in the territory. Whenever good field points come up during the course of the Bible study, parents could highlight these.
5 Similarly, brothers conducting book studies have opportunities to help publishers in their group to make progress in handling God’s Word. They may want to discuss with the field overseer what he knows about those needing aid and what could be done in their behalf. If some, though associated with the congregation for a long time, are only presenting magazines in the field service, how might they be encouraged to expand their ability by using the Bible? Could they be helped to make up a presentation based on a scripture or two with which they are familiar? They might benefit from working in the field service with the conductor or another publisher who uses the Bible well. Occasionally, during the course of the book study, the conductor might briefly show how a particular scripture could be used in the field.
6 What a blessing it is for people in the territory when the Scriptures are explained to them! As we seek to reason from the Scriptures, we will be helping sincere persons to appreciate the value of studying God’s Word. Is that not a desirable goal?
[Blurb on page 8]
Make Preparations to Use the New Booklets.

