New Public Talks to Equip Us for Bible Studies
1 “Something is planned that will not only delight you but also no doubt surprise you.” So read The Watchtower back in 1968 when announcing the district assemblies for that year. How thrilled we were to learn at these conventions about the six-month Bible study program with the Truth book! This has had a tremendous impact on the disciple-making work. Why, since the release of the Truth book more than 1,300,000 persons from all nations have gotten baptized.
2 In December, we can once again look forward to something new​—the release of three booklets specifically designed for Bible study purposes. Each booklet has been prepared with one basic segment of society in mind. So that we can quickly become acquainted with the contents of these new publications, they will provide the basis for three public talks, starting the second week of December.
3 The first of these discourses will feature the subject “A Secure Future​—How You Can Find It.” This talk will be directed mainly to people who believe the Bible but are disturbed about the growing uncertainty of life. It will show how security is possible both now and in the future, while at the same time discussing basic Bible teachings.
4 “There Is Much More to Life!” is the encouraging topic to be considered the following week. Many people today see life only from the standpoint of day-to-day living. They want to know where we come from, what the meaning of life is and what the future holds. This is true of many young people as well as others. The material for this talk comes to grips with their thinking and points the way to a meaningful life as an approved servant of Jehovah God.
5 Concluding the series will be the discourse “Is There a God Who Cares?” This talk is directed to those who have doubts about God’s existence​—persons who cannot understand how a God who cares could permit humans to experience untold grief and suffering.
6 Not only will we benefit from hearing the special talks scheduled for December but so will many interested persons. Besides attending yourself, be sure to invite Bible students, acquaintances and relatives. If possible, arrange to accompany them to the Kingdom Hall. Hopefully they will attend all three talks. If for some reason they cannot do so, encourage them to come especially to the one that you feel would be most appropriate for them.
7 At the conclusion of each discourse, the particular booklet on which it was based will be released. Perhaps some attending for the first time will be glad to have you study the material with them. All, of course, will benefit by having the booklet for reviewing points that they may have missed. While the talk is fresh in your mind, read the booklet. As you read, mark it for use in conducting home Bible studies.
8 Truly we have grand things to look forward to in December. May Jehovah bless our efforts to aid fellowmen to come to an accurate knowledge of the truth with the help of the new instruments that will soon be available to us.

