Presenting the Good News​—‘Being All Things to All People’
1 The apostle Paul was keenly interested in helping his fellowmen to come to an accurate knowledge of the truth. He did everything within his power to reach their hearts. “To the Jews I became as a Jew,” said Paul, “that I might gain Jews . . . To the weak I became weak, that I might gain the weak. I have become all things to people of all sorts, that I might by all means save some.” (1 Cor. 9:20-22) Is this your desire when sharing in the field service? But how can you become “all things to people of all sorts”?
2 One way is by approaching them with a presentation of Scriptural information that will have real meaning to them. What might appeal to a Catholic or Protestant, for example, may be of no interest to an agnostic or atheist. Similarly, men, women and youths vary as to their fields of interest. So would it not be good to prepare to share Scriptural thoughts that would fit the people whom we will meet in the field?
3 What might you say to a woman? After a greeting, perhaps you could state: “I would like to share with you a thought from the Bible about how one can enjoy a happy family life. Many parents today are very much concerned about their children. The way children act can affect a family’s happiness, isn’t that so? Notice what the Bible says about this. [Read Proverbs 23:24, 25.] Bible instruction can be of real help to children.” Then offer the Bible, along with Listening to the Great Teacher, for $1.25.
4 When a man answers the door, you might say: “The reason I am calling is to share with you God’s promise of peace and security. We all are concerned about the security of our home and our job, are we not? Notice what kind of security the Bible promises.” (Read 2 Peter 3:13.) Thereafter the current offer could be presented.
5 What about teen-agers? Do we take time to speak to them? Or do we always ask for the parents? Though their parents may not be interested, many youths are. One fourteen-year-old boy wrote to the Society requesting a visit from one of Jehovah’s witnesses. Among other things, he said: “After reviewing many of your publications, I would like to learn more about God’s Word. Realizing that my religion is part of Babylon the Great, I wish to get out from her.”
6 What might you say when a teen-ager comes to the door? Possibly something like this: “Hello, my name is . . . What’s yours? I am encouraging young folks like you to read about the grand future that the Bible promises for us.” (Read Revelation 21:4, 5.) Ask what his thoughts are about this promise, and conclude with the literature offer. You might encourage him to read chapter 46 of the Great Teacher book.
7 It may be that you have found certain other Scriptural thoughts that work well in your territory. If so, continue using them and mention them to other publishers. The important thing is that we try to reach “people of all sorts,” doing so in the hope that some of them might be saved.

