Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 7
15 min: Song 111. Enthusiastic talk on main article, “New Public Talks to Equip Us for Bible Studies.” Emphasize inviting everyone to hear these discourses and how each talk should benefit people in the territory.
20 min: “Rejoice In the Hope.” Brief comments on Romans 12:12, showing that hope enables the Christian to endure with rejoicing. Consider with audience the following questions based on Aid, pp. 787, 788. (1) Upon what relationship does one’s having real hope depend? (Eph. 2:11, 12) (2) Why can we be sure about the hope of everlasting life? (Heb. 6:17-20) (3) What guarantee do we have that there is going to be an earthly resurrection? (Acts 17:31; 24:15) (4) How can our Christian hope be strengthened? (Heb. 3:6; 6:11; Rom. 5:2-5) (5) How does the “hope of salvation” benefit us? (2 Cor. 3:12; 1 Thess. 1:3; 5:8; 1 John 3:2, 3) Conclude with comments about how our hope should be motivating us. Even though we do not as yet possess the reward, our hope should sustain us when we are faced with trials and move us to share it with others at all opportunities.​—1 Pet. 3:15.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—‘Being All Things to All People.’” Comment on the scripture in paragraph one, regarding the value of imitating Paul’s example in ‘becoming all things to people of all sorts.’ Then demonstrate points in paragraphs 3 and 6. After each demonstration ask why it is beneficial to share Scriptural thoughts that fit people we meet in the field. Encourage audience to use Bible texts that would help them to reach people of all sorts.
10 min: Concluding comments, including accounts report. Encourage publishers to advertise widely public talks for December, and to try presentations learned. Song 68.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 14
10 min: Song 63. Discuss Branch Letter and highlights of December 8 Awake! report on Malawi. Encourage writing of letters.
25 min: “Aiding New and Inexperienced Ones to Use the Bible.” Talk on paragraphs 1 and 2, emphasizing the Scriptural principles in the texts cited. Then, have experienced publishers present well-developed demonstrations of suggestions in paragraphs 3 and 4. Ask audience what was learned from each demonstration. Conclude with comments on paragraphs 5 and 6, encouraging brothers who need assistance in using the Bible in field service to approach book study conductor for suggestions.
10 min: The 1976 Theocratic School Schedule. School overseer might briefly review the benefits of the School and then ask audience about its new features (extended discussion after the written review, new ways to present the Bible reading, and the oral review immediately after the instruction talk). Encourage those not in School to enroll.
15 min: Concluding comments. Encourage brothers to read booklet received at last public talk and to mark points for use on Bible studies. Consider the temporary pioneer work and urge all to plan for service activities during worldly holiday season. Mention need for being prepared for next week’s Scriptural discussion. Song 51.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 21
10 min: Song 97. Comments on Yearbook text (Joel 2:13) for December 17. Apply thoughts to the parts that will be discussed in the rest of the meeting.
15 min: Warm talk on “Help Endangered ‘Sheep.’” Apply the information to the needs of the congregation. If possible, interview one or two brothers who were helped by congregation publishers.
25 min: “Exercise Patience.” Discussion of James 5:7-20, with scriptures that provide the basis for the questions being read first. (1) Read verses 7, 8. (a) What lesson can we learn from the farmer? (b) What factors might cause us to become impatient? (Note verses 4-6.) (2) Read verse 9. If we are patient, what will we not be doing toward our brothers? Why? (3) Read verses 10, 11. (a) How can the example of Job and the Hebrew prophets encourage us? (b) What do we learn here about the way Jehovah dealt with Job, and how does this encourage us to be patient? (4) Read verse 12. If we are patiently waiting for Jehovah to bring an end to the world’s dishonesty, what should be true of our “Yes” and our “No”? Why? (Aid, p. 1238, pars. 3, 4, 6) (5) Read verses 13-20. (a) What should we do if we are suffering from some evil​—disappointment, poor health or the like? (b) The patient person has joy. What should his being in “good spirits” move him to do? (Note that “psalms” are praises to God.) (c) If a person becomes spiritually ill, perhaps because of failing to exercise patience, what should he do? (d) How will patience help elders in dealing with erring ones? What should they do and why? (Emphasize the importance of prayer.) (e) Why, especially now, should we be interested in recovering those who have turned aside from the truth? (Conclude with encouragement for all to continue exercising patience.)
10 min: Concluding comments. Urge all to imitate Jehovah’s patience by helping people to repent. (2 Pet. 3:9) Song 115.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 28
20 min: Song 78. Enthusiastic talk on highlights of pages 3 to 15 of new Yearbook. There is no need to try to cover all the material. Explain how the experiences of our brothers in other parts of the earth strengthen our faith. Encourage all to read the Yearbook, individually or as a family.
25 min: “The End of All Things Has Drawn Close.” Discussion of 1 Peter 4:7-19, with passages on which questions are based being read first. (When the apostle Peter wrote, he was referring to the approaching end of the Jewish system of things. Today we are fast approaching the end of the entire wicked system. So the admonition of Peter has timely meaning to us.) (1) Read verse 7. (a) If we are “sound in mind,” what view will we have of material things, worldly pleasures and the like? How will this right view affect our field service? (b) Why is prayer essential in this time of the end? (2) Read verses 8, 9. (a) What attitude should we take toward the minor transgressions of our brothers, and why? (b) What developments in the “last days” can put our hospitality to the test? (3) Read verses 10, 11. What are some gifts we have, and how should we use them? (4) Read verses 12-14. (a) Why should we not become disturbed about persecution? (b) How should we feel about it? (5) Read verses 15-19. (a) What should never be the reason for our undergoing suffering? (b) Why is Peter’s counsel in this regard especially appropriate for us today? (c) To whom should we always look to strengthen us when we are experiencing difficulty? (d) What should we be doing when enduring trials? Conclude, urging all to live in expectation of the certain fulfillment of Jehovah’s promise.
15 min: Concluding comments. Share some experiences of article “Preaching the ‘Good News’ in the Frozen North,” in the 3/1/74 Watchtower, page 141. Encourage brothers to read Question Box and to finish personal reading of the booklets so they will be prepared for the Watchtower campaign. Point out scripture featured in opening article of January 1 Watchtower and describe how it may be used in presenting subscription offer. Song 105.

