Announcements
ABREAST OF THE NEW WORLD SOCIETY
In the new world of righteousness the hopes of all godly persons will be fulfilled. ‘Righteousness is to dwell forever’ in that world. Members of the New World society not only anticipate the glorious things promised but serve the interests of the new world by keeping abreast in proclaiming the good news of its establishment far and wide. Gladly they engage in the ministry, telling others about it at every opportunity, as did Paul. (1 Cor. 11:1) During October householders will be given opportunity to subscribe for the Scripturally helpful magazine Awake! A year’s subscription is only $1, and three booklets will be given free.
SONGS OF PRAISE
Ever since they were first sung centuries ago, the Psalms have been a constant source of inspiration. It is fitting indeed that these beautiful songs can now be read in the clear and unmistakable language of today. They are available in Volume 3 of the New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures, just released at the district assemblies of Jehovah’s witnesses held throughout the world. This volume contains the books Job to The Song of Solomon and has 512 pages. The regular edition is printed on thin Bible paper with gold-embossed hard-bound cover in green leatherette, and can be obtained by sending a contribution of only $1. It is also available in a de luxe edition, bound in genuine Morocco leather, for only $5. Send for your copy today.
LIFE IS NOT A GAMBLE
Life is not a gamble. Neither is right religion. You would avoid unnecessary risk physically. Why take chances spiritually with your everlasting life? You can lose it through ignorance, endanger it by negligence or you can win it by ‘making sure of all things.’ How? By going to the right source for information. The world is full of confused and contradictory ideas and beliefs. Religions differ as to doctrine and even as to what God requires of us. Who is right? Each one, of course, thinks he is. But what does God’s Word say? Do you really know? Can you call to your use the scriptures that give authority for right doctrine? “Make Sure of All Things” places them at your fingertips. It is a pocket-size hard-bound book of 416 pages that lets the Bible speak for itself. Seventy Bible themes and 287 subjects are presented without comment. Bible texts, quoted from eleven translations, provide the answers. Obtain “Make Sure of All Things” today by sending 75c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
October 13: Healing of the Nations Has Drawn Near. ¶1-21. Page 557.
October 20: Healing of the Nations Has Drawn Near. ¶22-42. Page 563.

