2 God Does Not Really Care​—Is It True?
What you may have heard: “If God truly cared about mankind, then he would remove evil and suffering from the world. And even if he is concerned about people in general, he doesn’t care about what happens to me.”
What the Bible teaches: Jehovah God does not cause evil. (James 1:13) While he could remove evil at any time, he allows corrupt society to exist for now in order to settle moral issues that were raised at the start of human history. He will ultimately act in behalf of humankind and undo all the trouble caused by those who reject his rulership.​—Genesis 3:1-6; Isaiah 65:17.a
Besides his overall concern for the human family, God demonstrates an intense interest in us as individuals. Matthew 10:29-31 shows that he observes details about us that even we do not know: “Do not two sparrows sell for a coin of small value? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground without your Father’s knowledge. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Therefore have no fear: you are worth more than many sparrows.”
How knowing the truth helps you: We usually avoid people who are harsh or uncaring. Not surprisingly, the lie that God is uncaring causes many people either to avoid getting to know him altogether or to approach him only when they feel that they have no choice. Knowing that Jehovah God really cares could lead you to want to learn more about him and build a friendship with him.
For example, you might have prayed to God but wondered whether he was listening or if he would answer you. The Bible assures us that the “Hearer of prayer” keeps this line of communication open at all times for all who approach him sincerely.​—Psalm 65:2.
God invites you to “throw all your anxiety upon him, because he cares for you.” (1 Peter 5:7) We can rely on his concern even in times of great distress, for his Word says: “Jehovah is near to those that are broken at heart; and those who are crushed in spirit he saves.”​—Psalm 34:18.
[Footnote]
For more information about why God permits suffering, see chapter 11 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach?
[Blurb on page 5]
If God does not care, why does he invite us to pray to him?

