Learn From God’s Word
How Can Your Family Be Happy?
This article raises questions you may have asked and shows where you can read the answers in your Bible. Jehovah’s Witnesses would be pleased to discuss these answers with you.
 1. Why is marriage vital to family happiness?
Jehovah, the happy God, originated marriage. It is vital to family happiness because it provides not only companionship but also a secure environment in which to raise children. How does God view marriage? He wants it to be a permanent, legally registered union between a man and a woman. (Luke 2:1-5) God wants husbands and wives to be loyal to each other. (Hebrews 13:4) Jehovah allows Christians to divorce and remarry only if their spouse commits adultery.​—Read Matthew 19:3-6, 9.
 2. How should a husband and wife treat each other?
Jehovah created men and women to fill complementary roles in marriage. (Genesis 2:18) As family head, a husband should take the lead in providing materially for his family and in teaching them about God. He should be self-sacrificing in his love for his wife. Husbands and wives should love and respect each other. Since all husbands and wives are imperfect, learning to forgive is a key to happiness in marriage.​—Read Ephesians 4:31, 32; 5:22-25, 33; 1 Peter 3:7.
 3. Should you abandon an unhappy marriage?
If you and your spouse experience difficulties, work at treating each other with love. (1 Corinthians 13:4, 5) God’s Word does not recommend separation as a way to resolve marital problems. In extreme situations, however, a Christian would have to decide whether it is advisable to separate or not.​—Read 1 Corinthians 7:10-13.
 4. Children, what does God want for you?
Jehovah wants you to be happy. He gives you the best advice on how to enjoy your youth. He wants you to benefit from the wisdom and experience of your parents. (Colossians 3:20) Jehovah appreciates anything you do to praise him.​—Read Ecclesiastes 11:9–12:1; Matthew 19:13-15; 21:15, 16.
 5. Parents, how can your children find happiness?
You should work hard to provide food, housing, and clothing for your children. (1 Timothy 5:8) But in order for your children to find happiness, you also need to teach them to love God and to learn from him. (Ephesians 6:4) Your example in showing love for God can deeply influence your child’s heart. When based on God’s Word, your instruction can mold your child’s thinking in a positive way.​—Read Deuteronomy 6:4-7; Proverbs 22:6.
Children benefit when you encourage and commend them. They also need correction and discipline. Such training protects them from conduct that could rob them of happiness. (Proverbs 22:15) Yet, discipline should never be harsh or cruel.​—Read Colossians 3:21.
Jehovah’s Witnesses publish several books that are especially written to help parents and children. These books are based on the Bible.​—Read Psalm 19:7, 11.
For more information, see chapter 14 of this book, What Does the Bible Really Teach?, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

