Announcements
● Two slips (S-10) to report the congregation’s activity during the past service year are being sent to all congregations with the July statement. This form replaces the previous presiding overseer’s report which has been discontinued. These slips should be filled out by the presiding overseer and field overseer. One copy is to be mailed to the Society with the September monthly report. The other copy is to be retained for the congregation files.
● A new Congregation Meeting Attendance Record form (S-88), which can be used to keep a record of meeting attendance for three years, is now available. A separate card will be kept for each of the congregation meetings, including each congregation book study. The Society will send each congregation twelve copies for its use starting in September. If more are required, order them with your next literature order.
● The October 8 Awake! and the October 15 Watchtower will be special issues. Be sure to order well in advance the extra copies that you will need. It would be helpful if the present field overseer would care for this before the end of August.
● The yearly supply of congregation forms for 1978 was sent to each congregation during July. However, congregations should order 12 report cards for each regular pioneer on the next literature order. The special pioneers will receive their supply of forms in August.
● Each congregation will receive two Literature Inventory forms and should take an actual count of campaign literature in stock as of September 1. Please fill out the forms and return the original to us no later than September 6. Keep the carbon copy for your files.
● Literature offer for August: Peace and Security or Youth book on a contribution of 25c, or both for 50c. For September: Tract and Truth book. Regular magazine supplies should also be placed in connection with tract distribution.
● September campaign should be well organized. Plan every step. Outgoing field overseer together with new one coming in will both be responsible to follow through. All tracts should be put out during September.
● New Publications Available:
Holy Spirit—The Force Behind the Coming New Order!—Portuguese
Your Youth—Getting the Best out of It—Norwegian, Portuguese, Swedish
There Is Much More to Life!—Korean
● Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained—Arabic

