Presenting the Good News—With the Youth Book
1 During August we will be offering the Youth book as an alternative offer to the Peace and Security book. Surely we will have many fine opportunities to offer this excellent Bible study aid in the field service as we go from house to house.
2 Especially is this true as we meet teen-agers. We should not feel that we must always ask to speak to their parents. Rather, why not take advantage of the opportunity to speak to the young person, knowing that we have a fine Bible study aid designed just for him or her? If interest is shown, we could ask, “Do your parents let you choose what you read?” If the answer is affirmative, then certainly it would be proper to offer the Youth book. If negative, we could explain the purpose of the publication and offer to call again to speak to one of the parents, if they are not at home right then.
3 What topic for conversation could we use? One that has been suggested is: “How can a young person make a success out of life?” This is based on Psalm 1:1-3, which is an excellent scripture to use in conversation with teen-agers. You may wish to start a conversation using this suggestion and then offer the Youth book. Or, some find it good first to turn to the Table of Contents in the Youth book to show the young person how applicable it is to the life of a teen-ager. Ascertain what might be of particular interest, and then follow through with Psalm 1:1-3, indicating how the Youth book, along with the Bible, can assist a young person.
4 Where can we find young people? Besides locating them in the house-to-house work, we can search them out in other places. For example, young people can be found at summer camps, in the vicinity of summer schools or in recreational areas. Could you arrange to go to such places in your territory and speak to the young people? One pioneer wrote us: “Last month I offered the Youth book from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. near the High School here and placed 120 of them.” Perhaps you, too, can have similar experiences placing the Youth book this month where young people are gathered together.
5 Parents should not overlook the fact that many of their workmates on secular jobs have children. No doubt many such parents (or grandparents) would welcome the practical information found in the Youth book to help their own children (or grandchildren).
6 And you young publishers, you have a special advantage. You know the problems and questions of youth very well. You also know how valuable the Youth book is in solving these problems and answering these questions. So take advantage of opportunities to talk to your schoolmates, youths in your neighborhood, and relatives, to see if you can help them and let them know how much you appreciate the Youth book. Do it now while they are out of school and have time on their hands.
7 With many schools preparing for new terms, it is a good time to pursue another avenue. Why not visit teachers, principals and school counselors? Acquaint them with the Youth book and show them how practical it is in helping young people. Let them know how you have benefited from the information in it. Inform them that this publication is available to them and to their pupils. You might be pleasantly surprised at the results you get.
8 Present the good news to young people, their parents, teachers, and counselors, by using the Youth book during August.

