From Our Readers
Sleep  Thank you for the article “Why Your Body Needs Sleep.” (June 8, 1995) I must say that it opened my eyes. As a medical student, I lose many valuable hours of sleep trying to keep up with my studies. I have suffered some of the effects mentioned in the article. I will try to develop better sleep patterns.
L. H., Trinidad
Grandparents  I cried tears of joy when I read the series “Do You Appreciate Grandparents?” (July 8, 1995) I had been going through a hard time with my in-laws, so your article could not have come at a better time. It made me realize that I had not been treating them with the proper respect they deserve. I proceeded to make the necessary changes, and we are all happier.
A. T., Canada
When we had to put my father in a nursing home, we resolved to visit him three times a week. We’ve kept that promise for two years. Small everyday news from home is so important to him! It takes a firm resolve to keep this up, but grandchildren as well as grandparents benefit.
P. L., United States
As a Catholic, I was impressed by the fact that the articles did not focus on creed or religion but were impartial. You have boldly addressed a need that has practically been ignored.
A. B., Costa Rica
Family Tragedy  I read with tears the article “Thank You for Bringing Me Home, Mom.” (July 8, 1995) I too lost my husband in an accident in 1982. I was left crippled—with six children and a mother to take care of. Reading the article was like reading my own story. Jehovah gives us the courage to go on.
C. R., United States
This story really touched my heart. I am 16 years old, and I have always wondered how I would cope if such problems ever arose. Todd’s experience has helped me appreciate that Jehovah is always there for us as long as we rely on him.
N. F., Dominica
The story was told so well that I almost cried. The trials of the Boddy family made my little discouragements seem so unimportant. Although our situations are different, seeing how Jehovah sustained them has helped me to continue pressing on.
V. S., Philippines
My husband of 33 years, a faithful Witness who has served as an elder for many years, has Pick’s disease—a long, heartbreaking illness that gradually takes its toll on the victim and his family. Mrs. Boddy’s strength in spite of the loss of her husband, as well as her years of selfless, devoted care for her son, impressed me deeply. May Jehovah bless her and her sons.
E. N., United States
Bad Breath  I have to thank you for your informative article “What Can You Do About Bad Breath?” (July 8, 1995) That was my problem! It is true that having bad breath makes you feel depressed. I visited the dentist twice, but still the odor persisted. I applied the suggestions in the article, and they are working. Please continue helping people around the globe.
R. O. I., Nigeria
Costa Rica  The article “Costa Rica—Small Country, Abundant Variety” (July 8, 1995) arrived just a few days before my trip; I took it along for reference. It is indeed a land filled with wonder and excitement! Everywhere we went, people would smile and wave to us. Just imagine the new world when everyone everywhere will be as friendly!
T. N., United States

