From Our Readers
Witness Assemblies  Thank you for the experience entitled “A Day That Changed Her Life.” (March 22, 1995) The experience of the young woman whose aunt invited her to a special assembly day of Jehovah’s Witnesses reminded me that the same thing happened to me. I attended my first assembly in the summer of 1985, after being invited by my brother. My initial distrust was soon replaced by a feeling of warmth; I felt as if I was in the middle of one big family. I decided to continue studying the Bible, and today I am a regular pioneer, a full-time evangelizer.
E. F., Italy
Debt  Thank you for your article “Does It Pay to Go Into Debt?” (June 8, 1995) I am only 13 years old, but I was not handling my money well. I think this article will help me a great deal.
C. A., United States
Slavery  As an African-American woman, I appreciated very much the June 8, 1995, series of articles “The Chains and Tears of Slavery.” The cover photo brought tears to my eyes. I was touched that you had the courage to address these shameful historical facts. The article was presented with much sensitivity and was most informative.
B. M., United States
The article came at just the right time since we were discussing the topic in history class. I used the article to complete some optional homework, and I got good marks. I also felt very sorry for the slaves.
M. C., Germany
Life Story  “My Successful Search for the Meaning of Life” (May 22, 1995) was a very moving article. Harold Dies’ story helped me decide whether to enter the full-time ministry. I also had opportunity to visit Bethel, the world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Brooklyn, New York, and I was very impressed. There’s no question about my entering the full-time ministry now!
A. C., United States
Forgive and Forget  Thank you for the excellent article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Forgive and Forget—How Possible?” (June 8, 1995) I used to wonder if the Bible was demanding something impossible from imperfect people. But now I understand what it means to forgive and forget. The article has contributed to my conviction that God’s commandments are not burdensome.
C. I. C., Nigeria
I just had to write and let you know how much I appreciate the article. As a young child, I was sexually abused by two of my uncles. Later, I was abused and mistreated as a wife. Upon becoming a Christian, I tried to show love and be forgiving. However, I have never been able to say honestly that I forgave these three people who caused me deep pain for many years. I realize now that there are some things that must be left in Jehovah’s hands, and I can get on with my life. Revelation 21:4 assures me that this deep hurt that has affected me will soon be gone.
A. B., United States
I have just finished reading the article, and I have never felt closer to Jehovah God than I do at this very moment. A while ago I was involved in a serious sin for which I sought the help of the congregation elders. Even though I received kind, loving counsel from them, I still felt inhibited in speaking to Jehovah in prayer. This article has given me the clearer understanding that I so desperately needed of how our heavenly Father forgives and forgets. It has enabled me to approach him freely in heartfelt prayer—a privilege that I had foolishly been avoiding. Thanks to Jehovah for giving me my “food at the proper time.”—Matthew 24:45.
D. J. S., United States

